* 2230071
* Collaborative Research: Infrared Chiral Metasurface Enhanced Vibrational Circular Dichroism Biomolecule Sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Xiaodong Yang, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 09/30/2025
* USD 238,688.00

Developing nano-biosensing techniques for the detection and characterization of
biomolecules with high sensitivity and selectivity is critically important for
food safety and nutrition, biomedical pathogen detection, point-of-care
healthcare, early disease diagnostics, and environment monitoring. However, the
major challenge for the existing nano-biosensors is to distinguish and identify
complex chiral biomolecules with ultrahigh sensitivity, which is highly demanded
for rapid protein analysis, early disease detection and real-time monitoring. In
this project, a new type of biomolecule sensing platform enhanced by infrared
chiral metasurfaces will be developed and demonstrated to detect and identify
different types of protein structures, with the advantages of ultrahigh
detection sensitivity and high signal-to-noise ratio. This research will benefit
many biomedical and photonic applications in early disease diagnosis,
pharmaceutical drug discovery, quantum sensing and remote communication. This
project also includes educational activities for training graduate students,
recruiting underrepresented and female students, and mentoring high school
students in outreach programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plasmonic nano-
biosensors have been widely used for the detection and characterization of
biomolecules, where the sensing principle is based on refractive-index induced
spectral shift or surface enhanced vibrational absorption. However, it is
difficult for these nano-biosensors to identify secondary structures of
biomolecules, which usually have similar featureless infrared absorption
spectra. The goal of this project is to study a new type of vibrational circular
dichroism biosensing platform enhanced by chiral metasurfaces for the detection
and identification of protein secondary structures with ultrahigh detection
sensitivity and high signal-to-noise ratio. A new chiroptical sensing paradigm
will be created relying on the on-resonance interactions between the superchiral
near-fields and the vibrational fingerprints of chiral biomolecules. In this
project, various types of mid-infrared chiral metasurfaces with high circular
dichroism will be designed and analyzed for biomolecule sensing. Nanofabrication
processes will be developed to fabricate chiral metasurfaces and integrate the
microfluidic cells with protein solutions. The chiral biomolecule sensing
platform will be characterized using infrared chiroptical measurements to
demonstrate the ultrasensitive identification and detection of protein secondary
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.