* 2230790
* RTG: Vertically Integrated Interdisciplinary Training in Mathematics for Human Health
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Christopher Kribs, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Amina Eladdadi
* 08/31/2028
* USD 537,442.00

The UTA-RTG: Vertically Integrated Interdisciplinary Training in Mathematics for
Human Health program at the University of Texas at Arlington (UTA) will train
and mentor three multi-level cohorts of interdisciplinary researchers (a total
of nine undergraduates, six Ph.D. students, and two postdoctoral researchers).
The Research Training Group (RTG) will leverage on the fact that UTA is a
Hispanic Serving Institution with a large population of veterans that offers a
diverse recruitment pool with many groups historically underrepresented in the
sciences. RTG teams will conduct research applying mathematical modeling to
answer questions on topics in cancer biology, computational neurology, and
vector-borne diseases. RTG scholars will be trained in mathematical theory and
computational methods for diagnosis, assessment, prevention, and treatment of
chronic and infectious diseases. Program activities will be led by a group of
ten UTA Mathematics faculty, in collaboration with researchers from UTA Nursing,
Bioengineering, Biology, and Psychology, as well as the University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, the University of North Texas Health Science
Center, and the VA North Texas Health Care System. The program’s experienced
mentors draw on a best-practices model of multi-level mentoring in which faculty
and trainees at all levels work together to share their own levels of expertise,
producing researchers who are also ready to act as mentors, and in teams in
biotechnology companies and health organizations as well as academia.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This RTG program integrates mentoring, interdisciplinary
research, and coursework. The program research, guided by experimental work,
will advance mathematics by developing state-of-the-art stochastic modeling and
optimal control frameworks for the dynamics of cancer biomarkers, neuronal
physiology, and immunological interactions between co-circulating vector-borne
viruses; and efficient and accurate computational methodologies for solving
differential and integral equations, as well as integrating modern data science
and machine learning methods with the aforementioned classical techniques for
analyzing data and solving the proposed mathematical problems. The program’s
research experiences include: a weekly program seminar and group roundtables
that develop research, teaching, and collaborative skills, while also providing
exposure to ongoing interdisciplinary research work at UTA; hands-on research
experiences and internships at off-campus RTG partner sites and UTA labs; and
writing reports and presenting research results at conferences. The UTA-RTG
program naturally builds on several federally funded mentoring and training
programs at UTA and aligns well with institutional goals of enhancing
interdisciplinary research, education, and community engagement in Health and
the Human Condition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the
Workforce program and the Mathematical Biology program at the Division of
Mathematical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.