* 2230578
* SBIR Phase I:  An impact analytics platform combining energy system optimization and life cycle assessment
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Daniel Howard, QUANTUM ENERGY, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 02/29/2024
* USD 255,960.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project focuses on data-driven support for optimal
energy decisions. The software platform proposed in this project will allow for
commercial deployment of an accessible, user-friendly tool to rapidly determine
a more complete picture of human health and ecosystem impacts as a result of
energy decisions. Through the development of a public-facing ‘Impact Tracker,’
this solution will provide a means for leaders to communicate the impacts of
their energy decisions to the public and climate-conscious international
investors, improving the public’s energy literacy and engagement, as well as
increasing the economic competitiveness of the United States.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research Phase I project
proposes to develop a commercial software platform to support optimal energy
decisions. Energy decisions made by large corporations and governments have
substantial impacts on human health, ecosystem quality, and biodiversity
extinction. The life cycle impacts of these decisions are often inaccessible due
to the time, data and financial resources required to collect the numerous,
disparate, non-standardized datasets and evaluate the multiple complex modeling
that is required. To overcome these limitations, this team will develop a cloud-
based, impact analytics software platform by 1) building an integrated energy
system optimization and life cycle assessment model that is compatible with a
broad range of geographies and electricity grid configurations and 2) developing
a data integration tool for automated collection of the required data from
multiple non-standardized, often internationally housed databases. The
anticipated results of this work will be a first-in-class, easy-to-use, and
highly accessible software platform that is accurate across varying geographic
regions and electricity grid configurations, allowing for this tool to have
national and global impacts. Overcoming these challenges will require a
combination of machine learning approaches with human involvement, known as
expert-augmented machine learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.