* 2230411
* I-Corps: Delivery of coherent coolant jet and nozzle manufacturing for grinding technology
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Alex Povitsky, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the potential
development of a methodology that could mitigate the spread of oil-based coolant
and the formation of oil mist that represents a safety hazard through inhalation
or as a fire hazard. The proposed technology may produce an adjustable and
varied methodology for cooling for use in the grinding industry. The technology
may be of interest to industries that experience inner diameter grinding, where
the material is removed from a part to finish its inner surface. The link
between the manufacturing of the nozzle, design of conditioner (device for
reduction of turbulence within coolant liquid), and jet spread is important for
other material processing technologies including forming and cutting
technologies. The efficient cooling could reduce heat pollution of the
environment, which is substantial in the grinding
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of a multi-scale and multi-phase fluid dynamics computational model of coolant
jet and the potential production of hardware including a nozzle and conditioner
for a long coherent jet. The proposed technology may be able to predict the
disintegration of a coherent jet and improve the cooling efficiency by
optimizing nozzle and conditioner settings for varying grinding situations. If
overheating is not managed properly during grinding, thermal damage may occur
including tensile residual stresses, discoloration, softening, re-hardening, and
cracks. The proposed technology could place the nozzle in direct proximity to
grinding situations, and the evaluation of jet coherence by the proposed
technology could also assist in the prediction of the need for replacement of
the nozzle, which can be timely manufactured using 3D
printing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.