* 2230503
* Collaborative Research: Multiscale Cardiomyocyte Mechano-Adaptation
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Anna Grosberg, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 05/31/2026
* USD 279,606.00

During every heartbeat, the cells stretch and move as the heart contracts and
fills. In disease or following surgery, the way the heart deforms can change,
which causes the cells to adapt. Ideally, this adaptation will lead to more
efficient heart function, but in some cases, adaptation exacerbates dysfunction,
leading to heart failure. The central goal of this project is to mathematically
characterize how cardiomyocytes (the primary functional cells in the heart)
adapt to changes in their mechanical environment. This research will
experimentally measure the cell structure and contractile function of
cardiomyocytes exposed to short- and long-term stretching. This will be done
using the conditions of both a healthy heart and one whose deformation is
perturbed by disease or surgery. Concurrently, we will develop computational
models that will provide insight into how perturbed deformations affect the key
contractile proteins within the cardiomyocyte. Finally, the experimental and
computational results will be combined to create models that can be used to
predict cellular adaptation due to any change in deformation. These studies
represent a first step toward a computational approach that could be used to
guide surgeries or design interventions that optimize cardiac adaptation in
heart disease patients. In parallel with these studies, the CardioStart outreach
program developed at the University of California-Irvine, will be extended to
reach high school students in the vicinity of the University of Minnesota-Twin
Cities. Additionally, the program will be expanded with modules that introduce
students to cardiac mechano-adaptation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a lack of
fundamental understanding of how cardiac cells respond to complex mechanical
loads. Elucidating the functional adaptation response of cardiac tissues would
provide an opportunity to guide surgeries, 3D tissue engineered hearts or
patches, and construction of in vitro heart disease models for testing of
interventions. Currently, most of the methods are based on qualitative design
approaches. For a more quantitative approach, it is necessary to build the
fundamental understanding of the mechano-adaptive response of cardiomyocytes,
which could be packaged in a model for a predictive design-build framework
applicable to a wide variety of challenges. Therefore, our goals are to: 1)
Elucidate the acute mechano-adaptive response of cardiomyocytes exposed to
complex loads. We hypothesize that the deformation of the cells, caused by the
complex loads, changes the dynamics of the actin-myosin motors in the sarcomere
leading to changes in efficiency of contraction. 2) Elucidate the long-term
mechano-adaptive response of cardiomyocytes exposed to complex loads. We
hypothesize that the loss of efficiency in contraction leads to remodeling of
the cardiomyocytes to minimize the free energy of the system. Through the
combination of experimental measurements and multi-scale models, this project
will elucidate both the acute functional and long-term remodeling response of
the cardiomyocytes to complex loads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.