* 2230187
* Analysis, Design and System-Level Performance of Repairable Precast Concrete Buckling-Restrained Braced Frames under Seismic Loads
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Yahya Kurama, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 01/31/2026
* USD 1,364,317.00

The scale of losses from previous earthquakes has demonstrated the need for
buildings that can rapidly restore their essential functions after a natural
disaster. This concept is called functional recovery. This project will
contribute to the nation’s functional recovery objectives by creating and
examining a repairable precast concrete buckling-restrained braced (BRB) frame
structure with a new type of non-proprietary diagonal brace. The new brace will
have low-cost features that permit practical replacement after an earthquake.
This project will generate fundamental knowledge on the seismic design and
performance of this building system. Data will be generated from numerical
analyses, testing of isolated braces and their connections, and culminating
tests on the seismic performance and repair of a three-story building utilizing
the six-degree-of-freedom Large High-Performance Outdoor Shake Table operated by
the University of California, San Diego, as part of the NSF-funded Natural
Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI). The project will emphasize
diversity and inclusion, will engage undergraduates from underrepresented groups
in education and mentoring programs, and will create engineering learning
modules for pre-college students. Precast industry partners will provide
specimens and technical guidance emphasizing the project’s focus on industry-
preferred structural details for practical acceptance. Engagement with the
broader engineering community will be achieved through a competition to predict
the building response on the shake table. Data generated from this project will
be archived and made publicly available in the NHERI Data Depot
(https://www.DesignSafe-CI.org). This award will contribute to NSF's role in the
National Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program (NEHRP).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is currently no comprehensive U.S.-based research on
the seismic performance of precast BRB frame structures. This project will fill
this research gap by 1) designing and characterizing the behavior of a novel,
replaceable concrete brace, 2) evaluating the design and modeling of multi-story
braced frames, and 3) evaluating the seismic behavior of these frames within a
building. The new brace will achieve ductile and stable behavior by structurally
efficient details incorporating energy-dissipating reinforcing bars crossing
gap-joints at the brace ends and spliced with threaded couplers and upsized bars
to minimize damage in the beam and column members. This threaded gap-joint
connection will permit damaged precast braces to be replaced with cast-in-place
concrete braces after an earthquake. Detailed numerical models will be developed
and experimentally validated to predict three-dimensional stress gradients and
damage conditions that could lead to premature failure of the brace, and to
evaluate efficient design-basis models for multi-story braced frames. The
modeling and design methods will be validated with the first system-level
testing of a precast braced frame building on the six-degree-of-freedom shake
table. These culminating tests will demonstrate the performance of the braced
frames, their connections, and brace replacement under multi-directional
demands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.