* 2230350
* Collaborative Research: NSFGEO-NERC: Recent changes in Arctic biogenic sulfur aerosol from a central Greenland ice core
* GEO,OPP
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Becky Alexander, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 03/31/2026
* USD 627,411.00

This is a project jointly funded by the National Science Foundationâ€™s
Directorate for Geosciences (NSF/GEO) and the National Environment Research
Council (NERC) of the United Kingdom (UK) via the NSF/GEO-NERC Lead Agency
Agreement. This Agreement allows a single joint US/UK proposal to be submitted
and peer-reviewed by the Agency whose investigator has the largest proportion of
the budget. Upon successful joint determination of an award recommendation, each
Agency funds the proportion of the budget that supports scientists at
institutions in their respective countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sulfur aerosols
cool the climate. The amount of sulfur aerosol in the Arctic has varied
dramatically in the recent past due mostly to sulfur aerosol from coal
combustion. Sulfur emissions from coal combustion increased at the onset of the
Industrial Revolution and have been decreasing since the 1970s because of the
implementation of policies in the US and Europe to reduce air pollution. As
human emissions decline, natural sulfur sources, such as from microscopic plants
in the ocean, are becoming more important. The ocean biological source of sulfur
aerosol may also be changing with a changing Arctic climate, particularly due to
the melting of sea ice. This project will measure the two main chemical sources
of sulfur aerosol in the Arctic, methane sulfonic acid (MSA) that is only from
ocean biology, and sulfate, that originates from ocean biology, volcanoes, and
combustion of coal and oil. The project will measure the sulfur isotopic
composition of the chemicals in order to distinguish the ocean biological source
from the other two sources and determine how large each source is and how fast
each is changing. These measurements will provide a way to determine if and how
ocean microscopic plants and their sulfur emissions are responding to Arctic
climate change. This project will support the training of two graduate students
and several undergraduate students. The students and PIs will participate in
local outreach events in Seattle, WA and in Brookings, SD. We will work with the
School of Ice to produce a new Virtual Field Lab geared towards students from
middle school through early college. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ice-core observations
of methane sulfonic acid (MSA) are used as a proxy for past oceanic biogenic
productivity because MSA originates solely from the oxidation of dimethyl
sulfide (DMS) emitted by ocean phytoplankton. Previous research using Greenland
ice cores showed a detectable MSA decline since the 1800s, implying decreasing
oceanic biogenic productivity. The use of MSA as a proxy for biogenic
productivity relies on the assumption that the branching ratio of production of
MSA versus sulfur dioxide (SO2) from DMS oxidation remains constant over time.
However, recent examination of MSA and isotopic composition of sulfate in
Greenland ice cores over the last 800 years shows that the ratio of MSA-to-
biogenic sulfate (MSA/bioSO4) has not remained constant. This project
hypothesizes that recent trends in MSA are driven by changes in oxidant
abundances (e.g., NOx) that lead to a reduced yield of MSA and increased yield
of SO2 during oxidation of DMS. The project will test this hypothesis by
measuring ion and MSA concentrations and sulfur isotopes of sulfate in Greenland
snow accumulated over the last 30 years. The last 30 years will cover the time
when anthropogenic NOx emissions from North America and Europe began to decline
(after the mid-1990s). In collaboration with University of St. Andrews in United
Kingdom, the project will also measure sulfate isotopes at sub-seasonal
resolution over the last 30 years from the proposed shallow ice cores in
addition to select, discrete samples from archived ice in the preindustrial.
Measuring biogenic sulfate at seasonal resolution since the preindustrial will
allow for investigation of changes in the seasonality of biogenic sulfur aerosol
in the Arctic resulting from changes in Arctic climate. To assist data
interpretation, the global chemical transport model GEOS-Chem will be used to
quantify the role of different oxidants on DMS oxidation as these oxidants have
changed due to anthropogenic emissions. This project has broad implications for
the ice-core, climate, and atmospheric chemistry communities because the results
will improve our understanding of the impacts of Arctic climate change and
anthropogenic emissions on biogenic sulfur aerosols, and thus our understanding
of a potentially important climate feedback at high latitudes and future climate
projections. This project will support the training of two graduate students and
several undergraduate students at the UW and SDSU in ice-core processing,
chemical and isotopic analysis, global modeling, and international
collaboration. The students and PIs will participate in local outreach events in
Seattle, WA and in Brookings, SD. The team will work with the School of Ice to
produce a new Virtual Field Lab geared towards students from middle school
through early college. The first-time partnership with University of St. Andrews
will enhance scientific outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.