* 2230829
* RUI: Evaluation of Neurotrophic-Like properties of Spaetzle-Toll Signaling  in the Developing and Adult Cricket CNS
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Hadley Horch, Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 07/31/2026
* USD 705,249.00

One of the most fundamental questions in neuroscience is how neuronal
flexibility occurs and why the capacity for neuronal change generally diminishes
over the course of an organismâ€™s life. In young organisms, nervous systems are
highly plastic; neural cells can change their shape and their function. In older
nervous systems, large-scale reorganizations are unusual. Certain growth
factors, known as neurotrophins, are thought to contribute to this early
neuronal flexibility in many organisms, from flies to humans. The goal of this
study is to understand whether a family of neurotrophic-like growth factors
influences the development, maintenance, and plasticity of neurons in developing
and adult crickets. The cricket is particularly compelling to study since it
demonstrates an unusual level of neuronal flexibility in circuits responsible
for hearing. Because these growth factors are well-conserved in a variety of
organisms, what is learned from these cricket experiments will be generally
applicable to circuits in other organisms. The broader scientific impact of the
work will be its contribution to a deeper understanding of the mechanisms of
nervous system development and plasticity. This work will also have important
educational impacts both at Bowdoin College and within Maine. Undergraduates
will be active participants in the proposed scientific research, and a special
effort will be made to identify, support, and retain students from
underrepresented groups. In addition, the PI and her students will participate
in annual STEM outreach activities at local elementary schools and with Wabanaki
middle school students, widening the societal impact of the
funding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neurotrophins are known to mediate the
survival, differentiation, and plasticity of developing and mature neurons in
mammals. There is also evidence for cross-talk between neurotrophin-Trk and
Semaphorin-Plexin signaling, which shapes mammalian dendritic morphology. The
assumption that neurotrophins are absent from insect nervous systems is being
challenged by the discovery of trophic-like functionality of the Spaetzle (Spz)
and Toll signaling pathway in Drosophila. However, additional evidence is
necessary to support the hypothesis that Spz-Toll function in insects is akin to
canonical neurotrophic signaling. The cricket, Gryllus bimaculatus, is separated
from Drosophila by an estimated 130 million years of evolution. It is a
compelling model in which to explore neurotrophic signaling due to the presence
of the unusual structural plasticity seen in the adult after sensory organ loss.
The PI and her students will test the hypothesis that Spz-Toll signaling
influences the development and maintenance of the cricket CNS. Further, they
will explore whether this signaling plays a causative role in the
deafferentation-induced plasticity present in the cricket and will initiate an
investigation into whether Spz-Toll signaling intersects with Semaphorin
signaling. DsRNA will be used to manipulate levels of Spz, Toll, Sema or Plexin
candidates individually or in combination, and resulting changes in
developmental or adult neuronal morphology will be assessed and quantified.
Given presumed evolutionary conservation of strategies for neuronal plasticity,
what is learned from these experiments using G. bimaculatus will be applicable
to developing and adult circuits in a wide variety of other organisms. This
project is jointly funded by the Neural Systems Cluster's Organization program
and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.