* 2230766
* Four Networks for Geologic Hydrogen Storage
* O/D,OISE
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2025
* Benjamin Gilbert, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Paul Raterron
* 11/30/2025
* USD 1,500,000.00

Every year, large amounts of renewable energy are wasted because they are
produced at times of low demand. Some of the excess energy could be stored by
splitting water into hydrogen, a flexible fuel and useful chemical. But where
can hydrogen be stored at scales large enough to impact the carbon footprint of
our society? Underground porous rock formations may be able to store and return
hydrogen. Natural gas reservoirs have trapped gas for millions of years. Storage
in depleted gas reservoirs may also provide new economic opportunities to
communities depending on fossil fuel extraction. It is unclear, however, whether
hydrogen can be stored in rocks and retrieved without economic losses.
Addressing these issues is challenging because, beside the safety concerns,
hydrogen can interact with minerals and microbes in ways that alter its
usability and resale value. The social and economic impacts of a hydrogen
economy are also unknown. Here, the team leverages expertise worldwide to
investigate the scientific, environmental, community, and economic implications
of underground hydrogen storage. They carry out state-of-the-art experiments to
unveil the chemical and biological transformations of hydrogen while stored
within rocks. The goal is to identify the best natural reservoirs. They design a
full-scale experiment where storage of hydrogen can be tested in the field. They
analyze the socioeconomic implications of transiting to a hydrogen economy. They
assess the opportunities and risks associated with the emerging green hydrogen
industry while informing interested communities. Such an assessment is critical
to unlock a growing supply of clean energy and distribute it to the public. This
project also trains the future green hydrogen workforce. It provides support and
training for 1 postdoctoral associate, and graduate and undergraduate students
notably from underrepresented groups in science.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;More
specifically, the project is organized around 4 tasks. Task 1 uses experimental
metagenomics and geochemical methods to understand chemical and biological
hydrogen losses. This task outcome is a thermodynamic biogeochemical model to
predict the fate of hydrogen in any candidate reservoir. Task 2 uses US and
international experts to design a field study of hydrogen storage to test
predictions of storage performance. This task's goal is to generate and publish
an open research proposal for a field study that can be used in any country
considering the transition to hydrogen economy. Task 3 studies and contrasts
plans and activities for the regional development of hydrogen hubs in the
Netherlands and California. An essential goal here is to inform communities on
how to assess and constructively respond to opportunities and threats associated
with the emerging green hydrogen industry. Task 4 establishes new international
opportunities for undergraduate education and training with a focus on the
diverse science, technology, environmental and economic issues around hydrogen.
This task seeks to recruit a diverse body of STEM students into Earth science
fields and train them to work skillfully and collaboratively across
disciplinary, social, and international boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.