* 2230769
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track E: Glass Recycling to Restore the Coast
* TIP,ITE
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Franziska Trautmann, Tulane University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Aurali Dade
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,577,567.00

People rely on coastal resources for food, water, and energy. However,
extraction of these natural resources over the last century has led to pollution
and coastal land loss. This project aims to convert recycled glass back into its
original form, sand, to support coastal restoration, preservation, and
resiliency. The ReCoast Team consists of over twenty scientists and engineers
conducting extensive regional economic, social, cultural, and environmental
research to create long-term, sustainable solutions for glass recycling and land
preservation throughout the United States. To tailor these solutions to meet the
needs of the community, the ReCoast Team has conducted interviews with
residents, government organizations, local business owners, non-profit
organizations, and students. From these interactions, the ReCoast Team has
formed partnerships with organizations like the Pointe Au Chien Indigenous
Tribe, the Pontchartrain Conservancy (which focuses on environmental
sustainability and stewardship through scientific research, education, and
advocacy), the Lower 9th Ward Center for Sustainable Engagement and Development,
Home by Hand (which builds affordable housing with proper water management
systems for low-income residents), and many others. Over the next two years, the
ReCoast Team will adapt the lessons learned from their work in southeast
Louisiana to other environments, including the Florida and Texas coasts and
island nations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We rely on coastal resources for food,
water, and energy. However, a century of extracting these natural resources has
led to pollution and coastal erosion. Protecting and restoring our coasts while
continuing to support the economies of coastal communities has never been more
urgent. In the Phase I partnership between glass recycling startup company Glass
Half Full and university researchers in chemical engineering, civil &amp;
environmental engineering, river &amp; coastal engineering, and ecology &amp;
evolutionary biology, the team: (i) established the material and ecological
safety of the recycled glass sand product, (ii) formed community partnerships
for multiple demonstration sites in southeast Louisiana, (iii) evaluated value-
added products for translation-readiness, and (iv) broadened participation
through outreach to Indigenous communities, interdisciplinary student training,
and student service-learning projects. In Phase II, the team proposes to (i)
carry out planned restoration projects, which we expect to attract investment in
glass recycling and coastal restoration to sustain a blue economy network in
Louisiana beyond the life of the project, (ii) bring value-added products to
translation-readiness (TRL 6-7), (iii) conduct techno-economic, lifecycle, and
multi-criteria decision analyses to support the economic and environmental cases
for our proposed blue economy network, (iv) extend lessons learned from
Louisiana coastal marshes to other ecosystems, and (v) expand their broadening
participation efforts to include residents of New Orleansâ€™ Lower Ninth Ward, a
predominantly African American neighborhood subjected to decades of
environmental racism, provide opportunities for citizen science, and redouble
K-12 outreach efforts as schools begin re-opening to campus
visitors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.