* 2230618
* Collaborative Research: Household Response to Wildfire – Integrating Behavioral Science and Evacuation Modeling to Improve Community Wildfire Resilience
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Brittany Brand, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 07/31/2026
* USD 279,709.00

The past four decades have seen a significant increase in wildfire frequency,
magnitude, and resulting human and economic losses as driven by climate change
and rapid population growth into the wildland-urban interface (WUI, where homes
and infrastructure meet the wildland). Wildfire risk can be significantly
reduced by three types of pre-event household hazard adjustments—mitigation,
preparedness to stay, defend, and survive, and readiness to evacuate. However,
the factors that influence the adoption of these hazard adjustments remain
poorly understood. Existing wildfire evacuation models rarely consider fire
spread dynamics; lack trilateral integration of people, fire hazard, and traffic
components; and are based on limited social-behavioral data. To address these
knowledge gaps, this project will integrate behavioral data with active learning
and goal-setting techniques for increasing WUI residents’ adoption of pre-event
hazard adjustments. In addition, social-behavioral data will be infused into
transportation engineering models to create more accurate and actionable agent-
based models (ABMs) for evacuation. To achieve these objectives, the researchers
will collaborate with four WUI communities in three states to (1) identify
factors influencing households’ pre-event hazard adjustment adoption and
evacuation decision-making for wildfire hazard, and (2) integrate social-
behavioral data into wildfire evacuation scenarios using ABMs to evaluate
alternative evacuation strategies. Regional planners and emergency managers will
be engaged to test and evaluate evacuation protocols and educational programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will expand and strengthen the capability of
the Protection Action Decision Model (PADM) to explain complex decision-making
processes related to wildfire mitigation, stay/defend/survive preparedness, and
evacuation readiness. Specifically, this project’s results will advance our
knowledge in pre-event risk messaging about wildfire hazards and address the
urgent need for incorporating multidimensional datasets in wildfire evacuation
models. The study of four different WUI communities will allow assessment of the
cross-population generalizability within and beyond the project’s study areas.
The outcomes will lead to best practices for motivating households’ protective
actions, assessments of community-informed evidence-based strategies for
wildfire evacuation modeling, testing of alternative wildfire warning messaging
strategies, and, ultimately, reduction in wildfire risk to residents and
businesses. The diverse project team includes early-career scientists, students,
and researchers from underrepresented groups. The project will build upon
previous collaborations with community stakeholders to co-produce and share
knowledge throughout the research process, ensuring that the work will promote
data-driven policies and resource allocation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.