* 2230181
* Collaborative Research: Design of High Entropy Alloy Electrocatalysts for Mineralization of Total Organic Carbon in Municipal Wastewater
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Natalia Soares Quinete, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2026
* USD 60,416.00

Advanced oxidation processes (AOPs) such as the commercial UV/AOP process are
increasingly being utilized as a final treatment barrier to remove organic
micropollutants (OMPs) in advanced water reclamation and reuse plants in the
United States and worldwide. In a typical UV/AOP process, UV-C light (200-280 nm
in wavelength) is combined with an oxidant (e.g., hydrogen peroxide) to generate
OH free radicals that can destroy and mineralize OMPs including personal care
products, pharmaceuticals, pesticides, herbicides, etc. Current commercial
UV/AOPs require significant amounts of energy to operate, have high CapEx and
OpEx or generate toxic products such as bromate when treating water containing
bromide ions. Electrochemical advanced oxidation processes (EAOPs) have emerged
as promising technologies that can destroy OMPs using electricity to generate OH
radicals at the surface of catalytic electrodes. Compared to UV/AOPs, EAOPs have
several advantages including high efficiency, modular design, and ease of
automation and operation using electricity from clean renewable energy sources.
However, the stability, lifetime, and high cost of the required catalytic
electrodes (electrocatalysts) are major impediments to the implementation of
EAOPs in water reclamation and reuse plants. To address these challenges, the
Principal Investigators (PIs) of this project propose to leverage the unique
properties of high entropy alloys (e.g., high strength and corrosion resistance)
to design, synthesize, and optimize a new class of electrocatalysts for EAOPs.
The successful completion of this project will benefit society through the
generation of fundamental knowledge and development of novel electrocatalysts to
improve the efficiency and cost effectiveness of using EAOPs in water
reclamation and reuse systems. Additional benefits to society will be achieved
through student education and training including the mentoring of two graduate
students at the University of Miami and one undergraduate student at Florida
International University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High entropy alloying has
emerged as a promising process for the preparation of electrodes with catalytic
activity and corrosion resistance comparable to those of noble metals (e.g., Pt
and Ir) using earth-abundant metals as precursors. Thus, high entropy alloys
(HEAs) provide unique opportunities to develop more stable, durable, and cost-
effective catalytic electrodes (electrocatalysts) for electrochemical advanced
oxidation processes (EAOPs). However, it is challenging to find the right alloy
composition that produces the target HEA electrocatalyst given that HEAs are
typically formed by mixing/alloying five or more elements. To address this
challenge, the Principal Investigators (PIs) of this project propose to combine
atomistic modeling and simulations with experimentation to design, synthesize,
and optimize new HEA electrocatalysts for EAOPs using earth-abundant metals. The
specific aims of the research are to (1) design earth-abundant HEAs for the
electrocatalytic generation of hydroxyl (OH) radicals in aqueous solutions and
mixtures by screening a large design space via atomistic modeling/simulations
and thermodynamic analysis; (2) evaluate and optimize electrocatalyst structure
and performance (activity, corrosion resistance, and durability) using
fabrication and bench scale electrochemical and wet chemical experiments, and
(3) conduct kinetic and mechanistic investigations of the oxidation of selected
organic micropollutants (OMPs) by HEA electrocatalysts using radical
scavenging/trapping assays and non-targeted high-resolution mass spectrometry.
The successful completion of this research has the potential for transformative
impact through the generation of composition-structure-performance relationships
to guide the design and development of HEA electrocatalysts for water reuse and
reclamation using electrochemical oxidation. To implement the education and
training goals of the project, the PIs propose to leverage existing programs at
the University of Miami and Florida International University to recruit and
mentor undergraduate students from underrepresented groups to work on the
project. In addition, the PIs plan to develop and deliver STEM immersion
programs to inner-city and underrepresented high school students including
presentations at K-12 schools and the Frost Museum of Science in
Miami.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.