* 2230092
* Collaborative Research: CyberTraining: Implementation: Medium: Cyber Training for Open Science in Climate, Water and Environmental Sustainability
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Xiaohui Carol Song, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 12/31/2025
* USD 847,844.00

Climate, Water and Environment (CWE) sustainability is critical for maintaining
the overall well-being of the United States and the world. Addressing the
current challenges in CWE sustainability requires knowledge and skills of big
data analytics, simulations, high-performance computing, and advanced
cyberinfrastructures. Yet, their are inadequate training opportunities on
integrating and working with data from different sources available to student
for CWE research. These include data quality control, analysis, visualization,
and simulations. This project fills this gap by creating a CyberTraining
curriculum for CWE sustainability that builds on previous successes and
incorporates rapidly-developing technology and community best practices in
Findable Accessible Interoperable and Reusable (FAIR) Science. This project
provides CyberTraining to students, trainers and working professionals using
publicly available data, simulation tools, and computing resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a CWE CyberTraining curriculum to
provide training at three levels: (i) foundation level that can be used across
multiple disciplines and audiences; (ii) expert level that teaches domain
specific data and cyber tools knowledge in CWE domains; and (iii) developer
level that provides advanced cyberinfrastructure training for addressing CWE
sustainability problems. This curriculum builds upon a proven flexible modular
approach, and can be implemented in the form of a sequence of credit courses,
non-credit certificates, and degree certificate programs. This CWE CyberTraining
curriculum will be disseminated through an open and scalable online platform to
overcome technology barriers and enable broader adoption and community
contribution. This unique platform will not only disseminate the curriculum, but
also provide access to the tools and resources to co-develop and implement the
curriculum. The project is co-led by a multi-disciplinary team that has rich
experience in developing in-person and online learning modules, cyber-enabled
data, computation tools, and platforms driven by community needs, and
additionally incorporating these tools in their undergraduate and graduate
courses. This project will directly train students at five universities, three
community colleges and one high school through its partnership with minority
serving institutions. This project is co-funded by a collaboration between the
Directorate for Geosciences and Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure to
support AI/ML and open science activities in the
geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.