* 2230254
* Determining organic copper speciation in stormwater and wastewater to improve treatment and regulation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Jeffrey Nason, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2025
* USD 374,649.00

The pollution of surface water systems by heavy metals is a global environmental
challenge. Heavy metals are released to surface water systems through
anthropogenic activities including the generation and discharge of wastewater
and stormwater. The interactions of heavy metals with dissolved organic matter
(DOM) are key drivers of their fate, transport, and toxicity in aquatic systems.
Copper (Cu) is of particular importance in this regard due to its strong
interactions with DOM and toxicity to a broad range of aquatic organisms
including threatened and endangered salmonid species. The current understanding
of Cu speciation in wastewater and stormwater is largely based on analytical
methods and assays that provide information on species bulk concentration and
complexation to organic ligands. Although these studies have revealed that over
99% of Cu in wastewater and stormwater is bound to organic ligands, a detailed
characterization of the chemical identity of these ligands and their
interactions with Cu ions in anthropogenic waters has remained elusive. The
overarching goals of this project are to 1) characterize and identify the
organic ligands that interact with Cu in stormwater and wastewater and 2)
evaluate and quantify the impact of these anthropogenic metal binding ligands on
Cu chemical speciation and efficacy of removal using sorption-based water
treatment processes. The successful completion of this research will benefit
society through the generation of new fundamental knowledge and validated models
to advance the design and implementation of more efficient and cost-effective
sorbents and treatment processes to remove heavy metals such as Cu from
wastewater and stormwater prior to their discharge into receiving surface water
systems. Additional benefits to society will be achieved through educational and
outreach activities including the training and mentoring of one graduate student
at Oregon State University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The complexation of heavy
metals with dissolved organic matter (DOM) plays a key role in controlling their
uptake, bioavailability, and toxicity once they enter aquatic systems from
various sources. Compositionally, there is evidence that the DOM in wastewater
and stormwater differs from natural DOM isolated from surface water systems in
both character and metal binding properties. However, a detailed knowledge of
the chemical composition, molecular features, and metal binding properties of
the organic matter present in stormwater and wastewater has remained elusive.
The goal of this research is to characterize and identify metal-binding ligands
present in stormwater and wastewater and evaluate the impact of metal-organic
binding on the chemical speciation of Cu and the efficacy of Cu removal from
these anthropogenic waste streams using activated carbon and biochar. The
guiding hypothesis of the proposed research is that the pools of Cu-binding
ligands in wastewater and stormwater are anthropogenic or microbial in origin
and possess distinct metal-binding properties compared to the natural ligands
present in DOM from surface water systems including lakes and rivers. The
specific aims of the research are to: (1) Characterize and identify the pools of
Cu-binding ligands present in wastewater and stormwater using a combination of
analytical tools including liquid chromatography (LC) followed by parallel
inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) and ultra-high-resolution
electrospray ionization Fourier transform mass spectrometry (ESI-FT-MS); (2)
Develop and validate new Cu chemical speciation models that account for metal-
organic complexation in wastewater and stormwater; and (3) Evaluate the impact
of metal-organic complexation on Cu removal from wastewater and stormwater using
common water treatment sorbents such as activated carbon and biochar. The
successful completion of this research has the potential for transformative
impact through the generation of new fundamental knowledge and validated models
to advance the implementation of chemical speciation-based regulations for
controlling the discharge of heavy metals such as Cu into receiving surface
water systems while providing critical data and modeling tools to guide the
design and operation of sorption-based processes for the removal of heavy metals
from wastewater and stormwater. To implement the educational and outreach goals
of this project, the Principal Investigators (PIs) plan to leverage their
existing partnership with a large Oregon water utility to communicate and
translate their research findings into the practice of heavy metals treatment
and removal at the companyâ€™s operating facilities. In addition, the PIs propose
to leverage existing programs at Oregon State University (e.g., NSF funded Louis
Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation Program) to recruit undergraduate
students from underrepresented groups to work on the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.