* 2230772
* International partnerships for accelerating climate-ready, sustainable, and clean urban transportation
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* John Anderies, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,499,886.00

This multi-institutional and multidisciplinary PIRE use-inspired project will
develop an integrated coupled infrastructure framework across multiple cities in
India with high potential to scale our design framework for South Asian and
global cities facing similar air quality issues and considering a path to
investments in clean transportation. This project will create a Transportation-
Air Quality Coupled Infrastructure System (TAQCIS) – a roadmap to facilitate
informed accelerated decision-making as cities plan to adopt clean
transportation options. The project will integrate (i) physical sciences for
high-resolution fully coupled urban-chemistry-weather-climate model outputs for
air quality and clean transportation scenarios; (ii) transportation and human
systems for behavioral reactions to travel demand management (TDM) strategies
impacting congestion, air pollution, safety, and effectiveness of clean
(electric) transportation; (iii) social sciences to assess robustness and
resilience of clean transportation interventions; and (iv) education to inform
public, train the trainers, and teach students and scholars from the U.S. and
India. The project will engage international partners around climate change and
urban sustainability to fill in knowledge gaps about how urbanization,
population growth, and vehicular traffic will impact cities, especially as they
develop clean transportation technologies. It will empower many global cities
that face similar climate change challenges and urban transportation problems,
including acute pollution. Overall, this project will enhance the resilience and
sustainability of urban communities, contribute to identifying strategic
investments in clean transportation based on vulnerability analyses and surveys,
and perform international student exchange and training and postdoctoral
mentoring. Assessment of short-term environmental benefits and an improved
understanding of clean transportation interventions will increase decision
makers' ability to reduce acute episodes of air pollution in cities, improve the
efficacy of air quality alerts, and empower individuals to make informed health-
related decisions. The PIRE team will share project updates with a global
audience through public webinars, social media outlets, and presenting in
multidisciplinary conferences, including the social sciences discipline. The
project will train 3 Ph.D. students and a postdoctoral fellow in the U.S. in
addition to 18 international student/scholar exchanges over a three-year period.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will result in a deeper understanding of
TAQCIS through a convergence urban sustainability research lens. Specifically,
the project will generate new knowledge for multiple cities in India,
specifically for Delhi, Pune, and Bhubaneswar, with the potential to scale to
other South Asian cities and global cities. The objectives of the project are:
(i) assess how early adoption of clean transportation coupled with a graded
response action plan (GRAP) can reduce emissions as compared to projected
stagnant trends until 2040; (ii) assess human behavior and their choices
concerning clean transportation options now and in future; (iii) evaluate social
inequity regarding transportation choices and clean transportation options while
improving public health outcomes; and (iv) identify the resiliency of the
current coupled infrastructure system (CIS) for transportation and identifying
any changes in feedback systems in the transition to a new regime of clean
transportation. State-of-the-art urban-weather-chemistry-climate modeling will
evaluate the effectiveness of clean transportation and GRAP interventions for
air quality, map traffic intensity and environmental vulnerability, and conduct
surveys to gauge public perceptions of vulnerability to air pollution and
climate change. A mathematical model combined with a social sciences lens will
be developed for analyzing TAQCIS for current and future climate change
scenarios. The project will advance education by using novel ‘science gateways,’
a virtual platform for integrating transdisciplinary knowledge and exchanging
knowledge across global institutions. With this use-inspired PIRE project,
Discovery Partners Institute in Chicago will establish center-level activities
that foster international partnerships for urban convergence research and
education, as well as enhance awareness, diversity, and
inclusion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.