* 2230083
* EAGER: SaTC: Shifts in Misinformation Topics on Social Media: Manipulators Masquerading as Humans
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Maimuna Majumder, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 12/31/2023
* USD 199,786.00

________________________________________________________________________________
__________________________________________________&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;EAGER:
SaTC: CORE: Small: Shifts in misinformation topics on social media: manipulators
masquerading as humans&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The spread of misinformation on
social media can result in major consequences to the health, wellbeing, and
stability of the general public. A wide range of topics are vulnerable to
misinformation, varying from medical misinformation to political misinformation.
Accounts that spread misinformation can be broadly classified into two
categories: (1) those who do so unintentionally (i.e., individuals who believe
in the misinformation that they spread) and (2) those who do so with the aim of
being deliberately deceptive (i.e., agents of disinformation “masquerading” as
humans). Those in the former category typically spread misinformation on a
constrained number of topics (i.e., either medical or political, but not both),
focusing on what they care about as individuals. However, agents of
disinformation may be incentivized by malicious third-party actors to spread
misinformation across an unconstrained variety of topics, with the objective of
prompting widespread instability among the general public. This project analyzes
misinformation spread on social media to distinguish third-party-incentivized
agents of disinformation from other, more benign
accounts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve this goal, the team will examine data
from Twitter to identify accounts that switched rapidly between spreading
medical misinformation to spreading political misinformation during the first
half of 2022. A machine learning framework will be designed to learn from
linguistic features that are unique to this subset of accounts, which will then
be used to develop a classification tool to label accounts across the broader
Twittersphere (i.e., pre-2022 and post-2022) as “potential agents of
disinformation”. The team will also characterize what fraction of misinformation
spread during the first half of 2022 was attributable to such third-party-
incentivized agents. All algorithms developed over the course of the project
will be shared openly with the broader scientific community to facilitate
efforts towards countering disinformation on social
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.