* 2230971
* Safe Lyapunov-Based Deep Neural Network Adaptive Control of a Rehabilitative Upper Extremity Hybrid Exoskeleton
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2025
* Chad Rose, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 12/31/2025
* USD 471,632.00

Hand cycling and reaching activities are rehabilitative exercises for
individuals with movement disorders. For those with insufficient strength to
exercise by themselves, electricity can be carefully applied to a muscle to
generate force. This application of electricity is called functional electrical
stimulation (FES) and FES has been shown to have many health benefits. Prior
research has shown that rehabilitation is improved by 1) repetition of the
exercise, and 2) active effort including from FES. For some individuals,
weakness and fatigue limit the effectiveness of rehabilitation therapy. Another
limitation of FES-based exercise is that FES causes fatigue to occur at a faster
rate than normal. Fatigue can be reduced by using a combination of FES and
robotics (e.g., a powered cycle, or a robot arm), called hybrid exoskeletons.
For example, applying FES only when it is most efficient and having the robot
help only when needed will reduce fatigue while encouraging active effort.
Fatigue can be further reduced by adaptively changing how much the FES and robot
help in the exercise. The goal of this project is to develop safe adaptive
methods for controlling hybrid exoskeletons that have the potential to
significantly transform the rehabilitation of individuals with movement
disorders. Throughout this project, the project team will invite middle and high
school students to participate in lab tours and/or experiments that evaluate the
designed methods to motivate the students to seek out advanced education in
science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM)
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project arises from
the design, analysis, and experimental demonstration of safe saturated deep
neural network (DNN)-based FES controllers with real-time closed-loop (Lyapunov-
based) DNN weight update laws, which can approximate the complex dynamics of
upper extremity hybrid exoskeletons and guarantee overall system stability.
Objective 1 will develop a saturated, concurrent learning-inspired, and DNN-
based FES control law that updates the DNN in multiple timescales and develop an
adaptive DNN- and admittance-based motor controller to improve participant
safety. Objective 2 will develop real-time and Lyapunov-based adaptive update
laws for both the inner- and output-layer DNN weights, while the exoskeleton's
motor controller will include barrier functions to constrain the exoskeleton
within a user-defined safe set. Objective 3 will experimentally evaluate the
proposed controllers in populations with and without movement disorders, survey
participants for user feedback, identify the most promising control
architectures, investigate the FES controllers' potential to reduce motor power
requirements, and develop new exoskeleton design guidelines. Successful
completion of this project could transform the rehabilitation industry by
enabling more personalized and energy-efficient control of a hybrid exoskeleton.
Moreover, another outcome is to acquire experimental data to enable the future
development of an untethered upper extremity hybrid exoskeleton that uses FES to
lower the weight and cost of the exoskeleton. This project is jointly funded by
the Disability and Rehabilitation Engineering Program and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.