* 2230090
* EAGER: A novel route for high activation of implanted p-type regions in vertical Gallium Nitride devices.
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Veena Misra, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 03/31/2024
* USD 137,399.00

Semiconductor based power electronics enabled efficiency improvements could save
1.2 trillion kilowatt-hour by 2030, avoiding approximately 733 million metric
tons of CO2. Implementation of wide bandgap materials in power electronic
devices is the single most important revolution to further increase system
efficiency, reduce the size and weight of devices, improve reliability, and
reduce life cycle cost. Among various wide bandgap materials, gallium nitride
(GaN) vertical power devices are conceived as a next generation technology.
Despite the success of gallium nitride lateral power devices, the implantation
of vertical gallium nitride power devices is delayed by limitation of p-n
junction and highly doped p layer formation. While n-type junctions via
implantation have gained success, p-type junctions formed via implantation are
still facing key challenges. Hence, developing an effective highly doped p-type
process is a critical need to enable high performance gallium nitride devices.
This project aims to address the current challenges of p-type doping on gallium
nitride by a novel route for highly doped p-type junctions using the process of
solid phase epitaxy. This presents a unique opportunity for achieving high
current and high voltage power devices to significantly benefit power electronic
systems. The impact of these advances could also drive enhancements in ultra-
wide bandgap devices. The proposed novel p-doping can enable wide adoption of
vertical gallium nitride power devices and help maintain leadership in wide
bandgap semiconductor technology and economic competitiveness. This project
provides a hand-on research experience for undergraduate students on device
physics, processing, and characterization. The experimental results will be
incorporated into undergraduate and graduate courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project proposes a novel route for highly doped p-type in gallium nitride using
the process of solid phase epitaxy after implantation. This solid phase epitaxy
process involves the conversion of a metastable amorphous region containing the
targeted p-type dopant into a crystalline region through modest temperature
anneals. In prior work on other semiconductors, solid phase epitaxy has shown to
result in increased active dopant concentration that is in great excess of the
solid solubility limit, decreased damage, reduced channeling, and lower
temperature operation. All these characteristics are highly desirable for
vertical devices and warrant investigation of solid phase epitaxy in gallium
nitride. The proposed process will involve three key steps: a pre-amorphization
implantation, a p-type dopant implantation and a moderate temperature anneal to
achieve high active concentration. This process is expected to convert the
amorphous region containing the targeted p-type dopant into a crystalline region
through modest temperature anneals. The recrystallization temperature and time
depend on the orientation of the crystalline substrate and the type and
concentration of implanted species. The proposed research aims to solve the
fundamental problem in III-nitride devices towards high current and high voltage
power devices and may also be applied towards emerging ultra-wideband gap
materials. The research will be carried out in multiple tasks including
molecular dynamic and process simulation, ion implantation, solid phase epitaxy
anneal optimization, device fabrication and characterization of structures
including transfer line method structures as well as diode structures to assess
impact of solid phase epitaxy process on gallium nitride p-junction
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.