* 2230960
* US-Japan Workshop on Needs, Priorities and Partnerships to Advance Human-Centered Data for Resilience
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Tracy Kijewski-Correa, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 06/30/2024
* USD 45,735.00

Despite significant technological advances in modeling and simulating natural
hazard impacts on society, disaster resilience is, at its heart, a matter of
human resilience. Thus, while engineers and social scientists have each made
important strides in their respective fields, reducing the impacts of disasters
on communities will ultimately require that researchers begin working across
disciplines, not only within nations but across nations. Noting in particular
the considerable investments made by the US and Japan to study and ultimately
mitigate the impact of disasters in their respective countries, an important
first step in fostering such cross-disciplinary and cross-national
collaborations in disaster research can be achieved by bringing together the
research communities cultivated by the Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST)
and US National Science Foundation (NSF). In response, the US-Japan Workshop on
Needs, Priorities and Partnerships to Advance Human-Centered Data for Resilience
will virtually convene these communities over multiple days with the primary
goal of identifying opportunities where US-Japan collaborations can uniquely
advance a more human-centered approach to research on disaster resilience. A
series of one-page briefings will be developed based on workshop learnings
(published in English and Japanese) to offer a concise roadmap for possible
future joint JST and NSF research opportunities. Ultimately, this roadmap and
the interactions between participants will drive new lines of research and
collaboration intended to reduce the risk of future disasters in both the US and
Japan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary workshop is intentionally
designed to incubate future US-Japanese collaborations by exploring important
questions such as: (1) How can the human dimensions of disaster impacts be more
accurately captured and represented in the analysis, modeling and simulation of
disasters?, (2) What type of data and supporting research infrastructure would
be necessary to enable novel, transdisciplinary approaches to answering these
and other human-centered disaster questions?, and (3) In what ways can US-Japan
collaborations advance these questions in new and important ways? The online
activities strategically blend asynchronous and synchronous convening mechanisms
to navigate time zone differences, accommodating different communication/problem
solving styles and levels of language proficiency by providing multiple
mechanisms to engage during real-time discussions. The hybrid model further uses
Position Papers, submitted in advance, to pre-populate workshop discussions and
offer those who come forward with bold ideas a larger platform for sharing their
ideas through plenary-style Lightning Talks and Rapid Panels. The workshopâ€™s
live sessions will use interactive Miro boards in breakout room discussions to
systematically establish the important link between compelling research
questions/opportunities and underlying research infrastructure/data needs,
subsequently mapping strengths, assets and opportunities for novel US-Japanese
partnerships in response to these needs. The hybrid approach of preparatory
asynchronous activities and well-structured synchronous activities increases the
likelihood of discovering concrete recommendations for future collaborative
efforts between the two countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.