* 2230265
* CEDAR: Examining the vertical structures of ionosphere-atmosphere coupling using decadal observations and ionospheric models
* GEO,AGS
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* King-Fai Li, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 10/31/2025
* USD 406,141.00

The ionosphere protects life on Earth by shielding cosmic rays, energetic
particles, X rays, and extreme UV from the Sun. The ionosphere also enables
communication by reflecting radio high-frequency transmissions. However,
disturbances due to natural variabilities on vastly different time scales, such
as the solar cycles and the solar flares from above, or the tidal waves and the
anthropogenic CO2 effects from below, may disrupt the stability of the
ionosphere, and interfere with civilian activities, such as navigation,
emergency services, precision farming, and artificial satellite systems. Thus,
an accurate space weather prediction must be able to predict the impacts of the
natural variabilities. This project studies the ionospheric variabilities in
ground-based and satellite observations and uses state-of-the-art models to
better understand the impacts of the solar electromagnetic changes and the
climate forcings on the predictability of the ionospheric variabilities. An
undergraduate research assistant will be hired to perform some of the data
analyses using machine-learning tools. Annual field trips to a local national
lab facility in Los Angeles for undergraduates will be taken to promote aeronomy
sciences among under-represented groups in Southern
California.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this investigation is to advance
our understanding of the influence of solar and lower atmospheric disturbances
on the global ionosphere, with particular focus on interannual variabilities
related to the solar cycles, the quasi-biennial oscillation (QBO), the El Ni√±o-
Southern Oscillation (ENSO) and the Pacific decadal oscillation (PDO). The team
will study vertical structures of these variabilities using International
Reference Ionosphere (IRI) reanalysis data and satellite observations from the
last two decades, including NASA's GRACE, NSF-sponsored COSMIC/FORMOSAT-3 and
COSMIC-2/FORMOSAT-7, and German Aerospace Center's CHAMP satellite instruments.
They will derive the vertical structures of electron density related to the
solar cycles, QBO, ENSO, and PDO using IRI reanalysis and satellite data and
compare these observations with NCAR's TIME-GCM and WACCM-X standard
simulations. The observed interannual variabilities will be diagnosed using
tidal wave fluxes and machine-learning tools. The interannual variabilities in
ionospheric electron density will be simulated using customized TIME-GCM and
WACCM-X models to elucidate the chemo-dynamical connections of the ionosphere
with solar electromagnetic changes and climate forcing. Thorough knowledge of
the interannual impacts on the chemical and dynamical components can help to
improve the space weather forecasts on monthly to decadal
timescales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded through a
collaboration between the Directorate for Geosciences and Office of Advanced
Cyberinfrastructure to support AI/ML and open science activities in the
geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.