* 2230734
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track E: Digital Reefs: A Globally Coordinated, Universally Accessible Digital Twin Network for the Coral Reef Blue Economy
* TIP,ITE
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Weifeng Zhang, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Cooperative Agreement
* Aurali Dade
* 08/31/2024
* USD 2,578,940.00

Coral Reefs support almost one billion people worldwide, yet development of a
thriving Coral Reef Blue Economy is threatened by unprecedented global climate
change and lack of universal access to the data and tools needed to address 21st
century challenges. Digital Reefs leverages Digital Twin Technology, Gaming
Engine Platforms and Cloud Analytics to transform the way humans’ access,
interact with, and use scientific data and models to solve societies’ most
pressing environmental problems. Digital Reefs delivers intuitive, immersive
4-dimensional visualizations of each coral reef ecosystem and a suite of
interactive user-inspired tools to empower millions of stakeholders around the
world with the most effective decision-making tools in a rapidly changing ocean.
Within 5 years, Digital Reefs, scaled to the globally interconnected Digital
Reefs Network, will be the go-to tool for effective management, conservation,
and restoration of coral reefs in the 21st century, and for communicating and
sharing data, knowledge and experience. Ultimately, the Digital Reefs technology
framework will provide the blueprint for expansion of Digital Twin technology
oceanwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Occupying less than 1% of the ocean surface,
coral reef ecosystems play a disproportionately large role in the global
economy, with an estimated annual value of $1 trillion. In the US, 4 million
acres of coral reef support hundreds of thousands of jobs and protect vast
expanses of coastal property, including strategic military infrastructure. Yet
the sustainable growth of the Coral Reef Blue Economy is threatened by
unprecedented climate change and a lack of access to intuitive, actionable data
that can help to solve problems. The project bridges this gap, leveraging 21st
century Digital Twin technologies to build digital replicas of actual coral reef
ecosystems, continuously updated in near-real time by sensor and satellite data
transmitted from the physical reef. The Digital Reefs platform employs
Visualization softwares and Gaming Engines to create intuitive, immersive,
interactive 4-D visualizations of each reef, and a suite of user-inspired
decision-making tools via an easily navigable user-interface. Our fully
functional, interactive Digital Reefs prototype of Palmyra Atoll, delivered in
two years, will include 4 Data Layers (3-D reef bathymetry, temperature,
currents, and benthic communities and changes through time) and 4 User Tools
that facilitate climate risk assessment, ecosystem service optimization,
effective restoration designs and invasive species and plastics monitoring. A
modular platform design will allow easy integration of additional data and
tools, guided by user-inspired research conducted throughout the project.
Application of gaming engines to create immersive, Virtual Reality experiences
with scientific data will deliver living coral reef ecosystems into homes,
classrooms and boardrooms alike, to transform our relationship with the ocean
and the Blue Economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.