* 2230824
* Supporting Antarctic Research with Ongoing Operations and Development of the USAP-DC Project Catalog and Data Repository
* GEO,OPP
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2027
* Kirsteen Tinto, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Allen Pope
* 11/30/2027
* USD 1,632,679.00

Scientific data from Antarctica are valuable, often unique research assets.
Preservation of these data increases the return on the significant public
investment for acquisition, enabling future re-use for new analyses, and
supports scientific reproducibility ensuring that observations behind scientific
publications are available for others to review. The US Antarctic Program Data
Center (USAP-DC) contributes to the preservation and discoverability of research
data acquired with funding from NSFâ€™s Office of Polar Programs by providing a
repository for diverse research data from the Antarctic region. USAP-DC provides
a space for researchers to share their data and assists them in making their
data as Findable, Accessible, Interoperable and Reproducible (FAIR) as possible.
USAP-DC enables finding and accessing datasets through web-based search and map
interfaces, and by sharing and distributing metadata information of the
different datasets widely with other search tools and catalogs. With full open
access to interfaces to search for and download data, USAP-DC makes a wide range
of data products resulting from NSF-funded research in Antarctica publicly
available and thus supports the NSF mission to provide broad access to data and
enable their use and reuse. The USAP-DC also aims to increase data literacy and
participation in Antarctic science by working with students and early career
researchers from under-represented groups to facilitate access to data
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;USAP-DC will continue to provide and improve a
broad range of data repository and discovery services. New developments will be
designed to encourage data submissions that are more aligned with the FAIR
principles. This includes tutorials and best practice guides for data
submissions as well as establishing a FAIRness score for datasets. This score
will provide feedback to data providers on how Findable, Accessible,
Interoperable, and Reusable their data are. In addition, we will overhaul the
user interface and search functions to keep the designs current and further
expand findability and usability of datasets. This includes the development of
preview functions for specific dataset types and options for users to provide
more detailed location information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-
funded by a collaboration between the Directorate for Geosciences and Office of
Advanced Cyberinfrastructure to support AI/ML and open science activities in the
geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.