* 2230827
* Midwest Dynamical Systems Conferences: 2022 and 2023
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Osama Khalil, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 09/30/2024
* USD 39,756.00

This award supports participation in the Midwest Dynamical Systems Workshops in
Fall 2022 and Fall 2023. The 2022 Workshop will be held at Indiana University
Purdue University Indianapolis from November 18-20, 2022. The 2023 host
institution will be selected by the conference's Scientific Advisory Board in
the Spring of 2023. The Midwest Dynamical Systems Workshop is an ongoing
educational experience for graduate students and a vehicle for supporting the
research careers of postdoctoral fellows and junior faculty. This award gives
early-career researchers, researchers who are members of underrepresented
groups, and researchers without other sources of support, the opportunity to
participate in the conferences. Training researchers in dynamical systems
contributes to maintaining and building a work force in the United States that
has a strong mathematical and scientific ability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamical
systems is a very active area of mathematical research and has interactions with
almost every other area of mathematics. Many conferences in dynamical systems
focus on a specific sub-area of the subject. In contrast, the Midwest Dynamical
Systems Workshops bring together researchers from all branches of dynamics and
promote interactions with other fields of mathematics. The Midwest Dynamical
Systems Workshops meetings especially encourage talks that build connections
between two or more different areas of mathematics and that advocate new areas
of promising research. Moreover, participants in the Midwest Dynamical Systems
Workshops have discovered important connections between mathematics and other
areas of science such as theoretical physics, statistical mechanics, electrical
engineering, information theory, economics, game theory, voting theory, and
epidemiology. These connections are presented at the meetings. More information
can be found on the workshop web site
http://sites.math.northwestern.edu/mwds/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.