* 2230111
* CyberTraining: Implementation: Small: Interactive and Integrated Training for Quantum Application Developers across Platforms
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Michael Strickland, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 10/31/2025
* USD 510,000.00

Along with the evolution of actual quantum computers from industry, like IBM,
IonQ, Rigetti, and D-Wave, quantum computing research has rapidly grown in the
past few years. However, the industry and academia lack mature and effective
workforce training plans for cutting across multiple disciplines, the most
relevant being physics, computer and information science, and electrical
engineering. The project aims to deliver a project-oriented training program
that can assist the scientific research workforce development for quantum
computing cyberinfrastructure and help foster broad adoption of quantum
computing cyberinfrastructure to advance fundamental research. The proposed
training program targets students and early-stage researchers, e.g.,
undergraduates, graduate students, and postdocs, who are interested in quantum
computing systems, quantum applications, cyber-physical systems, Quantum
Physics, Quantum Chemistry, and quantum machine learning. A long-term
collaboration with DoE national laboratories will ensure broad adoption of
quantum computing infrastructure by the research community to catalyze
significant research advances and train professional cyberinfrastructure
contributors to optimize the current hardware and software stack. The proposed
cyber training programs will accommodate 80+ trainees participating in cutting-
edge research projects each year. These programs will expedite adopters and
users to understand how to use the quantum computing cyberinfrastructure and
enable them to advance research in CISE, BIO, ENG, and MPS' core
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds upon existing knowledge, data,
and tools to create tailored, high-impact, engaging, collaborative, and
integrated training modules for quantum computing cyberinfrastructure research
workforce Development. Three training projects are built upon the PI and co-PI's
innovative research on quantum error characterization and modeling, visual
analytics of the quality of the quantum hardware system and quantum compiler
optimizations, and reliability assessment of the quantum applications. Each
training module will focus on one mini-project. With the aim to enhance the
trainee's design and implementation capability, problem-solving skills, and
critical thinking ability, the training modules will be delivered with multiple
lessons on the background of the problem, literature study, data collection and
processing, methodology, evaluations of the solutions, and hands-on experiments.
The deliveries of the proposed training program will include: 1) a new course on
"ST: Fundamentals of Quantum Computing Systems"; 2) a project-based short course
plus its long-term maintenance and support; 3) hands-on tutorials based on the
training projects; and 4) multiple research topics for undergraduate and
graduate capstone projects. The long-term goal of this project is to boost the
adoption of new quantum computing cyberinfrastructure to multidisciplinary
students and researchers from different STEM domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award by the Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure is jointly supported by the
Physics at the Information Frontier program in the Division of Physics within
the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences, the Division of
Chemistry in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences, the
Division of Computing and Communication Foundations in the Computer and
Information Science and Engineering Directorate, and the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems in the Directorate for
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.