* 2230929
* NSF Student Travel Grant for the 2022 International Workshop on Computational Network Biology: Modeling, Analysis, and Control (CNB-MAC)
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2023
* Anna Ritz, Reed College
* Standard Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 05/31/2023
* USD 10,000.00

Biological networks are critical tools for modeling and analyzing questions in
systems biology, and computational network biology has grown into a subfield
that combines biology, computer science, and modeling. Scientific workshops are
important for researchers to share their work and learn about cutting edge
advances in the field, and the Seventh International Workshop on Computational
Network Biology: Modeling, Analysis, and Control (CNB-MAC 2022) will be held in
Chicago, Illinois, on August 7, 2022. This award will support conference travel
for at least eight graduate students to CNB-MAC. Students will gain firsthand
knowledge of recent advances in computational network biology, which can have a
long-lasting impact on their own research career. Students will also have the
opportunity to present and discuss their own research findings, receiving
feedback and mentoring from established researchers. New this year, CNB-MAC will
have events to foster networking and collaboration among attendees. Attending
CNB-MAC through travel support from this award will provide graduate students
valuable opportunities to engage with the computational network biology
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Seventh International Workshop on
Computational Network Biology: Modeling, Analysis, and Control (CNB-MAC 2022)
will be held in Chicago, Illinois, on August 7, 2022. The workshop will be held
alongside ACMâ€™s Conference on Bioinformatics, Computational Biology, and Health
Informatics, which is the flagship conference of the ACM Special Interest Group
in Bioinformatics. CNB-MAC aims to provide an international scientific forum for
presenting recent advances in computational network biology and boost the
awareness of the importance of rigorous mathematical modeling in transforming
big biomedical data into reproducible and meaningful scientific knowledge. CNB-
MAC solicits original research papers that report new research findings that
have not been published elsewhere, highlight abstracts that present advances in
the field that have been reported in recent journal publications, and poster
abstracts for rapid dissemination of the latest research results in
computational network biology. CNB-MAC workshops are an excellent venue for
young researchers working in computational network biology to share ideas and
get involved in deep scholarly discussions, thereby ultimately contributing to
the advancement of the field of computational network biology. This award will
support travel to CNB-MAC for at least eight graduate students, providing
essential networking and professional development opportunities for the travel
awardees. Travel support can significantly reduce the financial burden for
students to attend the conference, especially for students from institutions
where their mentors are unable to pay for conference registration and
travel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.