* 2230504
* WORKSHOP: Virtual Student Doctoral Consortium ("Think Tank") at the ICAD 2022 Conference
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2022,12/31/2022
* Michael Nees, Lafayette College
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 12/31/2022
* USD 1,650.00

This is funding to support a one-day "Think Tank" (virtual workshop) of about 10
promising graduate student scholars along with five distinguished research
faculty mentors on Friday, June 24, in conjunction with this year's meeting of
the International Conference on Auditory Display (ICAD 2022), which will be held
virtually on June 25–27, 2022. Historically, auditory displays have been
overlooked in favor of visual information displays, but technological advances
in the last several decades have opened new possibilities for the delivery of
audio information in human-machine systems. Well-designed auditory displays can
play a vital role in improving human performance with systems, in making
information accessible and inclusive (e.g., for people with visual impairments),
and in providing new, exciting, fulﬁlling opportunities for human-machine
interactions. As such, auditory displays and soniﬁcation have been deployed in
such diverse applications as assistive technologies, desktop and mobile devices,
automotive user interfaces, medical devices, computer music, and artistic
installations. As a relatively young ﬁeld, auditory display research has a
still-emerging potential to make valuable contributions to science and society.
Achieving this potential requires the on-going development of a base of
scientiﬁc, engineering, and artistic knowledge by a community of people with
speciﬁc expertise and interest in sound as a medium for information display.
Decades of research and practice have shown that the eﬀective use of auditory
displays requires a deep understanding of how humans create, perceive, and use
sounds,, and for the last 3 decades ICAD has been the premiere venue for the
discussion and dissemination of the intellectual products of auditory display
research. Normally an in-person meeting, the 2020 conference was cancelled due
to the onset of the pandemic, and the 2021 event was forced to assume a virtual
format, which was highly successful, so a similar format will again be employed
this year when the conference theme is "sonification that can be used to
maintain awareness." More details about ICAD 2022 are available online at
https://icad2022.icad.org/. The ICAD Think Tank is a doctoral consortium that
promotes scholarship and networking among new researchers in this important
emerging interdisciplinary area. There are three objectives: To support the
research eﬀorts and professional development of students who are studying
auditory displays and soniﬁcation; To provide speciﬁc feedback and potential
solutions to barriers those students are facing in their research projects; To
develop and sustain a community of early career researchers of auditory
displays.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To these ends, the Think Tank will provide a
friendly and open, yet rigorous, scientific forum in which participants can
present their research ideas, listen to ongoing work from peers and receive
constructive feedback from a panel of distinguished experts. Panel feedback is
designed to help students understand and articulate how their work is positioned
relative to related research, whether their topics are adequately focused for
thesis research projects, whether their methods are correctly chosen and
applied, and whether their results are appropriately analyzed and presented. The
Think Tank will also offer invited speakers and discussion groups (e.g., to
provide students with relevant information about important issues for doctoral
candidates, whether they are considering academic or industrial career paths).
Thus, the Think Tank will help shape ongoing and future research projects that
have clear and important implications for development of assistive technologies
and universal access. It will bring together students from diverse disciplines
(such as engineering, computing, music, and psychology), so that they can
experience the broad spectrum of approaches to auditory displays, assistive
technologies and universal design. It will afford participants exposure to a
larger community, allowing them to bond among themselves and with senior
researchers at a critical stage in their professional development. Because the
students and faculty constitute a diverse group across a variety of dimensions,
including nationality and culture, scientific discipline, and institution, the
students' horizons are broadened to the future benefit of the field. The
organizers will be proactive in promoting diversity among Think Tank attendees;
every eﬀort will be made to recruit and select participants who represent the
diversity of ICAD, broadly deﬁned, including diversity of research topics and
geographic location, demographic diversity, and diversity of disciplinary
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.