* 2230919
* NSFDEB-NERC: Origins and expansion of endemic biodiversity in western Melanesia and their relation to tectonic evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Edward Kraus, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 08/31/2025
* USD 222,977.00

This project addresses a fundamental research question regarding how geological
processes drive the diversification of species and current patterns of
biodiversity. The project will focus on western Melanesia, one of the most
biodiverse regions on Earth as well as a region of high tectonic activity. A
synthesis of biological and geological models for several animal groups will
clarify the timing and extent of colonization and diversification of biotic
diversity within the context of the region’s geologic history. The results will
advance our understanding of the effects of tectonic movements on the generation
and dispersal of species. The research is funded in partnership with the UK’s
Natural Environment Research Council (NERC) as an international collaboration
between U.S. and U.K. laboratories. The project will support the training of
graduate and postdoctoral scholars, as well as collaborative training and
outreach activities in Papua Guinea. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team
will construct dated phylogenetic trees for over 25 reptile and amphibian
lineages representing different dispersal abilities, times of origin, and
natural histories that span the five major landmasses of western Melanesia.
Areas and times of origin for each group will be identified and traced to
explain details of their expansion to new regions. Updated geological models
will be created and will illuminate tectonic events that drove speciation and
dispersal in the region. This research will test competing models for the
origins and maintenance of Pacific biodiversity distributions. The results will
be broadly useful as a model for investigating biogeographic evolution in
regions with complex tectonic histories and dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.