* 2230025
* CyberTraining: Implementation: Small: Infrastructure Cybersecurity Curriculum Development and Training for Advanced Manufacturing Research Workforce
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Hongyue Sun, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 12/31/2025
* USD 499,989.00

This project addresses the problem of Cyberinfrastructure (CI) needs in Advanced
Manufacturing and Industry 4.0 by aiming to host a 10-week summer program for
undergraduate, graduate students and CI professionals. The project develops
instructional materials and implements a new CyberTrainng project to train
current and future Advanced Manufacturing (AM) research workforce members in CI
cybersecurity. It exposes the participants to various challenges of CI centered
cybersecurity in Industry 4.0, with a focus on the vital national need for well
trained and highly knowledgeable AM researchers who are capable of solving real-
world cybersecurity problems in emerging complex Industry 4.0 manufacturing
systems. The training also includes the secure and safe adoption of CI centered
computational tools in AM. The project has direct and long term impacts in both
the public and private sectors by training the research workforce to address CI
centered cybersecurity challenges in Industry 4.0. University at Buffalo (UB)
has established solid and intellectually-engaging programs in the areas of AM
and CI centered research areas. This project can form a new synergetic research
and education program for the AM research workforce. Moreover, utilizing the
collaboration with established diversity-promotion programs at UB and local
industrial partners, this CyberTraining project can significantly increase the
collective impact of the project, benefiting numerous graduate and undergraduate
students from underrepresented groups and improving the diversity of the
research workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to bridge
the gap between general cybersecurity education and CI centered Advanced
Manufacturing research training and to prepare a group of future AM research
workforce with advanced CI cybersecurity knowledge to undertake specific roles
in their future careers. Currently, as computersï¼Œnetworks and intelligent
devices penetrating every aspect of Industry 4.0, CI cybersecurity training is
in high demand to cover materials that deeply incorporate discipline-oriented
topics for modern CI-centered manufacturing environments beyond core literacy in
computers/networks security. Specifically, the team aims to develop and provide
an innovative training program, including a set of hands-on labs that introduce
domain specific cybersecurity attack surfaces and mitigation techniques. The
training skills are crucial to address the various cybersecurity challenges of
Industry 4.0 systems in AM hardware (e.g., industrial controllers and power
line), AM software (e.g., embedded firmware, CAD/CAM software, and supervisory
control and data acquisition (SCADA) systems), AM communication networks (e.g.,
industrial IoTs, CAN bus) and other crucial CI components (e.g., new side
channel discovery, IP theft/protection, quality control tools, supply chain
software/database, and incident response strategies). Moreover, the project
employs learning science principles, specifically the active learning and
inquiry based learning strategies, that facilitate students' learning outcomes
and provide formative feedback to instructors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is jointly funded by OAC and the CyberCorps program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.