* 2230080
* Collaborative Research: CyberTraining: Implementation: Medium: FOUNT: Scaffolded, Hands-On Learning for a Data-Centric Future
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* David Koop, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 09/30/2025
* USD 204,815.00

Data informs decisions throughout our lives, and its importance keeps growing in
a data-centric society and future. Scientists, educators, students, and the
workforce at large require advanced skills to learn how to manage and process
massive amounts of data efficiently and accurately. The nation's future as a
global leader of innovations depends on having a large, versatile, and adaptable
data-proficient workforce. Training this workforce, however, is challenging and
requires significant hands-on skills in data systems where the constantly
evolving hardware architectures, networking technologies, or changing price-
performance ratios create unprecedented opportunities but also an urgent need
for thorough and ongoing education in topics ranging from data acquisition,
computer networking, storage systems, machine learning and data analytics, and
visualization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a FOUNT of scaffolded,
educational modules, or courselets, in the rapidly developing field of data
systems, that provide shared educational content executable on Chameleon and
other open clouds and testbeds. The courselets are based on the concept of
literate programming and enable students to explore concepts and methods taught
in the classroom via hands-on exercises – and then modify and extend those
exercises in various ways to deepen their understanding and explore new ideas.
Students can find relevant courselets through a content hub, integrated with
open clouds and testbeds, so that they can deploy them “with one click”, making
exploration-based learning readily available. Ultimately, the project aims to
translate its experience of creating, teaching, supporting, and improving
courselets into a set of best practices, and build a vibrant community of
students, teachers – and contributors across all types of academic institutions,
and thereby create a model of digital sharing that will improve availability of
digital educational content to all members of our
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.