* 2230240
* Topological Photodetectors
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Ritesh Agarwal, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 07/31/2026
* USD 380,000.00

Photodetectors are devices which detect the presence of light and are very
important components for applications in spectroscopy, imaging, diagnostics and
for driving our information technology infrastructure. Conventional
photodetectors detect optical power, i.e., convert the total number of photons
impinging on the active area into a corresponding current. Therefore, most
applications involving light utilize intensity to encrypt or decrypt
information, i.e., by modulating the intensity of light at different wavelengths
to encode information and counting the total number of photons at the detector
end. However, light can also be engineered to carry much more information
encoded in its phase and the direction of the oscillation of electric field.
Vortex light is an example of a complex type of light which can be used to carry
much more information that conventional light beams. However, it is not easy to
detect and distinguish different types of vortex beams for on-chip applications.
In this project, new types of quantum materials will be explored along with
specially designed devices to assemble on-chip photodetectors that will produce
different currents depending on the nature and type of light vortices. These new
types of photodetectors can increase the information carrying capacity of our
optical systems by utilizing more degrees of freedom of light than conventional
systems that can enable us to continue to meet the ever-increasing demands on
our devices to process more information. Research and educational activities
will be integrated by the involvement of undergraduates in the research program,
incorporating latest research results in the teaching modules, and training high
school and college teachers from the Philadelphia district with student
population from minority and underrepresented sections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On-
chip topological photodetectors working at room temperature that are sensitive
to different spin (SAM) and orbital angular momentum (OAM) states of topological
(vortex) light will be developed. These topological photodetectors can enable a
nonlinear scaling of information carrying capacity of optical systems that still
mostly rely on optical power. At a fundamental level, the proposed studies will
pave the way to understanding and engineering novel optoelectronic response in
quantum topological materials via symmetry and geometry concepts. The project
will extend these ideas to design the next generation of photodetectors with
enhanced functionalities to replace bulky table-top optics currently used for
sensing OAM modes of light. To develop on-chip topological photodetectors,
materials that have a photoresponse sensitive to complex phase and intensity
distribution of the OAM modes along with sensitivity to photon spin
(polarization) will be explored. Most materials are neither sensitive to optical
polarization nor the spatial or phase gradients of the optical beam, which makes
this task challenging. For this purpose, topological Weyl semimetals will be
studied due to their unique symmetry that can support OAM-SAM sensitive and
strong nonlocal photoresponse at room temperature. By utilizing artificial
neural network algorithms, these devices will then be trained to read out the
OAM-SAM modes with high fidelity for applications in imaging, spectroscopy, and
integrated systems for processing much larger bandwidth
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.