* 2230963
* ASCENT: TUNA: TUnable randomness for NAtural computing
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Chris Kim, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,500,000.00

A new class of computers that rely on the natural relaxation process to find the
ground state, dubbed as “natural computers”, has been gaining interest. Natural
computers can find the solution to hard optimization problems using room-
temperature electronics, with far greater speed and efficiency than conventional
digital computers. A critical challenge for natural computers is preventing the
system from getting stuck in an undesirable local minima point. This
necessitates intrinsic noise in the system to perturb the intermediate
solutions, however, noise parameters must be carefully tuned for the system to
resolve to a good ground state. This project aims at developing new tunable
nanoscale magnets, modeling and benchmarking tools, and demonstrator systems for
enabling practical natural computers, which is only possible through an
integrated program such as ASCENT. The ability to solve hard optimization
problems using natural computers will have a direct and transformative impact on
our daily lives. Many industries, from manufacturing and finance to
transportation and resource management, are poised to benefit from the new
optimization capabilities brought about by natural computers. This inter-
disciplinary project is providing growth opportunities across the entire
microelectronic design stack, from device fabrication to application
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technological advances being made by this
ASCENT project is threefold. First, novel nanoscale magnetic devices with
auxiliary terminals for tuning the noise characteristics are being developed. To
ensure good compatibility with state-of-the-art silicon technology, the project
team is investigating tuning schemes that can be integrated seamlessly into a
silicon fabrication process. Second, simulation models and benchmarking tools
are being developed for evaluating the tuning capabilities afforded by the new
nanomagnets. Using the evaluation framework, the team is investigating various
tuning modalities, such as temporal or spatial or both, to understand the impact
on the computation results and energy-efficiency. Finally, several practical
demonstrator systems are being built in traditional and emerging semiconductor
manufacturing platforms to validate the tunable device concepts using real-world
application drivers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.