* 2230388
* Online Undergraduate Resource Fair for the Advancement and Alliance of Marginalized Mathematicians
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Kiera Edwards, Mathematical Association of America
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 09/30/2023
* USD 49,960.00

This project serves the national interest by providing undergraduate and
graduate students in the mathematical sciences with “insider” knowledge that
will allow them to make informed decisions about their educational and career
choices. Specifically, this project will support the third offering of the
Online Undergraduate Resource Fair for the Advancement and Alliance of
Marginalized Mathematicians, a two-day online conference. Building from two
prior offerings in 2020 and 2021 that involved 350 and 400 participants,
respectively, the 2022 conference will include six main activities for
participating students: (1) Our Stories talks, where recent PhD recipients will
share their experiences; (2) crash courses that provide brief overviews of
fields of mathematics common in undergraduate research; (3) a summer
opportunities panel; (4) a student experiences panel; (5) two plenary
presentations; and (6) two virtual networking lunches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Too
often, students can be excluded from educational and career opportunities simply
because they are not “in the know”, be that due to insufficient mentorship,
underdeveloped institutional advising systems, or other circumstances. This is a
particularly common challenge for individuals from low-income backgrounds,
first-generation students, and students from populations that have historically
been underrepresented in the mathematical sciences. This conference looks to
provide important mentoring and networking opportunities to promote positive and
inclusive access to opportunities for all students. The conference builds upon
three pillars: (1) sharing information about resources and opportunities through
conference presentations and panel discussions; (2) providing access to role
models and representation through a careful selection of speakers with diverse
identities and experiences and a history of supporting students; and (3)
providing access to networking opportunities. A participant overview and an
assessment of the conference’s effectiveness will be conducted using a
registration form, a Zoom meeting report, a post-conference survey immediately
after the conference, and a post-conference survey four months after the
conference. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects
to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.