* 2230327
* Planning: Connecting Inupiaq and Veterinary Knowledge about Wildlife Diseases and Food Safety
* GEO,OPP
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2024
* Tuula Hollmen, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Erica Hill
* 11/30/2024
* USD 99,767.00

Climate change and its impacts on pathogen distribution and traditional storage
practices in Alaska have the potential to adversely affect human health and
subsistence. This project documents traditional Inupiaq understanding of food
safety and knowledge of wildlife diseases in subsistence species common in
Northwest Alaska. Combining Indigenous knowledge and veterinary science, the PI
team will explore local perspectives on food safety and food-borne illness and
knowledge of pathogens in subsistence species. Investigators will assess local
interest in the development of a research project dealing with subsistence food
safety and collaboratively identify appropriate social scientific, monitoring,
and sampling methods to answer community questions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Year 1
activities involve virtual and in-person meetings with local residents with an
interest in or knowledge of wildlife pathogens in subsistence foods. The PI team
will endeavor to include participants familiar with all stages of subsistence
animal procurement, processing, and preparation. Using a workshop structure,
investigators and participants will discuss Indigenous and veterinary approaches
to wildlife pathogens, identifying points of convergence and difference. Should
there be sufficient local interest, the PI team will facilitate collaborative
development of research questions and identification of appropriate methods,
which may include monitoring and sampling, as well as interviewing and
participant observation. Ethical aspects of the proposed work will be explicitly
addressed, as changes to foodways may have impacts on nutrition and well-
being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.