* 2230342
* Travel: Request for Student Travel Support for the 48th International Conference on Very Large Databases 2022
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2023
* Sharad Mehrotra, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 06/30/2023
* USD 15,000.00

The provided support will enable United States-based students to attend and
participate in the 48th International Conference on Very Large Databases (VLDB
2022) to be held in Sydney, Australia from September 5, 2022 to September 9,
2022 (https://vldb.org/2022). The VLDB conferences are a premier international
technical event centered on various aspects of database research and practice.
The VLDB conference provides a forum that promotes students and researchers to
identify scientific foundations for building large-scale database management
systems that can work ever more effectively. Efforts will be made to broaden the
participation of underrepresented students and researchers. The conference will
thus contribute directly to training the next generation of scientists who are
both consumers and developers of technology in database management system design
and implementation. The involvement of United States-based students will have a
direct impact in creating a highly-qualified workforce who can take on the
emerging data science challenges of the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Database
research profoundly influences domains that include health sciences, the
emerging field of Internet of Things (IoT), service-oriented computing, real-
time business analytics, and social computing. The VLDB conference series
provides researchers and practitioners from academia, industry and government
agencies with an excellent opportunity to share their research and experiences
on all aspects of data management and analysis at scale. The aims of the
conference are multi-fold: (1) to provide an international forum for sharing
research results related to the investigation of major challenges in next-
generation database research; (2) to stimulate interactive discussions on
research in the database area through panels, posters, tutorials, student
scholar roundtables, etc.; and (3) to motivate and engage future generations of
researchers via the many conference and workshop presentations, interactive
poster sessions, and panel and breakout sessions. The VLDB 2020 Proceedings will
be broadly accessible at http://www.vldb.org/pvldb/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.