* 2230385
* Collaborative Research: CEDAR: Investigation of Gigantic Jets, Their Ionospheric Effects, and How They Couple the Troposphere and Ionosphere
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Steven Cummer, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 08/31/2025
* USD 120,000.00

This award seeks to advance the science of how cloud-to-ionosphere electrical
discharges known as gigantic jets (GJs) couple the troposphere and ionosphere.
GJs are large electrical discharges that begin inside a thunderstorm, emerge
from the top of the cloud, and connect with the lower ionosphere (80 -100 km
altitude). They are capable of transferring hundreds of coulombs of charge (10
times more than typical lightning) between the troposphere and ionosphere,
directly coupling these atmospheric regions. Due to infrequent observations from
past observational techniques, many mysteries remain regarding these events,
such as their effect on the global electric circuit (GEC), how they perturb the
upper atmosphere, and how they propagate to such high altitudes above the cloud
top. The work under this award will involve detecting GJs on nearly a
hemispheric scale using optical data from the Geostationary Lightning Mappers
(GLM) and machine learning techniques, in addition to multi-step validation. The
detection pipeline will have the capability to identify thousands of GJs per
year, orders of magnitude more than previous observations. The large-scale
database of detections will be made publicly available and widely disseminated,
allowing high impact on other fields of research such as aeronomy (GEC),
atmospheric chemistry, and meteorology. As part of the broader educational
outreach for this award, K-12 teachers from Title 1 schools (those with high
percentages of children in poverty) via an existing NSF-sponsored program
(Research Experience for Teachers) will work on a research project each summer
and incorporate what they learned in their curriculum. Graduate students will be
involved in the project as well. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three main goals of
this project are: 1) Construct climatologies of GJs after developing a robust
pipeline to detect them by the thousands using GLM data and a machine learning
classier. 2) Quantify whether and how GJs perturb the D-region ionosphere. 3)
Investigate the physical characteristics of GJs. The large-scale detection will
be performed by a pipeline that uses GLM in conjunction with machine learning
algorithms, and multi-step validation with ground-based radio networks. The
multi-step validation consists of: correlating potential GJs with a low
frequency (LF) lightning network in space and time to filter out non-lightning
events; validating with a stereo altitude GLM model (developed as part of this
work); and validating with an ELF radio model (developed as part of this work).
Using VLF remote sensing on a subset of events that pass within an existing VLF
radio network, changes to the electron density profile in the D-region will be
quantified using temporal-spatial mapping methods and correlated to properties
measured by the Duke ELF radio network. The detections will also be correlated
with ground-based instruments such as very high frequency (VHF) lightning
mapping arrays (LMA) and with instruments in low earth orbit such as the
Atmospheric Space Interactions Monitor (ASIM) to understand the discharge
physics of the events, such as the leader and streamer portions of the discharge
and if they are associated with gamma rays. The research supported by this award
will significantly advance the science of how the ionosphere responds to
electrical impulses from below.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded
by a collaboration between the Directorate for Geosciences and Office of
Advanced Cyberinfrastructure to support AI/ML and open science activities in the
geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.