* 2230957
* Narrating Autoimmunity through Biographies of Illness, Narrative Medicine, and Treatment
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Kalindi Vora, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 12/31/2023
* USD 310,877.00

This project focuses on how healthcare practitioners and patients coproduce
knowledge about autoimmunity and its treatment. This study looks at how the
organizing metaphor of autoimmunity understanding of the body and its processes.
It will explore how autoimmunity is being actively conceptualized through
patient communities and alternative practice in functional medicine by looking
at how patients and patient communities with chronic conditions communicate.
This study will be of interest to medical researchers, health care workers,
patients and their families. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is
to understand how patient-practitioner co-production of knowledge, specifically
through practitioner attention to patient narrative and biography, to address
these as vectors of illness. This research uses methods from medical
anthropology to understand how functional medicine, an integrative approach to
autoimmune disease, might serve as a model. During the fellowship period, the PI
will conduct ethnographic study of individual subjective narratives of
autoimmune disease through individual interviews with patients and practitioners
and observation of online communities of illness. The study frames these
narratives through a science and technology studies approach to analyze the
social and cultural factors shaping the medical and popular concepts that allow
patients and practitioners to link experience of social exclusion to symptoms
marked as “autoimmune.” Beyond the specific fields of STS and medical
anthropology, this project will help inform future projects that aim to advance
personalized and narrative healthcare practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.