* 2230747
* Advancing International Partnerships in Research for Decoupling Concrete Manufacturing and Global Greenhouse Gas Emissions
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Maria Konsta-Gdoutos, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 08/31/2025
* USD 1,499,800.00

Part 1: Nontechnical description &lt;br/&gt;The production of concrete, the most
widely used manufactured material worldwide, is one of the largest contributors
to greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, resulting in 9-10% of global energy-related
carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions. Efforts for decarbonization in the concrete
industry are still in a nascent stage, focusing primarily on CO2 mitigation
strategies within the cement manufacturing process. Considering that the global
demand for concrete will grow by as much as 38% by 2050, the vision of this
project is to establish a multidisciplinary consortium between Universities,
Research Centers and Non-profit Organization in the U.S. and European Union to
enable cross-disciplinary scientific and use-inspired technological advancements
that (i) significantly enhance concrete’s ability for carbon capture by
incorporating carbon neutral waste materials and nanostructured materials with a
high CO2 uptake potential; and (ii) develop a novel technology for renewable
electricity and large-scale power production by engineering for the time
concrete to absorb high amounts of thermal energy and directly convert it into
usable electrical energy. Young faculty, early career researchers, and students
from the U.S. will collaborate with their counterparts in the EU in specific
training and research for decoupling concrete manufacturing and global
greenhouse gas emissions. The educational plan of this project is closely
integrated with the research objectives and will contribute to the successful
development of the next generation of the American engineering workforce that
includes students from under-represented groups, technical and community college
students, as well as undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: Technical description &lt;br/&gt;TE-
CO2NCRETE pioneers a Thermoelectric Carbon Neutral Concrete with high CO2
capture and sequestration capacity, and the ability to absorb thermal energy
from solar radiation and directly convert into usable electrical energy.
Identification and control of the yet unexplored chemical interactions between
functionalized multidimensional carbon-based nanostructures and calcium-
silicate-hydrate (C-S-H) interfaces in the &lt;10 nm length scale will provide a
paradigm shift for designing nanoscale-to-macroscale structures that promote
carbonation kinetics. Investigating the electron tunneling and phonon absorption
in nanomaterial/C-S-H electrochemical cells via sub-picoampere electron
tunneling spectroscopy and tuning the material’s conductivity and dielectric
permittivity will enable controlled and rapid transformation of thermal
gradients into electricity, a key to the successful development of a
thermoelectric concrete battery for generation, long-duration storage, and
transmission of electric power. A transformative aspect of the project is the
development of molecular dynamics methods that adapt for the first time the role
of the atomic-to-nano scale 3D dimensionality, electrochemical and
thermoelectric properties for developing CO2 mineralization and energy density
realistic simulations in engineered concrete. Designing the TE-CO2NCRETE has a
potential of net carbon removal of 110 lbs CO2 per 1000 lbs concrete. With a
conservative estimate of 4.4 B tons concrete produced every year globally, our
technology would result in 482 M tons CO2 absorbed annually, which is 7% greater
than the current annual concrete production-related CO2 emissions (451 M tons);
thus, enabling carbon negative concrete production
globally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.