* 2231492
* RTG: Topology, Representation Theory, and Mathematical Physics at Louisiana State University
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Pramod Achar, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eriko Hironaka
* 05/31/2028
* USD 1,572,845.00

This grant will support a number of initiatives aimed at making Louisiana State
University a premier institution in the south for students and early-career
mathematicians seeking to engage in cutting-edge research in the fields of
topology, representation theory, and mathematical physics. Activities will be
pitched at a range of levels, including high school students, undergraduates,
graduate students, and postdoctoral researchers, and includes ongoing events
during the academic year as well as during the summer months. Through these
efforts, the PIs hope to broaden engagement with research-level mathematics
while simultaneously helping build a talented workforce of research
mathematicians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the past twenty years, the Department of
Mathematics at Louisiana State University has experienced enormous growth in
research productivity, in career prospects for Ph.D. graduates, and in
visibility on a national and international scale. The present proposal aims to
build on this growth on three fronts: (i) Outreach initiatives aimed at local
high schools and at regional undergraduate institutions; (ii) Summer "incubator
workshops" aimed at launching new research projects and collaborations; and
(iii) Enhancing existing infrastructure through graduate traineeships,
postdoctoral positions, and seminar support. Specific research projects will
draw on the expertise of the team of twelve senior personnel on topics such as
contact and symplectic topology, geometric group theory, harmonic analysis,
modular representation theory, and the geometric Langlands
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Topology
&amp; Geometric Analysis Program (TGA), The Algebra &amp; Number Theory Program
(ANT), the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and
Research Training Groups in the Mathematical Sciences
(RTG).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.