* 2231936
* Collaborative Research: The Role of Ice Sheet Instability in Marine Carbon and Nutrient Cycling in the Eurasian Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Ellen Martin, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 04/30/2026
* USD 198,117.00

The Arctic is experiencing some of the fastest and most dramatic changes on
Earth in response to human-caused carbon dioxide emissions, including rapid
reduction of sea ice, retreat of glaciers, and changing ocean circulation
patterns. These changes are fundamentally re-organizing Arctic marine carbon and
nutrient cycles. The long-term impacts on these cycles are unclear. This project
will help us understand how glacial instability impacts ecosystems and ocean
chemistry, with potential implications for future changes in Greenland and the
Canadian Arctic. We will use this project to create educational activities
designed to “bring the polar regions to the Southern and Midwest US.” Teaching
about Arctic change provides a unique chance to teach students and the general
public about the impacts of human-caused climate change. We will also provide
research opportunities and mentor students who will help make up the next
generation of polar scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use the
sedimentary record from marine sediments to investigate the links between
climate change events and the land-sea-ice exchange pathways of carbon and
nutrients within the Eurasian Arctic margin over the past 160 thousand years.
The sedimentary record from locations on the Yermak Plateau and Barents Sea
slope documents significant perturbations to carbon and nutrient cycles
including multiple abrupt sediment delivery events with distinct geochemical and
sedimentological compositions. We will determine the source and impact of these
sediment events to evaluate how marine carbon and nutrient cycles are perturbed
by glacial retreat and instability. This project will use clay mineralogy and
geochemical (radiogenic isotopes) techniques to reconstruct the changing sources
of sediments through time. We will compare these results with geochemical
records of carbon and nutrient cycling to determine the impacts of a changing
sediment source. At Kent State, project data will be incorporated into new and
existing undergraduate curriculum. At UF, polar marine activities will be
incorporated into a Florida Museum of Natural History open
house.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.