* 2231490
* CRISPR Microfluidic Array for Simultaneous Multiplexed Sensing of Proteins and miRNAs
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* James Rusling, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 04/30/2026
* USD 166,695.00

Measurement of biomolecules like proteins and nucleic acids, called biomarkers,
in blood, is a valuable approach to detect cancers and other diseases. Samples
consisting of several proteins and nucleic acids show promise for this purpose,
but at present must be measured using separate, time-consuming methods. This
project uses a biological construct called CRISPR (Clustered Regularly
Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats) to enable measurements. CRISPR can be
designed to bind a nucleic acid or a protein labeled with a nucleic acid and
give a signal only when that specific nucleic acid or label binds to CRISPR.
This approach will be developed into a fast, low-cost 3D-printed, semi-automated
device to measure several nucleic acids and several protein biomarkers in the
same test. The project will also develop sensitive electrically-driven light
emission called electrochemiluminescence (ECL) as a simpler detection method.
The blood test using the 3D-printed device will be designed to run in a short
time in a clinic or physician’s office by a lightly trained technician. This
will allow fast turnaround in what is called point of care mode. Results will be
available to the physician while the patient is still in his or her office and
can be used at that time as part of the diagnosis. This project will utilize
programs at Univ. of Connecticut to support education in new CRISPR technology
for graduate students, undergraduates, science teachers and high school
students. Activities include holding workshops on CRISPR detection through
SECRET (School of Exploratory Chemistry Research Experience and Training),
developing Early College Experience programs for secondary school students and
science teachers, facilitating training of Ph.D. students in CRISPR array design
and fabrication, and providing research opportunities for undergraduates at
UCONN and in UCONN’s NSF REU program, as well as high school students through
the ACS SEED program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular biomarkers have become
increasingly valuable in medical diagnostics for many diseases. Panels of
biomarkers, as opposed to single biomarkers, show superior diagnostic utility
and combined protein-miRNA panels have shown significantly improved diagnostic
predictions over separate protein or miRNA panels. This project will develop the
first analytical array using CRISPR technology to simultaneously measure
combinations of miRNAs and proteins. The new 3D-printed array will be able to
analyze miRNA-protein biomarker panels for a wide range of disease diagnostics
in point-of-care (POC) mode, as well as in other biomedical research
applications. In addition to fluorescent detection, electrochemiluminescence
(ECL) will be explored with CDC and iPhone camera detection. The focus will be
on miRNA and protein biomarkers that are high performing biomarkers for
aggressive prostate cancer. Assays will be validated by measuring target miRNAs
and proteins in 130 existing human serum samples from patients with high grade
prostate cancers and controls. The intellectual merit of this project involves
design and development of the first engineering strategy using a new CRISPR
assay technology to detect panels of miRNAs and protein simultaneously at
POC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.