* 2231806
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: A Geoarchaeological Investigation of Coastal Resources
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Jessica Thompson, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2024
* USD 23,880.00

The goal of this dissertation project is to understand how changes in resource
densities and distribution across landscapes impacted subsistence strategies,
mobility, and social connectivity of foraging communities. Researchers
previously noted that large-scale environmental shifts impacted floral and
faunal communities, which likely influenced human social organization by
changing resource distributions and the distances between them. Coastal
communities are particularly sensitive to such shifts, as environmental changes
may submerge or expose large sections of land. An archaeological investigation
can address such considerations as the extended timescales capture repeated
restructuring of resource distribution and density. Within this broader context,
this project considers the impacts of coastal shifts on nutrient-rich resources,
and asks whether foraging communities responded by expanding or contracting
their social networks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses larger
questions about human response to changing resource distributions. The doctoral
student plans to use materials collected from coastal archaeological sites along
a modern coastline and one in the hinterland, to better assess how forager
subsistence strategies, mobility, and social connectivity were impacted across
time and space. Previous research demonstrated that this area was subjected to
multiple climatic events where the coastline expanded and contracted, offering a
unique ability to situate these materials within a broader context. This project
uses ostrich eggs to inform multiple dimensions of forager life: subsistence
(eggs as food), technology (eggs as water containers), and social connections
(flasks and beads as trade items). Investigators plan to analyze the eggshell
surfaces, chemistry, and organic components, and present a model for using
ostrich eggshell fragments more broadly to tackle questions of subsistence and
mobility. By examining how foragers used ostrich eggs, a better understanding of
responses to changes in resource distributions can be determined, as can an
assessment of how this response changed over multiple climate cycles that had
clear impacts on coastline resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.