* 2231229
* AGS-FIRP Track 2: Understanding Vertical Variation of Energy Dissipation near the Surface for Solving the Mystery of the Observed Surface Energy Imbalance
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Jielun Sun, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Subhashree Mishra
* 12/31/2025
* USD 562,097.00

The overarching goal of the project is to advance understanding of atmospheric
energetics and the vertical variation of energy dissipation near the surface.
Understanding atmospheric energetics, especially the linkage between kinetic and
thermal energy, is critical for comprehending extreme weather events under
climate change. Scientists have tracked heat exchange at the surface, which is
responsible for warming/cooling the soil beneath and the atmosphere above for
over 80 years. With consideration of all possible heat sources and sinks, they
have found that heat sources do not match all the heat usages by the soil and
the atmosphere and that there is a missing link in the energy balance equation.
Based on latest understanding of how heat is transferred, the principal
investigator suggests a new theory for explaining the missing piece in the
energy balance equation. Results from this study have the potential to improve
theoretical understanding of how heat and air movements are connected, and
thereby improve weather and climate models, and severe weather forecasts. As
part of this project, the principal investigator will engage in education and
outreach activities with student participants from a Hispanic-serving
institution, local elementary schools, and public outreach events.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides funding to investigate the impact of
hydrostatic imbalance on energy transfer and validating the contribution of
energy dissipation to the surface energy imbalance. The objective of the project
is threefold: 1) to conduct a field experiment to directly observe the non-
hydrostatic energy transfer and energy dissipation, 2) to investigate the
hydrostatic imbalance in environmental energy partition between kinetic and
thermal energy as well as energy dissipation as a function of height and
atmospheric stability, and 3) to continue developing a simple one dimensional
model to validate theoretical understanding of atmospheric energetics as well as
momentum and mass conservation in comparison to observations. Data collected
from field observations will be used to measure how much energy from air motions
is reduced due to surface friction to see whether the diurnal pattern of this
energy dissipation matches the observed imbalance cycle. Results from the field
study will be used in the development of the one-dimensional model and for
improving understanding of total energy conservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.