* 2231099
* Structural Characterization of SARS-CoV-2 Genome Organization by NMR
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Tatyana Polenova, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 03/31/2026
* USD 797,846.00

The goal of this project is to structurally characterize the nucleocapsid
(N)-mediated packaging of the genome of the SARS-CoV-2 virus, the causative
agent of the deadly COVID-19 pandemic. The proposed investigations and the
general methodological framework to be developed will have broad applications
since they will provide 1) biological insights that open new strategies for
interfering with viral genome packaging, and 2) integrative magnetic resonance-
based protocols that can be used by other practitioners (biochemists,
biophysicists, molecular biologists). As such, the proposed research will impact
several areas of science, including structural biology, biochemistry, physical
chemistry, magnetic resonance spectroscopy, biotechnology and pharmacology. The
proposed innovative research program will provide unique training for students
at all levels in state-of-the-art experimental methods. Importantly, an
educational program within this project will include embedding opportunities for
members of the laboratories of the PI, Co-PI and the industrial collaborator
that will greatly enhance the training of the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to structurally characterize
how the nucleocapsid (N) packages the genome in the SARS-CoV-2 virus, by
integrating experimental magic angle spinning (MAS) and dynamic nuclear
polarization (DNP) nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) methods. This new
methodological framework, established through the proposed research, will
overcome the current challenges in studying complex heterogeneous viral genome
ribonuclear particles that exhibit different degrees of disorder and dynamics.
The proposed research will provide atomic-level knowledge on the structure and
dynamics of the SARS-CoV-2 N protein as well as the structural organization of
the N protein in assemblies with genomic RNA. Employing high magnetic fields
together with fast and ultrafast 1H- and 19F- detected MAS and DNP-enhanced MAS
NMR will enable studies into very large virus systems, requiring only a fraction
of the material used in conventional experiments. The general methodological
framework that will be developed will be broadly applicable to investigate
packaged genomes of other viruses and can be used by a wide range of
practitioners of these methodologies (biochemists, biophysicists, molecular
biologists). As such, the planned research will impact several areas of science,
including structural biology, biochemistry, physical chemistry, magnetic
resonance spectroscopy, biotechnology and
pharmacology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.