* 2231760
* Collaborative Research: Seed-fungal interactions: uncovering functional specificity and primary symbionts as key drivers of tropical tree recruitment
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2027
* Paul Zalamea, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 02/28/2027
* USD 788,505.00

Microbes are key determinants of plant population size, density, and diversity
in all terrestrial biomes. In species-rich tropical forests, fungi and fungus-
like organisms mediate plant population dynamics and community structure. Most
studies of plant-fungal dynamics have focused on seedlings and saplings, with
little consideration of seeds. Yet, the survival of seeds is a critical first
step to the recruitment of individuals to the next generation. This research
aims to test the hypothesis that beneficial and antagonistic plant-fungal
interactions at the seed stage are important to tropical tree recruitment. The
researchers will provide inclusive, cross-disciplinary research training and
mentorship from the US and Latin America. The leadership team will ensure that
all trainees, students, and postdoctoral associates, will benefit from the rich
scientific community of their institutions and the Smithsonian Tropical Research
Institute in Panama, including opportunities for professional growth,
networking, collaboration, and participation in the Inclusion, Diversity, Equity
and Access initiative at the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute. In
addition, the investigators will initiate course-based undergraduate research
modules and continue a long-standing undergraduate field course in Panama.
Finally, the team will give bilingual presentations for students and the public
in regional, national (US, Panama), and international settings, and showcase
their research by hosting Seed Ecology IX, a biennial international meeting, in
Panama in 2024.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the processes that influence
tropical forest biodiversity is important at a global scale. Fungal pathogens
are major sources of mortality in the tropics and essential to understanding
tropical tree population size, density, reproductive success, and ultimately,
species diversity. By combining the study of seed defenses and fungal symbioses,
the project will uncover the potentially crucial but hidden drivers of tree
recruitment in tropical forests. This research will (1) use two novel approaches
(untargeted metabolomics and assays of inducible defenses) to understand how
seed chemistry influences susceptibility to fungal infection, pathogenicity, and
corresponding fungal responses; (2) move beyond local geographical scales to
explore how the physical environment and maternal genotype influence fungal
community composition and host susceptibility at a landscape scale, spanning the
Panama Canal watershed; (3) combine lab and field approaches to test the
hypothesis that priority effects in low diversity microbial systems will
strongly influence the outcome of plant-microbial interactions (known as the
primary symbiont hypothesis); and (4) support diverse training, outreach, and
educational activities in the US and beyond. Collectively these elements will
contribute to resolving the intrinsic factors (seed defenses) and extrinsic
contingencies (additional microbial partners, different environmental
conditions, variable genetic background of plants), that determine the outcome
of seed-fungal interactions in the tropics. Thus, this project will elucidate
how fungi influence plant recruitment, with relevance to diverse wild- and agro-
ecosystems where plants regenerate from seeds. The project includes research
training at the undergraduate, graduate student and postdoctoral levels at the
University of South Florida, University of Illinois, Utah State University and
University of Arizona.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.