* 2231334
* ExpandQISE: Track 1: Quantum Materials Temporal Analysis and Coherent Control using Atto metrology for Quantum Information Science
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Wesley Sims, Morehouse College
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2025
* USD 797,770.00

Non-technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of Quantum
information Science and Engineering (QISE) and associated technologies are on
the horizon. Thus, expanding the fundamental understanding of quantum
electrodynamics is critical. The interest of this project is to unveil the
ultrafast quantum phenomena at the attosecond scale, by developing a new
technique capable of detecting and cross-correlating wave-packets with single-
digit attosecond or single-particle level accuracy at GHz data rates. This
project leverages a multi-institutional collaboration led by the Physics
department at Morehouse College, the Electrical &amp; Computer Engineering and
Physics &amp; Astronomy departments at University of California, Los Angeles,
and a traineeship program at the Linac Coherent Light Source under Stanford
University’s SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory. This partnership is used to
strengthen the existing efforts to recruit, retain, and graduate undergraduate
and graduate participants from underrepresented groups in STEM and help train
the next generation of quantum scientists and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Controlling electronic coherence in atomic and
molecular, and condensed matter physics is a long-sought-after goal. Photo-
excitation pathways can be exploited to coherently transmute light wave-packets
into charge excitations and electronic phase transitions for quantum and
neuromorphic computing. Unfortunately, coherence is usually lost in extremely
fast timescales due to incoherent fluctuations and decoherence effects intrinsic
to certain (nonequilibrium) states of matter. Thus, measuring and understanding
the (de)coherence mechanisms of technologically relevant quantum materials—e.g.,
correlated materials such as twisted graphene and 3D Dirac semimetals — is a
crucial first step to the deployment of decoherence mitigation strategies. The
technology the research team aims to develop is capable of measuring quantum-
level de/excitation mechanisms in a wide ensemble of physical systems. As a
model system, this study investigates high-harmonic generation as one prominent
type of attosecond-level electronic dynamical system. High-harmonic generation
in strongly correlated materials generate ultrafast light source via quantum
phase transition by nonlinear optics in strong laser fields. This project could
experimentally verify emerging theory on the quantum nature of high-harmonic
generation, a process that is traditionally described through (semi)classical
frameworks. The broader impact of this study spans beyond Quantum information
Science to render a new transformational tool in molecular physics, quantum
electrodynamics, relativistic and nonlinear&lt;br/&gt;optics, and particle
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is co-funded by The Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA), and the Historically Black Colleges and
Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.