* 2231984
* EAGER: Bootstrapping NSF-Supported Infrastructure with Open Educational Resources
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Fraida Fund, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 08/31/2024
* USD 99,936.00

In the past decade, the field of computer networking systems has been
transformed by the availability of NSF-supported research infrastructure, which
enables verifiable, repeatable, large-scale experimental research. These
infrastructure projects are also a significant asset for computer science and
engineering education, and thousands of students have gained hands-on experience
with networks and distributed systems through educational use of testbeds.
However, although a substantial library of teaching materials exists for earlier
testbeds such as GENI (Global Environment for Network Investigations), there are
fewer education resources available for more recent infrastructure projects.
This project seeks to bootstrap these newer testbeds by adapting some of the
most widely used GENI-based teaching materials for the next-generation CloudLab,
Chameleon Cloud, and FABRIC platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
create a library of high-quality experiential learning materials for CloudLab,
Chameleon Cloud, and FABRIC, including hands-on lab assignments and projects on
a variety of topics in computer networks and network security. For educators
currently using GENI, the project will support a seamless transition to next-
generation testbeds with more advanced experimental capabilities. It also lowers
the barrier to entry for new education users of CloudLab, Chameleon Cloud, and
FABRIC, and reinforces existing education and outreach efforts by these
platforms. Furthermore, these education activities can act as a force multiplier
for a wide range of research efforts on NSF-supported testbeds, by preparing
students to engage effectively with advanced research platforms and experimental
methodologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Open NSF-supported testbeds make
sophisticated networking and cloud computing capabilities available to
researchers and students at less-resourced institutions. However, these
platforms are designed with extensive capabilities to support complex state-of-
the-art research experiments. For this reason, the learning curve for new users
can be steep. A collection of open educational resource materials at a level
appropriate for senior undergraduate or beginning graduate students will enable
broader participation in these platforms, both for education and for
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Curriculum materials and related artifacts will
be made available to the community of computer science educators at
https://teaching-on-testbeds.github.io and will be updated and supported for at
least the duration of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.