* 2231736
* Research Infrastructure: An Integrated Laboratory Facility to Improve Research Capacity at Archbold Biological Station
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Aaron David, Archbold Expeditions, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 01/31/2026
* USD 564,734.00

Archbold Biological Station, established in 1941, is a not-for-profit biological
field station in south-central Florida dedicated to long-term ecological
research, education, and conservation. Archbold owns and manages a 2,102-ha
globally significant scrub preserve and adjacent 1,476-ha restoration site, as
well as Buck Island Ranch, a 4,168 ha terrestrial and freshwater working cattle
ranch ecosystem. The Principal Investigators will develop an integrated
Laboratory Facility to provide new laboratory capacity and equipment to better
allow Archbold’s scientists and visiting researchers to study the links between
external and internal drivers of change and four key areas of biological
responses: biodiversity, population ecology, ecosystem functioning, and
agroecology. The improvements will facilitate broader, deeper collaborations
with visiting researchers whose work requires enhanced laboratory facilities,
increase scientific networks involvement, as well as serve diverse stakeholders,
broaden student training and enhance education
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Archbold Biological Station’s
(https://www.archbold-station.org/index.cfm) laboratory capacity will be
increased for: (1) field sample processing, (2) analytical capabilities, and (3)
molecular research. The centerpiece of the Facility will be a new Core
Laboratory (93 m2) constructed in renovated building space. The proposed
integrated Facility will also include equipment upgrades to improve
capabilities, efficiently utilize existing laboratory space, and serve the
growing research needs of Archbold’s scientists and visiting researchers. These
improvements will promote cross-disciplinary, laboratory-based work to
complement our long-term population studies (e.g., Florida scrub jays
(Aphelocoma coerulescens; 54 yr), gopher tortoises (Gopherus polyphemus; 55 yr)
and 17 plant species (20-42 yr)) via new capabilities to increase and enhance
wide-ranging laboratory functions (e.g., soil and water nutrient analyses, DNA
analyses, immunological tests). Ultimately, these improvements will enhance
basic research and ecological theory in biodiversity, population ecology and
genetics, ecosystem functioning, and agroecology, and advance 22 specific
research foci at Archbold. Facility-related research will be disseminated via
Archbold’s extensive communication outlets and directly integrated into
Education programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.