* 2231682
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Mitigating Threats of Physical-Domain Signal Injections on Security, Reliability, and Safety of Sensing and Control Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Yazhou Tu, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 06/30/2026
* USD 207,319.00

Light, motion, and sound sensors are used in many applications, such as smart
homes, self-driving cars, and industrial control systems. As with many computing
technologies, sensors can be vulnerable to attacks. In particular, attackers may
try to inject false information into sensors; this could lead to the cyber-
physical systems they rely on having an incorrect model of the world, in turn
affecting these systems’ reliability and safety. This project’s goal is to
detect and mitigate those attacks, based on the fundamental insight that the
underlying physics of light, motion, and sound can be used to detect
inconsistent signals. Developing methods that use physical properties to detect
possible attacks, as well as sensor noise and errors, can lead to safer and more
robust cyber-physical systems. The planned work will support a number of post-
graduate, graduate, undergraduate, and high school educational activities
through integrating projects with coursework and research projects, while
developing research tools, testbeds, and datasets that can be used by others for
both research and education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to secure
sensor-based systems with untrustworthy analog sensing components through three
research thrusts. The first thrust involves determining how to reliably detect
and mitigate transducer-stage o ut-of-band acoustic injections on inertial
sensors, through embedding modulated patterns at the digitization stage of out-
of-band signals and develops robust inertial sensing on multiple sensors. The
second thrust explores defenses against light-based attacks on cameras to secure
vision systems, modeling threats of light injections that exploit the same
modality (i.e., light) as image sensors and utilizing adversarial optical
physics to defend against various light injections. The third thrust will
develop testbeds, tools, datasets, procedures, and metrics to test, improve, and
validate sensing system security and reliability under physical-domain signal
injection attacks. Together, the project outcomes will provide direct help to
secure kinematics-based sensing and actuation systems, as well as autonomous
vehicle, against various adversarial injection
attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.