* 2231250
* PurSUiT: Biodiversity and Taxonomy of Fish-Parasitic Gnathiid Isopods on Coral Reefs
* BIO,DEB
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2027
* Paul Sikkel, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 03/31/2027
* USD 1,157,344.00

Marine scientists and members of the public have long been drawn to the larger
marine organisms easily seen with the unaided human eye. However, scientists are
becoming increasingly aware of the importance of the smaller majority of marine
life that operate largely behind the scenes. Collectively referred to as
cryptofauna this group includes parasites. Gnathiid isopods (gnathiids) are a
group of parasites that are unique to marine environments and are found in all
oceans and depths. By attaching to fish, extracting blood meals and then
dropping off, gnathiids are the marine equivalent of ticks and mosquitos on
land. Some even transmit blood parasites to fish just as ticks and mosquitos do
to birds and mammals. This project focuses on the diversity of gnathiid isopods
in coral reef systems, the most diverse ecological systems on the planet. The
project is an international collaboration involving nearly all the active
gnathiid researchers in the world who are making significant investments in the
project, including helping to train US students. While there are hundreds of
research teams worldwide who study ticks and mosquitos, only a handful of
scientists study their marine equivalent – gnathiid isopods. As a consequence,
while there are likely hundreds of species of gnathiids, we only have
identifications and names for a few. Identifying and characterizing gnathiids to
species is important for the same reason that we need to know one tick or
mosquito species from another – even though they have certain similarities,
there are important differences among them, such as what, if any diseases they
may transmit. Given the similarity of gnathiid isopod-fish interactions to ticks
and mosquito interactions with humans and other land animals, this study will
provide the basis for understanding similarities and differences of host-
parasite interactions and disease transmission in coral reef fish as compared to
terrestrial systems. The project will contribute to educating and training the
next generation of taxonomists and systematists, and will improve public
understanding of coral reef biodiversity both in the US and
abroad.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goals of this project are to: 1)
Characterize gnathiid isopod diversity, biogeography, and key functional traits
in tropical coral reef and adjacent ecosystems; 2) Generate DNA barcodes for as
many species as possible and construct a molecular-based phylogeny; and 3)
Provide student training in gnathiid isopod taxonomy and systematics. With an
international group of collaborators that include field ecologists, taxonomists,
molecular biologists, bioinformaticians, and museum specialists, we will use an
integrative and interdisciplinary approach. We will sample from representative
coral reef habitats using a variety of collecting techniques our team has
developed over decades, and will use state of the art taxonomic, molecular, and
bioinformatic techniques to describe and identify gnathiid species. Through this
approach we will fill major gaps in biodiversity knowledge by: 1) Thorough and
systematic sampling of regions characterized as evolutionarily distinct and
globally endangered and therefore likely harboring unknown gathiid diversity;
and 2) Providing information on the systematics, biogeography and genetic
diversity of fish-parasitic gnathiid isopods that will enable major advances in
our understanding of their phylogenetic relationships. By identifying patterns
of host exploitation, and linking parasite life history stages, we will answer
fundamental questions regarding ecological function of parasitic isopods and
build capacity to address more sophisticated ecological and evolutionary
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.