* 2231699
* I-Corps: Structural Integrity and Resilience Index for Adaptation to Climate Change and Extreme Events
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Pallab Mozumder, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a ubiquitous structural integrity and resilience index to provide
a transparent mechanism to objectively assess the risks posed by weather- and
climate-driven hazards under current and future scenarios. This product seeks to
increase resilience as property values, mortgage, and insurance rates more
accurately account for associated risks and meaningfully signal trends to
diverse stakeholders (e.g., homeowners, prospective buyers, property developers,
lending agencies, insurers, and reinsurers). The technology may create an
informed community and enable state planning agencies to identify high-risk
areas and address the potential need for disaster assistance and/or strengthened
building codes. Homeowners may have opportunities to enhance their building's
resilience through actionable information. The cyberinfrastructure that will be
developed for this project may result in sustained economic growth and improved
social well-being by increasing equity in disaster risk
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a unidimensional structural integrity and resilience index for
adaptation to climate change and extreme events and promotion of resilience in
the built infrastructure. This technology seeks to promote the status,
sustainability, and security of vulnerable communities in a decentralized
fashion. The primary goal of the project is to create a framework for a
unidimensional score for residential buildings. This scoring system will be
accomplished by integrating four data sets: 1) building characteristics, 2)
environmental and climate risk characteristics, 3) past and future hazard
characteristics, and 4) social vulnerability characteristics. Using multimodal
data fusion tools and techniques including artificial intelligence and machine
learning, the technology seeks to integrate a wide range of complex
multidimensional characteristics into a unidimensional score to be utilized by
the public, diverse business entities, and government agencies to help
coordinate the development of more resilient
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.