* 2231874
* SCC-PG: Getting the Edge on Data-Driven Self-Managed Care: A Focus on Older Veterans in Arizona
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Nicole Roberts, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 04/30/2024
* USD 149,999.00

Older adults strive to be independent and healthy yet compared with younger
individuals, they are at greater risk of chronic health conditions and social
isolation. Solutions are needed that create ways for older adults to thrive,
connect, contribute to, and shape their communities. The increasingly available
Internet of Things (IoTs), particularly wearables and smart home devices (e.g.,
smartwatches, voice-activated home assistants), offer important opportunities
for real-time interventions for self-management of care, especially if they are
customized to meet each person’s unique needs and goals. This planning project
focuses on older military veteran populations in Phoenix, Arizona. The project
is building a multidisciplinary team to form a research agenda for studying,
developing, and deploying an IoT based solution for providing high quality, low
cost, and community-sensituve self-managed care. This project can benefit
Arizona’s large populations of older adults and veterans, with potential to
impact underserved aging populations across the U.S. The project also provides
education and workforce development to all levels of students from multiple
disciplines, and in particular creates innovations and access for many
underrepresented students at Arizona State University, where the project is
based.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through focus groups and pilot data collection, this
planning project is laying the groundwork for innovations in real-time and
privacy-preserving learning systems which that employ IoTs and edge computing to
support learning on live, personal health data and provide real-time,
personalized feedback without compromising user privacy. The project also
entails heterogeneous data integration and learning techniques to detect social-
emotional, and health changes and support prevention and early interventions.
The project builds on human-systems engineering and health informatics. This
approach is designed to meet the diverse needs of older adults and to allow them
to more effectively take charge of their health; The project includes an
analysis of social, cultural, and relationship factors and their effects on
cognitive and affective processes in older veterans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.