* 2231962
* CSGrad4US Mentoring Program - Phase Two
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Erik Russell, Computing Research Association
* Standard Grant
* Jill Denner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 1,351,347.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Computing Research
Association’s Committees on Education (CRA-E) and Widening Participation (CRA-
WP) will collaboratively implement a mentoring program for recipients of the NSF
CSGrad4US Graduate Fellowships, which support individuals in the workforce
returning to graduate school for a PhD in a CISE discipline. A previously
developed pilot program will be revised and expanded to better meet
participants’ needs to address new eligibility rules on the expected CISE
background and to meet the diverse and unique challenges a transition to
graduate school entails, as evident from the results of the pilot. The overall
goals of the CSGrad4US Mentoring Program are (1) to guide returning students
through the application process towards a successful CISE PhD admission and
school selection, and (2) mentor them through the transition to PhD graduate
study in the first year towards high retention. Compared to the pilot, the
individual coaching component of the program will be strengthened and mentoring
will be more individualized. To broaden the CSGrad4US program 's reach, the
project staff will perform outreach to potential applicants and develop and
disseminate publicity materials. The program evaluation will shed light on the
retention rate of students taking this pathway and the potential impact of the
program on domestic CS PhD production. The resulting mentoring program model and
professional development model for mentors and coaches will inform other efforts
and CISE departments on ways to increase domestic PhD
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mentoring needs of students returning from
the workforce are different from those applying to graduate school as
undergraduates. Key differences of this group include the lack of a natural peer
group, diminished access to faculty who can provide graduate application
guidance as well as perspective on their academic strengths and weaknesses, a
lack of past research experiences, and the reality of a significant change in
their financial situation and the resulting life-style adjustments during
graduate school. The CSGrad4US Mentoring Program will provide not only general
graduate application advice and guidance, but also aim to build a community and
a professional network among awardees. These goals are achieved through group
mentoring sessions, panels, and individual coaching during the application and
decision making process and the first year of graduate school. The presentations
created as part of this mentoring program will be useful beyond the
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.