* 2231171
* Conference: 2022 Meeting of the Pan-American Society for Evolutionary Developmental Biology (Vancouver, Canada July 17-20, 2022)
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Athula Wikramanayake, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 06/30/2023
* USD 20,000.00

Evolutionary Developmental Biology (EvoDevo) is an integrative field that sits
at the intersection of Evolutionary Biology, Developmental Biology, Genetics,
Genomics, and Physiology. One main goal of EvoDevo is to understand how genotype
gives rise to phenotype. But in addition, EvoDevo workers are interested in
reconstructing the evolution of developmental mechanisms. One strategy to
achieve this is to utilize naturally occurring variation between organisms to
link genotype and phenotype and hence reveal how changes in genotype results in
developmental and evolutionary change. To accomplish this, EvoDevo researchers
apply modern developmental, genetic, genomic, and bioinformatic tools to a broad
range of canonical and non-canonical model organisms. The mission of the Pan-
American Society for Evolutionary Developmental Biology (PASEDB) is to: 1)
promote and support EvoDevo in the Americas, 2) provide a forum for
communication and collaboration between workers in the field and related
disciplines and, 3) promote training and education in EvoDevo and related
disciplines. The members of PASEDB view the continued vitality and growth of the
EvoDevo community as essential to progress and innovation in several fields,
including some directly relevant to human and environmental health. PASEDB is
also strongly committed to achieving appropriate representation of women,
racial/ethnic minorities, persons with disabilities, and other individuals who
have been traditionally underrepresented in science. The main way PASEDB is
addressing these concerns is by organizing a biennial conference where
established researchers and trainees representing a diverse cross-section of the
field can meet to exchange ideas, network, and establish collaborations. The
activity will support the attendance of postdoctoral fellows, graduate students,
and junior faculty to the 2022 Biennial Meeting of PASEDB which will be held
jointly with the Society for Developmental Biology in Vancouver, Canada. In
doing so, the project will facilitate the exchange of ideas, collaborations, and
sense of community needed to advance knowledge and train the next generation of
scientists. Due to the highly interdisciplinary nature of the field, these
benefits will extend to related fields including Evolutionary Biology,
Developmental Biology, Genetics, Genomics, and Physiology. Attendees will also
participate in several activities designed to help promote appropriate
representation of women, racial/ethnic minorities, persons with disabilities,
and other individuals who have been traditionally underrepresented in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activity will support attendance of 8
postdoctoral scholars, 12 graduate students and 4 junior faculty at the 2022
Pan-American Society for Evolutionary Developmental Biology. Attendees will
participate in several activities designed to help promote the future leaders in
EvoDevo and to achieve appropriate representation of groups traditionally
underrepresented in science. These will include a postdoctoral fellow symposium,
workshops for persons of color, members of the LGBTQ community, women in
science, and EvoDevo researchers in Latin America. Participants will also be
chosen to achieve gender parity, and at least 30% of funded attendees will be
from groups traditionally underrepresented in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.