* 2231086
* Travel: NSF Student Travel for 2022 USENIX Conferences SOUPS 2022 and Security 2022
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,12/31/2022
* Catherine Bergman, USENIX Association
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 12/31/2022
* USD 50,000.00

The USENIX Security Conference is one of the most important research conferences
for professionals to present cutting edge research of fundamental importance to
advancing understanding of computer systems security. Published research has
specific application to security threats and vulnerabilities in computing
systems; the design, implementation and implications of systems software;
virtualization, system and network management and troubleshooting; cloud and
edge computing; security, privacy, and trust; mobile and wireless systems; and
more. This award provides funding for approximately 20 students to attend the
18th USENIX Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security (SOUPS ‘22), and 20
students to attend the 31st USENIX Security Symposium (Security
‘22).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;USENIX conferences gather researchers from across the
academic, government, and industry communities to foster cross-disciplinary
approaches and to address shared research challenges. This cross-disciplinary
emphasis makes them well-suited as a target for student&lt;br/&gt;participation,
and the important topics addressed in these conferences encourage student
research and collaboration in critical areas of advanced computing. This award
enables the participation of students who would otherwise be unable to attend
the conferences. It also extends the impact of research presented to a broader
audience inclusive of junior researchers from across the country. For 2022,
USENIX events are provided as hybrid events enabling both in-person and remote
participation; this award supports students attending in
person.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.