* 2231356
* ExpandQISE: Track 1: Energy Efficient Quantum Control of Robust Spin Ensemble Qubits (EQ2)
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Louis Bouchard, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 08/31/2025
* USD 800,000.00

Non-technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;An important problem in scalable quantum
computing is to locally address qubits in an energy-efficient manner. Current
approaches, for example, use microwaves at different frequencies conveyed
through waveguides to address different qubits that are resonant to different
frequencies. Such microwave fields consume significant energy and their
confinement to the nanometer scale is challenging. This project will use
voltage-control of nanoscale magnets for energy efficient and selective
addressing of spin qubits with high spatial resolution and will be easy to
integrate with existing foundry manufacturing processes. Thus, this project will
synergistically bring together the fields of spintronics and quantum computing.
The project team will create a vibrant Quantum Information Science and
Engineering (QISE) program at Virginia Commonwealth University (VCU) and
integrate this research with teaching and outreach to educate students in QISE
at the graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 levels while leveraging existing QISE
expertise at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) through
collaboration. Such activities include developing a new QISE course, lab
modules, and K-12 outreach through workshops and summer internships for
underrepresented students in QISE. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;This project will simulate and demonstrate highly
localized control of qubits using nanomagnets driven by an electric field at the
Larmor frequency of proximally located spin qubits to implement single-qubit
quantum gates with state-of-the-art fidelities and high energy efficiency.
Towards realizing the above research vision, the project will (1) simulate and
experimentally demonstrate voltage control of nanoscale magnets using
heterostructures to generate the desired magnetic field pulses locally in a
confined nanoscale volume for high fidelity single spin qubit gates, (2)
demonstrate that the voltage-controlled magnetization dynamics of such
nanomagnets can control NV spin qubit centers in diamond with high fidelity that
can be read optically, and (3) simulate the collective dynamics of mesoscopic
spin ensembles comprising 10-100 spins (for an increased signal to noise ratio
and possibly error correction through spin interaction to reduce dephasing) and
demonstrate that voltage-controlled nanomagnets can control such an ensemble of
spins with high fidelity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.