* 2231557
* SCC-IRG Track 1: Enabling Smart Cities in Coastal Regions of Environmental and Industrial Change: Building Adaptive Capacity through Sociotechnical Networks on the Texas Gulf Coast
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Karabi Bezboruah, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 09/30/2026
* USD 2,399,762.00

The Coastal Bend Region (CBR) of Texas is vulnerable to acute and chronic
environmental stressors stemming from natural and industrial sources, including
flooding and erosion from high tides, storm surge events, and ship traffic, as
well as higher levels of air and water pollution due to expansion of nearby
industrial operations. Despite the multitude of environmental hazards facing the
region, formal monitoring systems are limited and provide an incomplete view of
local-level conditions. In addition, networks for communication and decision-
making are often localized and/or fragmented. As a result, CBR communities lack
the comprehensive data and decision-making structures needed to plan for,
respond to, and mitigate the impacts of potential hazards. This project will
advance the understanding of how smart and connected technologies can be
integrated into and support regional communication networks to build adaptive
capacity in the face of cumulative impacts from climate change and industrial
expansion, using the CBR as an exemplar. Research activities will be co-
developed and coordinated with residents, community-based organizations, elected
officials, and city/county staff to strengthen multidisciplinary, cross-sector
partnerships, enhance public engagement with science and technology, and broaden
participation by underrepresented groups and frontline communities in the
scientific process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will apply a mixed-methods
approach to assess how sociotechnical networks can be leveraged to increase
knowledge and awareness of environmental and industrial hazards and to build
community adaptive capacity equitably among diverse residents of the CBR. This
project's main objectives are to (1) evaluate the structure and evolution of
regional communication, information-sharing, and policy-making networks focused
on environmental change and industrial expansion using grounded theory, (2)
develop and leverage real-time sensing technologies, machine learning models,
and data dissemination tools to monitor, predict, and communicate local-level
environmental conditions, and (3) integrate the social and technical components
through usability testing, tabletop exercises, and longitudinal questionnaires
to assess how the generated data can be effectively interpreted and presented to
various stakeholders to increase knowledge of environmental hazards, strengthen
regional decision-making processes, and build adaptive capacity. Community
workshops and symposia will provide opportunities to refine the study needs and
objectives, obtain feedback on the sensor network and data products, share
project results, co-develop a vision for long-term sustainability of the
project, and discuss opportunities for integration with other regional
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in response to the Smart &amp;
Connected Communities program. It is co-funded by the Advancing Informal STEM
Learning program which seeks to advance new approaches to, and evidence-based
understanding of, the design and development of STEM learning in informal
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.