* 2231916
* Conference: Climate Resilience and Managing Water Resources
* TIP,ITE
* 07/15/2022,12/31/2022
* Benjamin Kravitz, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 12/31/2022
* USD 94,090.00

Water sits at the nexus of every human activity. Agriculture, power generation,
transportation, public health, and industrial processes depend on consistent
availability and quality of water resources. When these conditions are not met,
significant disease, famine, and conflict can ensue. But water resources are
complicated, and water quantity and quality are not consistently distributed
around the planet, causing water inequities. These disparities are only getting
worse with ongoing climate change, and any disproportionately felt effects are
likely to be amplified. If we are going to improve resilience to climate change,
we need to improve water resource access, management, and equity. Because water
needs are ubiquitous and pervasive, there are no one-size-fits-all answers. We
need a whole-of-society approach to addressing water resilience, and we don't
really know what that is yet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will convene a
three-day Convergence Accelerator Workshop to bring sharper focus on existing
research gaps in water resources. This workshop will bring together experts from
academia, industry, government, society, and numerous other stakeholder
communities to identify critical research gaps that may have been missed by
previous narrowly focused efforts and will highlight high priority areas to be
addressed in a further, larger program. There will be particular focus on
connections between the research community and extensive efforts on the
operational side (such as at USDA and others) for maximum societal impact. In
doing so, the workshop will galvanize the research community and build a network
of partnerships between a wide variety of stakeholders, especially beyond
academia. One of the main purposes of the workshop is to identify strategies and
effectiveness of different approaches to climate resilience and water resources
that will have societal impact in the next few years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.