* 2231278
* ExpandQISE: Track 1: Fingerprinting and engineering tunable carbon-based quantum emitters in hexagonal boron nitride
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Benjamin Aleman, Howard University
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2025
* USD 799,811.00

Non-technical description:&lt;br/&gt;Emerging quantum technologies are poised to
revolutionize science and everyday life, from finance and sensing to computation
and medicine. At the core of these technologies is the quantum bit, or qubit.
Hence, there is an intense search to find viable, robust qubit candidates.
Certain defects, called deep-level defects, in electrically insulating materials
are often described as “artificial atoms/molecules.” This is because under
illumination they behave like atoms. Such defects are important amongst the
solid-state implementations of qubits. In recent years, deep-level defects have
been discovered in two-dimensional layered hexagonal boron nitride. Their
identities, however, have largely remained a mystery, which has frustrated both
the ability to make them and to control their properties. This joint theory-
experiment project brings together a research team of scientists from the Howard
University and University of Oregon to identify and tailor promising carbon-
based deep-level defects in hexagonal boron nitride layers via a combination of
theoretical and experimental defect-fingerprinting techniques. The work also
impacts the needs of this field more broadly, by establishing the use of
fingerprinting-techniques to identify deep-level defects in other 2D layered
materials. The project directly engages graduate and undergraduate students from
the two universities, boosting participation of underrepresented groups in
quantum information science and engineering (QISE). Research and workforce
development efforts, such as the establishment of new QISE courses at the two
universities, a remotely accessible quantum testbed, and year-round skill-
building mini-workshops for undergraduates are designed to help train and
broaden participation of students in QISE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description:&lt;br/&gt;Quantum information science and technologies are at the
frontiers of modern science. These technologies require robust and long-lived
qubits. Defect-based quantum emitters in wide-bandgap semiconductors have
emerged as leading qubit-candidates for use in future quantum-information and
quantum-sensing applications due to their potential for scalability and
integration. In particular, two-dimensional hosts offer unparalleled
opportunities for the near-deterministic placement of quantum emitters and
tailoring of their properties via strain engineering. Notwithstanding these
advantages, the full potential of these quantum emitters remains unrealized due
to difficulties in uniquely identifying them, thereby thwarting attempts to
engineer their photophysical and quantum properties. This project uses a novel
combination of theoretical and experimental fingerprinting studies, which
involve applying external stimuli to determine unique responses of different
defects, thereby, identifying these defects uniquely. The strain-induced
tailoring of different properties of quantum emitters to tune the target
properties (such as emission frequencies) allows for their use in different
quantum applications. Broader impacts on the field include a potential to use
the fingerprinting-techniques to identify deep-level defects in other two-
dimensional layered materials. The project also enables a broader range of
frontier science studies and discoveries, including new quantum-based sensing
modalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is co-funded by The Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA), and the Historically Black Colleges and
Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.