* 2231416
* IUCRC Phase I University of Washington: Center for Soil Technologies (SoilTech)
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Pedro Arduino, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 02/29/2028
* USD 140,000.00

Healthy soils are needed to sustain life, to grow food, to provide shelter, to
provide resilient infrastructure, and to enable mobility, but there is presently
a lack of knowledge about many key aspects of soil and its dynamics such as
variations in the moisture and organic matter content, and how these variations
affect soil health and stability. The Center for Soil Technologies (SoilTech) is
a partnership among the University of Southern California, Iowa State
University, the University of Connecticut, and the University of Washington to
address this knowledge gap with a mission to support industries related to
agriculture, defense, energy, and environment. By convening researchers across
the nation with complementary areas of expertise, and by recruiting Industry
Advisory Board members from a broad range of industry, foundation, and
government organizations, SoilTech will make crucial progress in understanding
soil dynamics. SoilTech will serve as a first-of-its-kind hub for technical
exchange and research among these organizations, providing inter-disciplinary
knowledge synthesis and broad applications of its research. SoilTech’s
participating sites have strong education and outreach programs addressing
underrepresented populations in STEM fields. These programs will train the next
generation of workforce in soil measurement and monitoring practices that will
broadly benefit society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SoilTech research teams are
poised to make significant advances in the understanding of dynamic processes in
soils through four research themes – Soil Sensors and Sensor Networks; Soil
Modeling and Data Analytics; Soil Carbon Capture and Accounting; and Soil Health
and Sustainability. SoilTech-enabled research will meet a number of as-yet
unaddressed needs in several industry sectors. SoilTech will provide the
underlying research necessary to develop new, more efficient, and more
sustainable ways of understanding soil properties and managing soils as a
natural resource. At the University Washington (UW), their research
contributions will focus on soil modeling, wireless soil sensor networks,
ambient energy harvesting, sensor development, and space-based remote sensing,
leveraging multiple world-class facilities for support. These include the
Applied Physics Laboratory, the eScience Institute, the Clean Energy Institute,
the Molecular Engineering &amp; Sciences Institute, UW + Amazon Science Hub, the
Washington Nanofabrication Facility, and the Cooperative Institute for Climate,
Ocean, and Ecosystem Studies. The center's research will be conducted with
considerations of diversity, equity, and inclusion woven into the fabric of
their work. Their workforce development plan includes creation of new courses
and training modules, experiential learning modules, and collaboration with the
UW NSF I-Corps Program for student entrepreneurial
engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.