* 2231651
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Towards Deceptive and Domain-Specific Cyber-Physical Honeypots
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Saman Zonouz, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 02/28/2026
* USD 600,000.00

Cyber-physical critical infrastructures provide management and control
capabilities for mission-critical utilities such as power grids. Programmable
logic controllers (PLCs) play a key role as they serve as a convenient bridge
between the cyber and the physical worlds. PLCs’ critical roles have made them
the target of sophisticated cyberattacks that are designed to disrupt their
operation, which creates both social unrest and financial losses. In this
context, cyber honeypots have been shown to be highly valuable tools for
collecting data to better understand the many different strategies and
objectives of the attackers. The project’s novelty is to develop a new domain-
specific stealthy honeypot for cyber-physical critical infrastructures and
specifically PLC controllers. The solutions allow for active data collection
using autonomous interactions with attacker’s software to activate its malicious
capabilities. The project's broader significance and importance are to provide
guidelines for researchers and practitioners looking to incorporate honeypots
and security methods into cyber-physical systems (CPS) and embedded controllers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For complete stealth, the solutions leverage air-gapped
observations of the malware behavior through physical side channels such as PLC
processor power signal produced by the on-device malicious code execution. For
deception, the techniques leverage mathematical models and physics-informed
neural networks to provide a realistic emulation of the physical dynamics and a
misleading physical process interface to the PLC input-output ports. The
research outcomes address the above-mentioned semantic gap via an automated
binary reverse engineering of the malicious controller code to extract the high-
level adversarial objectives from low-level controller software execution
traces. This enables the classification of adversaries dynamically using online
data-driven meta-learning algorithms. This work transforms how people approach
the problem of threat intelligence and modeling in CPS, in that the holistic
view cognizant of both cyber and physical factors becomes
widespread.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.