* 2231898
* A conference to encourage and support women creating and distributing STEM media
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Cynthia Lopez, NEW YORK WOMEN IN FILM & TELEVISION
* Standard Grant
* Kevin A. Clark
* 07/31/2023
* USD 75,000.00

In both the STEM media and entertainment sectors women are significantly
unrepresented. Women account for only 21% of the upper-level positions in film
(directors, writers, executive producers, cinematographers, etc.) according to a
recent study. This small conference directly addresses how to expand the volume
of STEM focused media and entertainment content centered on women and girls. The
Creative Workforce Summit: Women Storytellers Explore STEM will be held in New
York City and online (hybrid) in September 2022. The goal of the conference is
to 1) encourage an infrastructure of support for the creation and distribution
of informal STEM educational film, digital, and television content that is
centered on women and girls and 2) to strengthen ties between women in media,
entertainment, and women in STEM fields. The agenda includes keynote addresses
by thought leaders in STEM disciplines and media, panels of industry leaders, a
youth journalist interviews, and film screenings with filmmaker and scientist
Q&amp;As. The conference will be a hybrid event to allow for the greatest access
to a broader audience. The projected 300 in-person and 1000+ virtual attendees
will be drawn from New York Women in Film and Television’s extensive membership
and 100+ partner organizations in entertainment and media, including Black
Public Media, Brown Girls Doc Mafia, Firelight Media, ReelAbilities, and the
National Association of Latino Independent Producers. The conference will be
followed by a publication based on the convening featuring the keynotes,
abridged panel discussions, additional interviews, and industry representation
data analysis. In addition, a curriculum guide for high schools and colleges
focused on STEM and film collaborations will be developed and distributed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A post conference quantitative survey will be conducted
with conference participants to gather data on the impacts of the conference.
Questions to be asked include: What new professional connections were made by
women attending the conference? What was learned related to the craft of STEM
related media production and distribution? Were new and meaningful connections
made with participants outside the participant’s current field/networks?
Additional analysis will be done by the organizers of the conference in planning
post-conference strategies for supporting and building the women in STEM
infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This small conference project is funded by
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which seeks to (a) advance
new approaches to and evidence-based understanding of the design and development
of STEM learning in informal environments; (b) provide multiple pathways for
broadening access to and engagement in STEM learning experiences; (c) advance
innovative research on and assessment of STEM learning in informal environments;
and (d) engage the public of all ages in learning STEM in informal
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.