* 2231710
* SCC-PG: Securing Underserved Communities from Drug Abuse with Drone-Based Smart Medication Delivery
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Courtney Cronley, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Vishal Sharma
* 03/31/2024
* USD 150,000.00

Despite considerable efforts in combating substance use and exploring novel
treatment and recovery strategies, current practices have not been able to
connect many patients from underserved low-income communities in rural areas
with available healthcare resources due to infrastructure challenges,
inaccessibility to pharmacies, patient’s inability to drive, and lack of
transportation. Responding to such issues involves interactions among diverse
community stakeholders, including healthcare providers, research institutes,
government agencies, nonprofit organizations, and community residents. However,
these stakeholders are typically isolated or inefficiently organized, which
leads to unbalanced community coordination and inefficient decision-making in
substance use responses. To address these challenges and gaps, this Smart and
Connected Communities Panning Grant (SCC-PG) will go beyond the current
practices to promote substance use disorder treatment by connecting multiple
community stakeholders via innovative community-based coordination mechanisms
and connecting the residents from rural areas with urban medical resources via
novel mobility technologies. Situated at the heart of Appalachia, Knox County
and the surrounding communities are selected as an ideal natural testbed to
demonstrate how the proposed delivery mechanism and framework can address
infrastructure challenges, hurdle interaction and communication barriers, and
help improve access to necessary medications among individuals with substance
use disorder.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this SCC-PG project is to create
connected systems and intelligent technologies to advance the understanding of
interactions and perceptions among people who use drugs, healthcare providers,
and government agencies; and build upon the in-depth understanding to engage
communities to enable novel practices to treat substance use disorder and reduce
illicit drug use. Specifically, the project aims to 1) develop community
perception models that reveal how patients’ choices and concerns and public’s
acceptance on truck- and drone-enabled delivery mechanisms influence the service
patterns and operations, 2) create new truck- and drone-assisted healthcare
delivery frameworks and operations through integration of these quantified
perception models and operation constraints from healthcare providers and
regulatory agencies, and 3) establish novel community engagement models that
channel information in a connected way, through which patients, healthcare
providers, scientists, engineers, government officials, and volunteers are all
involved in a timely fashion to foster informed and all-inclusive decisions and
practices to achieve connected interventions and treatment. This research is
expected to lay a foundation for more comprehensive design and control of
innovative mobility systems and connected and collaborative frameworks that span
social and technical dimensions with community engagement to improve medication
access of underserved people with substance use
disorder.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.