* 2231634
* EAGER: ADAPT: Machine Learning for the Analysis of Novel Zero-field Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopic Data
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Ashok Ajoy, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 07/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models, and Computational Methods (CTMC)
program in the Division of Chemistry and the Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities (OMA), Ashok Ajoy of the University of California, Berkeley (UCB) and
Eric Jonas of the University of Chicago (U of C) are working to develop new
artificial intelligence (AI) methods for interpretation of zero-to-ultralow-
field (ZULF) nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra. NMR spectroscopy is a
vital and widely applicable tool for determining the structure of unknown
molecules, but traditional NMR systems, which operate at high magnetic fields,
are very large and expensive pieces of equipment and consequently are
inaccessible for many researchers. Traditional NMR systems also suffer from very
low throughput. New compact ZULF-NMR instruments pioneered by Ajoy Lab have the
potential to make NMR spectroscopy much more affordable, widely accessible, and
high in throughput. However, ZULF-NMR spectral data is very complicated and
difficult to interpret. In this project, Jonas Lab will build upon their recent
advances in AI techniques for interpretation of chemical spectra and Ajoy Lab
will gather a diverse ZULF-NMR dataset under known controlled conditions for
training of AI models. Finally, the Jonas Lab team will combine these techniques
and data to produce AI models that rapidly determine molecular structure from
ZULF-NMR spectra. It is anticipated that these models can be scaled up for
automated analysis of dozens of samples simultaneously without human
intervention, enabling "robotic" laboratories to autonomously discover novel
molecular substances. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ajoy and Jonas research groups
at UCB and the U of C, respectively, will collaborate to solve the spectrum-to-
structure problem for zero-to-ultralow-field (ZULF) NMR spectroscopy. ZULF-NMR
systems omit the large, expensive, highly homogeneous superconducting magnets
used in traditional high-field (HF) NMR systems. This means that ZULF-NMR mainly
measures inter-nuclear couplings (J-couplings). The resulting spectra are very
complex and difficult to interpret. By treating determination of molecular
structure from a ZULF-NMR spectrum as an inverse problem, the Jonas lab will
first leverage new developments in graph neural networks to create a forward
model that rapidly computes the probable spectrum for a given molecular
structure. To produce training data for this forward model, the Ajoy lab will
acquire hundreds of new experimental ZULF-NMR spectra for a set of small
molecules (up to 32 atoms), and the Jonas group will simulate the spectra for
thousands of other molecules using ab initio methods. The Jonas group will then
use this "fast forward model" to simulate ZULF-NMR spectra for millions of
molecules, and then use these spectra to train the inverse models in two phases:
first, the Jonas team will create a model to compute the posterior distribution
over spin system parameters given an observed ZULF-NMR spectrum; second, they
will create a model that uses those posterior distributions of spin system
parameters to estimate molecular structure via deep imitation learning. The Ajoy
and Jonas research groups will extensively validate this approach with
additional new experimental spectra. The outlined approach has the potential to
enable automated ZULF-NMR structure determination in autonomous laboratories,
and the low cost of ZULF-NMR instruments may make structure determination and
other applications of NMR available to a much broader array of laboratories and
novel use cases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.