* 2231202
* GP-UP: Workshop to build collaboration &amp; participation across DE&amp;I programs in Ocean Science
* GEO,OCE
* 08/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Nicole Raineault, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 06/30/2024
* USD 49,906.00

The University of South Florida will organize and support a two-day conference
for representatives of Diversity, Equity and Inclusion (DEI) programs in ocean
sciences who will map the landscape of programs and opportunities designed to
encourage underrepresented students to pursue ocean STEM careers. A primary goal
is to identify existing programs in this space, what audience(s) they reach, and
where the gaps or connection points are between programs. A secondary goal of
the workshop is to identify ways to provide increased access to at-sea training
and experiences, as well as shoreside experiences, especially at the
undergraduate level where opportunities are lacking. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
conference will support the development of new long-term collaborations focused
on supporting the engagement of under-represented students in ocean sciences.
The workshop will seek to mitigate barriers to advancement of under-represented
students in ocean sciences and to identify pathways that support student
advancement in ocean science careers. The results of the workshop will be
disseminated in a report, and the PI will seek to publish an information item
about the workshop results in a major ocean science journal. The collaborative
plan that emerges from it will aid all DE&amp;I programs in ocean science. The
workshop report will help existing and new programs, institutions, and
individuals interested in advancing DE&amp;I in ocean sciences by identifying
best practices, gaps and opportunities, and potential
collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.