* 2231798
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: RI: Causal Decision-Making
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Judea Pearl, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 08/31/2023
* USD 75,000.00

Artificial intelligence (AI) plays an increasingly prominent role in society
since decisions that were once made by humans are now being delegated to
automated systems. These systems are expected to be efficient, robust,
explainable, generalizable, and lead to outcomes agreed upon by society. There
is a growing understanding that robust decision-making relies on some knowledge
of the causal mechanisms underlying the environment. For instance, an
intelligent robot has to know the cause and effect relationships in its
environment to plan its course of action more robustly; a physician needs to
understand the effects of available drugs to design an effective strategy for
her patients. The current generation of AI systems responsible for decision-
making does not explicitly represent the underlying causal model. This project
will build the foundations toward a general framework — i.e., a set of
principles, algorithms, and tools — for decision-making systems by enriching the
traditional AI formalism with causal ingredients for more efficient, robust, and
explainable decision-making. The research will plant the seed for a
transformation in the decision-making field and have consequences for developing
the next generation of AI systems. The research results are expected to have
significant impacts on AI foundations and may potentially have broad
implications for society as more and more decisions are being delegated to AI
systems. The researchers will develop new educational materials and course
curricula in causal inference. The researchers will provide research training
for graduate students and are committed to continuing to recruit from
underrepresented groups. The research team will continue supporting the
“Causality in Statistics Education Award” to improve the teaching and learning
of modern causal inference tools in statistics and the data
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is the first step toward the
integration of causal inference (CI) and reinforcement learning (RL) into the
discipline of causal reinforcement learning (CRL). The idea is to endow an RL
agent with an explicit causal model of the environment and new capabilities for
interventional and counterfactual reasoning. CRL will open a new family of
learning opportunities and challenges that were neither acknowledged nor
understood before. The tasks included in this research include integrating
offline and online methods when the agents have different perceptual and
actuation capabilities and developing general machinery for counterfactual
decision-making, which is more powerful than its standard, interventional
counterpart.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.