* 2231619
* IUCRC Phase I Oakland University: Center for Pervasive Personalized Intelligence (PPI)
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2023,12/31/2025
* Marouane Kessentini, Oakland University
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 12/31/2025
* USD 75,000.00

The Internet of Things (IoT) refers to the ecosystem of computing devices (e.g.
cellphones, household appliances, vehicles, etc.) connected to each other via
the internet. The goal of the Center is to enable the next generation of IoT
systems to be more proactive and personalized without compromising security and
privacy, thereby improving decision making, increasing efficiency and enabling
new types of computing applications. This Pervasive Personalized Intelligence
(PPI) will be brought about by collaborative research efforts between industry
and Oakland University (OU), which will advance the areas of intelligent
transportation, edge intelligence, and smart
energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers at OU will investigate foundational
research under three thrusts: Intelligent Transportation/Edge AI, Software
Engineering Intelligence, and Smart Energy. The proposed research projects will
investigate several challenges related to managing the complexity in deploying
ML applications on the edge in constrained hardware environments such as
embedded devices in cars; developing personalized, context-aware sensing-
analysis-actuation solutions in smart vehicles and enabling smart electric
systems that help customers use the most energy when demands are lower. These
research projects are related to the next step in IoT technologies evolution
which involves developing AI and machine learning applications that run on the
edge, closer to where data is produced and consumed such as embedded devices in
smart cars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advances in IoT impact many facets of everyday
life. The PPI Center explores research thrusts in Artificial Intelligence, Smart
Energy, Intelligent Transportation, Computing Systems, Programmability,
Visualization, and Computer Security and Privacy that are broadly applicable
beyond IoT systems to a variety of other scientific domains such as
environmental science, agriculture, biology and robotics. The research outputs
will be disseminated through publications, research presentations to industry
and academia, open-source code and industrial collaborations. The Center will
train graduate students through hands-on experience on projects relevant to
industrial collaborators. The educational activities include summer schools for
industry engineers and K-12 outreach through partnerships with OUâ€™s
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PPI Center will maintain a publicly-
accessible project repository that will store open-source code, publicly
available datasets, papers and other research outputs that can be disseminated
to the general public. This repository will be maintained for the lifetime of
the center and the URL will be http://ppicenter.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.