* 2231646
* IUCRC Phase I University of Connecticut: Center for Soil Technologies (SoilTech)
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Baikun Li, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 02/29/2028
* USD 140,000.00

Healthy soils are needed to sustain life, to grow food, to provide shelter, to
provide resilient infrastructure, and to enable mobility, but there is presently
a lack of knowledge about many key aspects of soil and its dynamics such as
variations in the moisture and organic matter content, and how these variations
affect soil health and stability. The Center for Soil Technologies (SoilTech) is
a partnership among the University of Southern California, Iowa State
University, the University of Connecticut, and the University of Washington to
address this knowledge gap with a mission to support industries related to
agriculture, defense, energy, and environment. By convening researchers across
the nation with complementary areas of expertise, and by recruiting Industry
Advisory Board members from a broad range of industry, foundation, and
government organizations, SoilTech will make crucial progress in understanding
soil dynamics. SoilTech will serve as a first-of-its-kind hub for technical
exchange and research among these organizations, providing inter-disciplinary
knowledge synthesis and broad applications of its research. SoilTech’s
participating sites have strong education and outreach programs addressing
underrepresented populations in STEM fields. These programs will train the next
generation of workforce in soil measurement and monitoring practices that will
broadly benefit society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research teams at SoilTech
are poised to make significant advances in the understanding of dynamic
processes in soils through four research themes - Soil Sensors and Sensor
Networks; Soil Modeling and Data Analytics; Soil Carbon Capture and Accounting;
and Soil Health and Sustainability. SoilTech-enabled research will meet a number
of unaddressed needs in industry sectors. Research topics include the
development of resilient in-ground sensors and sensor networks, soil modeling
and analytics for decision support, standardization of carbon accounting
methodology, and developing holistic soil health initiatives such as contaminant
mitigation and support for precision agriculture. SoilTech will provide the
underlying research necessary to develop efficient and sustainable ways of
understanding soil properties and managing natural resources. University
Connecticut (UConn) contributions will focus on soil sensors and soil heath
based on its research expertise. UConn has multiple world-class facilities to
support SoilTech and foster partnerships with entrepreneurs. These resources
include the Institute of Environment, Institute of Material Science,
Agricultural Extension Station, Science I Research Center, and the newly
inaugurated Innovation Partnership Building. UConn will also leverage several
existing mechanisms for incorporating underrepresented students into SoilTech’s
research, including the First Year Experience program, and Louis Stokes Alliance
for Minority Participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.