* 2231209
* CCSS: Distributed Swarm Learning for Internet of Things at the Edge
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Yue Wang, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 12/31/2025
* USD 400,000.00

With the vigorous growth of versatile Internet of Things (IoT) services, smart
IoT devices are increasingly deployed at the edge of wireless IoT networks to
perform collaborative machine learning tasks using locally collected data,
giving rise to the edge learning paradigm. Because IoT networks have massive
low-cost edge devices with limited capabilities and resources, IoT-driven edge
learning faces major technical challenges caused by the communication
bottleneck, data and device heterogeneity, non-convex optimization, privacy and
security concerns, and dynamic operating environments. To overcome these
challenges, this project builds a new framework of distributed swarm learning
(DSL) through a holistic integration of artificial intelligence and biological
swarm intelligence. The proposed DSL framework for edge learning is expected to
benefit a wide range of IoT applications such as autonomous fleet management,
massive wearable electronics, smart agriculture, to name a few. This project
also provides broader societal impacts through student training, workforce
development, research dissemination and outreach to minorities and local
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This objective of this project is to develop
an efficient distributed learning framework that coherently addresses the unique
technical challenges related to swarm IoT with device restrictions and resource
constraints on communication, computation and data, and in complicated edge
environments with potential link failure, attacks, and topology changes. First,
a new DSL framework is established by bridging federated learning with swarm
optimization techniques. With theoretical backing, efficient information
extraction and exchanging mechanisms are developed along with parsimonious
transmission schemes for high efficiency in both communication and computation
of model updates. Second, to cope with data heterogeneity, link failure and
malicious attacks in practical IoT systems, robust DSL techniques are developed
based on generative adversarial networks, multi-worker selection and analog
transmission-and-aggregation techniques. Finally, to handle streaming data in an
online fashion at the network edge, dynamic optimization techniques are
investigated via the design of adaptive weights and exploration-exploitation
strategies under the DSL framework. The outcomes of this research are expected
to contribute to novel tools for learning and optimization tailored to real-time
operation of large-scale IoT in dynamic environments, with technological impacts
on statistical learning, signal processing and wireless
communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.