* 2231649
* SBIR Phase I:  Process for Producing Steel using Super-Pure Iron Ore Powder (SPIOP) and Hydrogen
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Dehua Zhu, AMERICAN MAGNET CO LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 03/31/2024
* USD 273,920.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to enable an environmentally sustainable, reduced-carbon emissions
steelmaking process for the iron and steel industry. This industry is
responsible for 7%~9% of global carbon emissions. The proposed innovation will
produce no solid waste discharge and no greenhouse gas emissions. Furthermore,
the proposed innovation will contribute to the United States and society by
reducing the use of precious mineral resources and promoting the use of
renewable energy sources. Once this innovation is proved to be successful and
scalable, it can be commercialized and massively applied to the American iron
and steelmaking industry, with the potential to reduce dependency on steel
imports, provide greater resilience to the US manufacturing sector, and reduce
the carbon footprint.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project will
demonstrate the feasibility of producing reduced-carbon emissions steel using
Super-Pure Iron Ore Powder (SPIOP) and hydrogen. Steel is ubiquitous in our
lives, from bridges and skyscrapers to cars and consumer goods. Yet, producing
steel often comes with a long flow sheet, high cost, waste, and pollution. The
proposed innovative process uses hydrogen (H2) to directly reduce SPIOP in a
high-temperature hydrogen reduction electric furnace to produce steel. The raw
iron ore is first ground to a fine target size range (~0-0.076mm) to dissociate
iron ore particles from gangue/impure particles such as quartz and rocks. The
dissociated iron ore particles are then purified using the company’s high-
intensity iron separation technologies. The purified iron ore concentrate is
&gt;99.0% purity. The hydrogen reduction process and direct reduced iron melting
process occur in the same furnace, producing a one-step crude steel
manufacturing process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.