* 2231665
* IUCRC Planning Grant University of Southern California: Center for CO2 Storage Modeling, Analytics, and Risk Reduction Technologies (CO2-Smart)
* GEO,RISE
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2023
* Roger Ghanem, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Barbara Ransom
* 12/31/2023
* USD 20,000.00

Geologic CO2 storage offers a viable option for reducing CO2 in the atmosphere.
Successful implementation of projects in this area hinges on scientific and
technological advances in multi-physics flow modeling, subsurface monitoring
data analytics, and risk assessment and mitigation strategies. This Industry-
University Collaborative Research Center for CO2 Storage Modeling, Monitoring,
Analytics, and Risk Reduction Technologies (CO2-SMART) aims to create a
synergistic research program to accelerate the development, adaptation, and
deployment of novel AI-enriched technologies to enable efficient and safe
implementation of the geologic storage of CO2. The prospective members of the
Center include the main CO2-producing sectors of the industry, including
upstream and downstream oil and gas companies, chemical and petrochemical
companies, as well as power plants and utility companies. The Center will train
the next generation of engineers and scientists as future leaders for
implementing and managing large-scale GCS projects. This will help to address
one of the most pressing challenges of our time with broad and significant
societal, energy security, and public health impacts. The Center will be guided
by an industry advisory board of Center members who will assist it in
maintaining its focus on addressing the emerging industry challenges for
successful implementation of CO2 storage in the subsurface.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The technical focus of the Center will be on integrating recent
advances in multi-physics modeling and simulation, subsurface monitoring data
acquisition, and modern AI and data science algorithms to develop reliable
technologies for safe and sustainable subsurface geologic storage of CO2. The
emerging AI-based technologies are bound to replace the traditional labor-
intensive modeling workflows with efficient automated platforms, where big data
analytics is used not only to enhance data processing, visualization, and
management, but also to provide advanced physics-informed predictive analytics,
anomaly/fault detection, and decision support capabilities for real-time
operation. The Center will focus on several key research and development thrust
areas, including (1) modeling and characterization of subsurface fluid, rock,
and fracture properties, as well as the parameters pertaining to the underlying
multi-physics processes, (2) multiscale and multi-physics modeling and
prediction of subsurface flow processes, (3) high-resolution dynamic
characterization and imaging using multi-physics monitoring data modalities and
advanced deep learning architectures, (4) modern risk assessment and uncertainty
quantification technologies pertaining to complex multi-physics systems, and (5)
optimization and control of the injected CO2 plume movement under risk and
uncertainty. Developing and advancing state-of-the-art technologies in these
research areas will directly benefit the industry members and serve the general
industrial and scientific communities, as well as the public at
large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.