* 2231825
* Travel: Student Travel Support for MVAPICH User group (MUG) 2022 Conference
* CSE,OAC
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Dhabaleswar Panda, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Ashok Srinivasan
* 07/31/2023
* USD 10,000.00

The 2022 MVAPICH User group (MUG) Conference will be a venue for bringing
together leading experts, including users, system administrators, researchers,
engineers, and students, to discuss and share their knowledge on using the
MVAPICH2 libraries to discuss and share their knowledge on using the MVAPICH2
libraries. The event will include a set of talks from researchers, users, and
system administrators who are experts in the field. The event also includes
contributed presentations (submitted through an open call for presentation and
selected by the MVAPICH team) and presentations from the MVAPICH team on tuning
and optimization strategies for various library components, troubleshooting
guidelines, etc. The conference, to be held in Columbus, OH, from August 22-24,
2022, is organized by a leading group of experts in message passing (MPI) and
networking technologies. The project will fund students to participate in the
conference, to engage deeply with the MVAPICH research and user community. The
project serves the national interest, as stated by NSF's mission, to promote the
progress of science as it provides a forum to disseminate research efforts,
connect researchers, and train the next generation of
scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference organizers are recruiting students
wishing to participate in the program from a diverse set of institutions, and
with the goal of a diverse set of participants. Prospective participants will
have to submit an application, and submissions are evaluated by a committee for
scientific merit and to promote diversity. The students will get several
benefits from attending the conference: (1) exposure to the latest high
performance computing (HPC) technologies (computing platforms, accelerators, and
networks), their features, and their impact on designing HPC software
environments; (2) in-depth exposure to the challenges and techniques in
designing, developing and maintaining open-source software environments for HPC
systems; (3) training on systematic tuning and optimization of HPC software
stacks; and (4) interaction with national laboratory and industry professionals.
The funding provided by NSF will have a significant impact on the careers of the
future generation of researchers in HPC, networking, and message passing
technologies, while encouraging diversity in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.