* 2231621
* EAGER: Multiplexed Wound Biomarker Detection with a Nanosensor Embedded Microfibrous Biomaterial
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Daniel Roxbury, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Chronic wounds with associated infections affect approximately 2% of the United
States population, primarily in the elderly, bedridden, and patients with
diabetes, and place severe physical and financial strain on those affected and
the broader healthcare system. There remains an urgent need for novel strategies
that enable the point-of-care monitoring of wounds to diagnose the degree of
progression or healing of the wound in addition to identifying the type and
severity of pathogenic infections. This EAGER award will fund a research program
that will create a new optically active bandage with integrated nanosensors that
detect several indicators (biomarkers) of wounds simultaneously. The bandage
sensing system is inherently wireless and does not require a power source or
sensitive electronics to be worn. This research will generate new knowledge, as
the interactions between the nanosensors and the biomarkers will be explored in
addition to the parameters of the textile synthesis process. The resulting
changes in the optical signals from the textile will be correlated to biomarker
concentrations. This research will be incorporated into an existing “nano-bio”
outreach program that the PI runs at a local high school. Finally, this platform
technology can be modified to develop wearable sensors for other important
applications, e.g. sensing disease biomarkers in the
sweat.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this EAGER project is to create,
optimize and explore the in vitro functionality of a smart wound dressing
platform for the real-time and multiplexed monitoring of wound biomarkers of
infection. It is known that the presence of pathogenic bacterial biofilms can
significantly prolong the healing process; however, the in situ detection and
subsequent treatment of such infections is often difficult. Thus, there is an
urgent need for a point-of-care wound monitoring platform that could help to
decrease the liabilities associated with prolonged hospitalizations and lab
testing by detecting infections in real-time and in an in situ fashion, i.e.
without the need to remove the bandage. Based upon promising preliminary data
obtained in the PI’s laboratory, a novel microfibrous platform is proposed for
the multiplexed detection of relevant wound biomarkers of chronicity and
infection. The combined analyte detection and signal transduction element is an
array of fluorescent carbon nanotube sensors with engineered selectivity and
sensitivity to biomarkers of chronic wounds including hydrogen peroxide,
interleukin-6 cytokine, and pyocyanin toxin. Embedded within a biocompatible
gauze-like microfibrous platform, in situ detection of the wound biomarkers is
accomplished wirelessly (optically) with a hand-held near-infrared spectrometer
device.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.