* 2231194
* TEA Center: Reclaiming the O'odham Language
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Paul Robertson, Tohono O'odham Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Regina Sievert
* 03/31/2028
* USD 2,000,000.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to promote the
advancement of intellectual leadership within TCUP institutions that will
support them in addressing the scientific or engineering priorities of their
tribes, communities, or broadly of the United States. Linked with this goal is
the TCU Enterprise Advancement Centers (TEA Centers) funding strand, which
provides support for TCUP institutions in establishing thematically based
centers whose work applies the college’s STEM instruction and research capacity
to realize benefits for their identified community. The O’odham Language Center
(OLC), conceived and directed by personnel from Tohono O’odham Community
College, directly aligns with the TEA Center concept in the significant positive
impacts it will have on the Tohono O’odham Nation in reclaiming the O’odham
language. Using a cross-generational approach, the OLC will strive to perpetuate
the language through the delivery of language immersion programs at Head Start
Centers on the reservation in a manner designed to develop the language fluency
of pre-K students who are citizens of the O’odham Nation. A slate of
comprehensive activities will be undertaken that includes the engagement of
community instructors fluent in the O’odham language and assisting students’
families in developing their own fluency in support of the overarching goal of
reclaiming their Indigenous language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The OLC will employ
evidenced-based pedagogical methods in the language immersion programs while
customizing the curriculum for the specific school and community settings in
which activities will occur. The work will be focused initially in three Head
Start Centers that have foundational elements of a language program already in
place. As the instructional model is optimized over time, the work will expand
to include all six of the Head Start Centers on the Tohono O’odham Nation.
Instructors will advance their own expertise through in situ practice as well as
professional development with linguists and language education experts. To
contribute to the greater knowledge base, the OLC will disseminate its findings
throughout the tribal college community, the Tohono O’odham community, its
related tribes, and other Indigenous communities in Arizona and North America.
Through the development of the immersion curriculum and instructional model, a
wide range of resources will become available that may be used to inform
language continuity efforts across tribal communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.