* 2231669
* Conference: The State of Equitable STEM Pedagogy at California Community Colleges
* EDU,EES
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Ciaran Brewster, Santa Monica College
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 01/31/2024
* USD 85,385.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this conference proposal aims to host a one-day
regional conference by Santa Monica College titled “The State of Equitable STEM
Pedagogy at California Community Colleges” where participants will share models
of equitable teaching practices within STEM courses at California community
colleges and HSIs. While much educational equity research has focused on the
experiences of students at four-year institutions, additional research is needed
on the experiences of community college students. This is a relevant area for
research given that proportionally more Hispanic/LatinX and Black/African
American students begin their academic careers in higher education at community
colleges; and within the California community college demographics 46.04% of the
student population are Hispanic/Latinx students while their success and
completion rates are lower than peers, specifically in STEM education. This
conference will contribute to a richer body of knowledge around effective equity
practices at community colleges and HSIs and will establish a platform for
greater collaboration among STEM faculty at California community colleges. This
conference will highlight key research findings from various initiatives already
underway at Santa Monica College, including the NSF-funded grant Fostering an
Equity Minded Student Success Culture in STEM, the California Board of Trustee’s
math initiative, the SMC Equitizing Gateway Courses initiative, and the redesign
of Student Services around the student experience. It will also showcase STEM
equity-focused initiatives from other California community colleges and will
allow STEM equity practitioners to gain knowledge and insight on how to best
serve our Black and Latinx students in STEM to help close racial equity gaps.
This conference will help build a broader network of equity practitioners among
STEM faculty at California Community Colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a
combination of online presentations and workshops, participants will be exposed
to high-impact equitable teaching practices designed to close academic
achievement gaps often experienced by Black and Latinx students in STEM courses,
including how intersectional identities often amplify existing equity gaps. The
goal of the conference will be to highlight how the unique goals, strengths,
challenges, and experiences of community college students require intentional
approaches to pedagogical practices designed around closing educational equity
gaps. This conference will consist of concurrent presentations and workshops,
along with a keynote speaker that will allow presenters and participants to
share their knowledge and experiences with equitable pedagogical practices in
STEM. Workshops will be organized around the following themes: sense of
belonging, intrusive advising, early alert systems, asset-based approaches, and
student services. A conference-specific Canvas course will be used to share
resources and foster discussion among participants. Conference presentations and
materials will be made widely available in a publicly accessible archive. An
external evaluator will survey conference participants to measure their
understanding of the conference sessions, as well as their likelihood to
promote, develop and improve their own teaching practices with an equity-minded
focus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.