* 2231040
* EAGER: Efficient Entanglement in Quantum Computing Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Yuanyuan Yang, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 09/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Quantum computing has shown capabilities far beyond traditional computing
paradigms and has great potential to be the next scientific breakthrough
propelling scientific and economic developments for the society in the near
future. Quantum processors are experiencing a major boost since technical giants
entered the quantum race. The computing capability of a quantum processor scales
with the number of qubits that can be embedded and interconnected. However, it
is still quite remote for a single quantum processor to perform large-scale
computing tasks. To bridge the gap between limited computing capability of a
single quantum processor and high-demands of computing tasks, quantum processors
are interconnected by quantum links in synergy with classical links, which forms
a quantum computing system. In such a system, a subset of quantum processors can
be entangled to form a virtual quantum machine with a large number of qubits to
boost the computing capability. This project systematically investigates the
fundamental and challenging issues in entanglement in quantum computing
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project explores unique features and
techniques of quantum to boost efficient entanglement in quantum computing
systems. It focuses on following closely coupled tasks: (1) investigate the
entanglement routing problem in broader quantum system settings in terms of
multiple quantum measurement metrics; (2) design novel entanglement routing
algorithms with both high efficiency and theoretical guarantees; (3) design
optimal system topologies to further boost the entanglement efficiency,
cooperating with the routing algorithms; (4) conduct a comprehensive performance
evaluation through extensive simulations and emulations by quantum simulators.
The outcome of this project will not only greatly boost entanglement efficiency
in quantum computing systems theoretically, but also facilitate future practical
quantum computing applications that rely on the cooperation of a set of
entangled quantum processors. It will have a profound impact on scientific and
economic improvement in the society. The project trains graduate students and
promotes the participation of female students in electrical and computer
engineering. The important findings of this project will be disseminated to the
research community and industry by way of conferences, journals, and website
access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.