* 2231629
* IUCRC Planning Grant Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University: Center for Aviation Big Data Analytics [ABDA]
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Reda Mankbadi, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 02/29/2024
* USD 20,000.00

The project seeks to address two fundamental issues: limited access to aviation
big data; and shortage of a robust workforce with integrated big data analytics
and aviation competencies. The proposed Center for Aviation Big Data Analytics
(ABDA) will advance research and education through discovery and innovation at
the confluence of big data analytics and aviation. Its mission is to develop big
data analytics solutions specially designed for the aviation industry to ensure
the safety, security, and prosperity of the U.S Aviation
Ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABDA has two sites: Embry-Riddle Aeronautical
University (ERAU) and New Mexico State University (NMSU). The ABDA Center's
research will focus on four thrust areas: (1) Data characterization and data
requirement identification; (2) Development of next generation big data-enabled
systems, services and applications; (3) Development of diverse ABDA-capable U.S.
Workforce of the Future; and (4) Development of AI/machine learning solutions
towards sustainable aviation. ERAU brings expertise in aviation data science and
business analytics, flight research, unmanned aerial systems and autonomous
systems, and aviation cybersecurity. Complementary expertise at other sites
include energy-aware operations, flight energy consumption modeling, energy cost
and emission assessment, artificial intelligence (AI), and machine learning.
During the planning period, ERAU will explore ways to advance diversity and
outreach with the Gaetz Aerospace Institute, the Boeing Scholars program, and
the Women in Aviation Chapter through recruiting prospective students, educating
current students, and identifying student researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ABDA Center's research is expected to have three major societal implications:
(1) to foster novel, transformative, multidisciplinary big data
analytics/AI/machine learning approaches that ensure the safety, security, and
prosperity of the U.S. Aviation Ecosystem, taking into consideration the unique
challenges present in the aviation industry; (2) to foster a research community
committed to advancing research and education at the confluence of big data
analytics and aviation, and to transition its findings into industry practice;
and (3) to collaborate with a minority serving institution site to recruit more
underrepresented students and develop diverse ABDA-capable U.S. Workforce of the
Future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All data, software, and artifacts produced in this
project will be archived and preserved, according to standard institutional
security and privacy practices and policies, for at least five
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.