* 2231348
* SBIR Phase II:  Portable Production Process for Icy Regoliths by Vapor Deposition
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2025
* Vincent Roux, OFF PLANET RESEARCH L.L.C.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Anna Brady
* 06/30/2025
* USD 996,708.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will enable research and development on
simulated moon surface materials that resemble the icy regolith on the Moon and
other worlds by a large number of organizations that currently do not have
access to such materials. Making realistic icy regolith simulants is beyond the
reach of most organizations because they are produced by replicating the natural
formation processes, that is they are produced under conditions that approximate
the environment within the ultra-cold, permanently-shadowed areas in the polar
regions of the Moon. Utilizing the resource potential of icy regoliths is a key
to an enduring human presence in space. Accurate simulants of these materials
are necessary to develop the technologies for studying, prospecting, and
utilizing this resource. Greater access to these simulants will increase
academia/industry partnerships and allow more rapid technology development
through higher fidelity testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project
provide a location-dependent, custom production method to produce icy regolith
simulants in large enough quantities in locations where they are needed by
students, researchers, and engineers. Currently, the difficulty and cost of
making realistic icy regolith simulants is preventing the higher fidelity
testing required to reduce the risk and facilitate the development of in situ
extraction technologies for critical resources. These simulants must be produced
by re-creating the natural formation processes on the Moon and other worlds as
closely as possible under very controlled conditions. Icy simulants must be
custom-made and can include hazardous gases so they are expensive and can only
be produced slowly in small batches. Cryogenic shipment after production is
expensive, difficult, and limited to small amounts. This project will produce
new equipment and methods of production that are portable. The solution will
also make more realistic and complete icy regolith simulants in quantities large
enough for effective research and development to take place. The equipment will
be designed to be adaptable and have the capacity to make various physical forms
of icy simulants with differing ingredients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.