* 2231677
* Enhanced Power System Resiliency through Adaptive Automatic Remedial Action Selection using Multi-Agent Reinforcement Learning
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Luigi Vanfretti, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 383,000.00

Electrical power grids have been facing increased operational challenges,
including those due to natural disasters, extreme weather conditions, and
increasing complexity with the ongoing upgrades to achieve zero-carbon footprint
goals. These factors challenge electrical power system operators in making
decisions on which action to take in order to keep most of the households
powered by the grid or even to avoid massive blackouts. Even though the control
centers’ technology and their practices undergo upgrades over time, grid
failures and blackouts still happen. When a severe event occurs on the grid, the
power system operator has to follow specific procedures to resolve the
unfavorable condition in order to bring the system back to normal operation.
With the aforementioned challenges in mind, it becomes necessary to automate the
process of choosing the most suitable remedial actions. In this case, the speed
of decision-making is crucial to avoid massive disconnections and minimize the
impact of unfavorable events on grid equipment. A significant improvement in
response time and even full automation may become possible in practice with the
help of modern computer science methods such as machine learning algorithms and,
more specifically, its subgroup of learning methods that is known as
reinforcement learning. Reinforcement learning acquires knowledge by choosing
actions that provide the largest benefit and has been shown to solve complex
problems, such as training robots to solve complicated tasks or even playing
complex games such as chess and the ancient game of
Go.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leveraging reinforcement learning methods, the proposed
solution in this research allows us to prioritize an action according to its
influence on consumers by choosing the action that reduces potential negative
impacts. This is done by assigning higher priority to a potential action if the
risk of disconnection of critical facilities is lower. To fully exploit the
advantages of reinforcement learning methods, multiple “agents” (decision
makers) are used. These agents can be distributed all across different grid
facilities and perform local control actions. However, to assure grid
resiliency, there is a degree of central coordination between them. Each agent
is responsible for its own control area where it can operate according to the
prioritized instructions that are provided in the form of actions during the
agent’s learning phase. In such a way, we aim to increase the trustworthiness of
the agents by incorporating prior knowledge about the power system that is
learned via ultra-high-fidelity nonlinear simulations. Once the agents have
learned enough, simulations are no longer needed and they can make their
decisions "on the fly". The advantage of the proposed solution with respect to
previously developed optimization methods in use in some grid control centers is
their ultra-fast online computational performance. Thus, the flexibility of
machine learning methods to perform exhaustive and fast analysis of a power
system's security while considering a broader impact on the connected households
makes them attractive to complement or even replace existing solutions.
&lt;br/&gt;The work in this project aims not only to advance the development of
the above mentioned methods but also to build proof-of-concept tools able to
derive actionable information for power system operators to improve power system
resiliency considering practical real-world constraints. This will be achieved
by working together with two US utilities and using their grid models and
measurements. If successful, the results of the project may lay the foundation
of an entirely new approach for power system
operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.