* 2231770
* The Global Land Programme (GLP): A key global research network of the Future Earth Initiative for Global Sustainability
* GEO,RISE
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Tatiana Loboda, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 01/31/2026
* USD 864,069.00

Land is at the nexus of addressing crucial societal and environmental problems.
The choices that societies make about land use globally are closely linked to
societal well-being. As an international network, Global Land Programme (GLP),
is uniquely positioned to address these grand challenges through removing
barriers, engaging all stakeholders, and identifying solutions developed through
collaborative mission-driven science processes. GLP brings land system
scientists together from around the globe to tackle broad questions, enabling
engaged collaboration across the international science community and advancing
specific cutting-edge research questions and synthesis activities; new products,
tools, and data; and societally relevant solutions with transformative benefits
for societies worldwide. Capacity building efforts will catalyze a more diverse,
globally competitive workforce in land system science and their contributions to
global change research, and connection to policy and practitioner communities in
the pursuit of answers multiplies the likelihood of impact. GLP will engage with
interested parties and decisionmakers to understand their knowledge needs to
solve what the U.S. Global Change Research Program (USGCRP) has framed as
priority research and information needs for addressing the challenges of global
change, generating actionable knowledge in support of sustainability
transformations in land systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mission of GLP
entails bridging scientific innovation with societal relevance and employs
place-based research to feed synthesis-understandings of the patterns and
processes of global change and related debates in global policy settings. Within
this overall strategic setting of the GLP, the International Programme Office
(IPO) will enable: 1) Setting agendas and facilitating synthesis in Land Systems
Science (LSS); 2) Production of cutting-edge LSS worldwide; 3) Inform and
support science-based policy on land; and 4) Building capacity of the LSS
community to deliver inclusive, solutions-oriented science. GLP researchers-
members, individually and collectively, have a twofold task in the achievement
of these objectives. First, they will further develop the methodological core
competencies of modeling, monitoring, and case study research and synthesis.
Second, through the GLP ‘bodies’ (e.g., working groups, nodal offices, early
career network) members will innovate in knowledge-building, engaging with non-
scientific stakeholders to maximize effectiveness toward sustainable land
systems. Integrating early career scientists into our training and workforce
development offerings from the beginning, and through provision of ongoing
mentoring and laddering, GLP will generate strong participation of young
scholars from the Global South and marginalized communities of the Global
North.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.