* 2231533
* RTG: The Mathematics of Quantum Information Science
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2028
* Konstantina Trivisa, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2028
* USD 1,500,000.00

Quantum Information Science (QIS) aims to develop new ways to compute and
communicate by taking advantage of the unique properties of matter at the atomic
level. This includes advances in cryptography, faster calculations, and better
understanding of natural processes taking place at the atomic level. Because of
its spanning impact, QIS addresses many areas of national interest, including
cybersecurity, pharmaceuticals, financial services, health care, among others.
QIS involves a fundamentally different logic than classical information science,
and advances in the field (in areas such as quantum algorithms and quantum
cryptography) have often depended on creative mathematical breakthroughs.
Furthermore, mathematics is an accessible entry point to QIS for students and
mentors from a wide range of backgrounds and skill levels. With these principles
in mind, this project strengthens both mathematics and QIS by training
mathematicians to enter the world of quantum research. A holistic curriculum
guides program participants from learning quantum principles to applying
sophisticated mathematical tools to advance QIS, while also exploring the
societal impact of their research. This project will support the involvement of
undergraduate and graduate students, and postdoc fellows from the Mathematical
Sciences, to be mentored by faculty who are leaders in fields relevant to
mathematics and quantum science. By expanding QIS training to Mathematics, this
project will contribute to a more robust and diverse QIS
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance mathematics by
tackling cutting-edge theoretical questions within three research themes that
are mature enough to allow for mathematical treatment and innovation: Quantum
Algorithms, Quantum Cryptography, and Quantum Systems. Each of these themes has
rigorous mathematical models (that the community agrees are useful) and these
models rise to an abundance of mathematical problems that are yet to be explored
and whose solution is likely to have high impact on scientific computing,
cybersecurity, and nanotechnology. Fifteen faculty will mentor undergraduate,
graduate, and postdoctoral researchers in QIS projects that draw from
algebra/representation theory, nonlinear analysis, partial differential
equations, scientific computing, and stochastic analysis. Research goals will
include: to develop new and enhance existing quantum algorithms, to use the
power of mathematics to expand the range and usefulness of quantum cryptography,
and to improve Quantum Information Science through advances in quantum systems
theory and vice versa. The project is expected to stimulate the research and
careers of mathematicians by equipping them to pursue research in Quantum
Information Science, both at the University of Maryland, College Park level and
at the national level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.