* 2231780
* Collaborative Research: Correlating Large-Scale Visual Structures to Entrainment Mechanisms in Buoyant and Momentum-Driven Plumes
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2025
* Blair Johnson, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 11/30/2025
* USD 249,998.00

This research will explore the development of buoyant plumes, specifically to
quantify how physical structures that develop along the plume/ambient interface
result from mass transport through an outlet, and how these structures
subsequently affect entrainment and mixing. This work will uncover mechanistic
differences in plume evolution, depending on source conditions, thus informing
transport models to appropriately incorporate physics for these phenomena. This
is key to understanding and predicting the fate of nutrients or pollutants from
plumes â€“ for example, volcanic ash clouds, discharges into bays or estuaries,
and a host of other environmental and industrial flows. While the fluid dynamics
community has long acknowledged the range of physical length scales of eddies in
turbulent flows, there exists a lack of research regarding how the exterior
structure of a plume or jet is linked to the source conditions. Knowledge
uncovered through this research will provide robust means for quantifying plume
dynamics through image analysis of remotely acquired data. The research will
support the training of two graduate students and undergraduate researchers. The
research team will develop workshops for local outreach and educational
programs, and data from the outreach events will be used in the research
mission. Finally, this project will form the basis for a project for a graduate
student in the WHOI summer program in Geophysical Fluid
Dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Laboratory experiments and direct numerical
simulations will be conducted to satisfy two primary objectives. The first goal
is to develop techniques to identify and quantify features comprising the plume
structure to remotely determine source conditions of industrial or natural
plumes from video or photographic recordings. The second goal is to investigate
mechanisms of mixing and entrainment at the plume/ambient interface. In
laboratory experiments, simultaneous spatio-temporally resolved particle image
velocimetry and laser induced fluorescence measurements will be used to quantify
the flow field and mass transport, respectively. Time lapse stereo
photogrammetry will be used to reconstruct the dynamic three-dimensional outer
edge of the plume, from which distributions of the length scales comprising the
external structure can be characterized. A complementary suite of direct
numerical simulations will be performed in quiescent unstratified and stratified
background fluids. The turbulent/non-turbulent interface and the structures
driving entrainment and mixing at the plume edges will be identified in the
simulation data and subsequently be compared to the laboratory data. This
research will enhance our ability to determine source conditions during plume-
driven phenomena, including but not limited to volcanic eruptions, forest fires,
glacial discharge plumes, undersea dispersion, and disease
transmission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.