* 2231237
* Understanding the Role of Mesoscale Atmosphere-Ocean Interactions in Seasonal-to-Decadal Climate Prediction
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2027
* Ping Chang, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 02/28/2027
* USD 478,784.00

Skillful predictions of year-to-year climate variations would have tremendous
value, for instance advanced warning of droughts would help farmers, water
managers, and relief agencies cope with the hardships of water scarcity. The
extent to which climate variations are predictable in general is not known, but
the example of El Nino shows that predictable variations can arise from
interactions between the atmosphere and the ocean. Recent research suggests that
predictable climate variations could also result from atmosphere-ocean coupling
associated with the Gulf Stream and the Kuroshio Current. A critical aspect of
the hypothesized coupling is the involvement of small spatial scales, in
particular the atmospheric response to the strong and narrow temperature
contrasts between the warm waters of the Gulf Stream and Kuroshio currents and
the surrounding cold water. Meanwhile the ocean's response to the atmosphere
could involve the mesoscale dynamics of sharp ocean fronts, through which
surface winds can induce deep vertical motions. Deep motions are important as
they can connect the atmosphere with levels in the ocean where variability takes
place slowly, thus creating the potential for skillful long-lead
prediction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research conducted here explores the potential
for predictability associated with air-sea coupling using climate model
simulations performed at high enough resolutions to capture the mechanisms. The
research also looks at the potential for high resolution to capture the weather
extremes associated with climate variability, for example changes in the
distribution of hurricanes and atmospheric rivers associated with El Nino
events. Specifically, the Principal Investigators (PIs) perform simulations
using the Community Earth System Model (CESM, version 1.3) with 0.25 degree grid
spacing for the atmosphere and 0.1 degree spacing for the ocean. The simulations
include a 10-member ensemble of uninitialized transient climate simulations from
1920 to 2100, as well as an ensemble of retrospective 5-year climate predictions
starting from years between 1982 and 2016. A number of strategies are pursued to
explore the impact of small-scale mechanisms, such as experiments in which the
sea surface temperatures produced by the ocean model are smoothed before they
are fed into the atmospheric model, thereby disabling small-scale interaction
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Skillful predictions of climate variability
could have tremendous societal value, as noted above, thus work to establish the
extent to which the climate system is in fact predictable, and the physical
mechanisms that determine its predictability, has substantial broader impacts.
The broader impacts of the project are also served by open access to the
simulations generated in the project, which allows researchers around the world
to engage in research on climate system predictability. The PIs also engage in
outreach to the research community and the general public through venues
including a radio program titled "On the Ocean" and International CLIVAR summer
schools. Educational broader impacts come from the PIs' participation in their
department's Research Experiences for Undergraduates program, and through the
support and training of a postdoctoral associate and a graduate
student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.