* 2231706
* Collaborative Research: CIF: Small: Approximate Coded Computing - Fundamental Limits of Precision, Fault-Tolerance, and Privacy
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Viveck Cadambe, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 05/31/2026
* USD 350,000.00

Distributed computing plays a central role in enabling modern machine learning
and artificial intelligence applications. This project develops new theoretical
frameworks, analyses, and techniques for distributed computing and machine
learning aiming to (i) accelerate the computation time by overcoming system
bottlenecks, (ii) ensure accurate computation in the presence of hardware errors
and faults, and (iii) enable data-processing approaches that adhere to data-
privacy constraints. These attributes will be enabled by inducing a controlled
amount of redundancy in computations based on coding theory - a field that has
enabled modern data communication and storage technologies. To obtain a
realistic understanding of what is possible in the long run, the developed
techniques will be accompanied by fundamental bounds on the tradeoffs between
computation accuracy, data privacy, error tolerance, and redundancy overheads.
The project will disseminate outcomes and enable awareness of developed research
to the broader scientific community through publications, tutorials, and
curricular integration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coded computing is a sub-area of
information and coding theory that induces redundancy into distributed
computing. Coded computing has emerged as a promising paradigm to relieve
straggler, communication, and data-privacy bottlenecks in large-scale
distributed machine learning. Yet, state-of-the-art coded-computing techniques,
mostly devised to enable exact reconstruction of the computation output, have
fundamental efficiency limitations, particularly for nonlinear computation
tasks. This project develops techniques for approximate coded computing, wherein
the decoder aims to obtain the function output within a prescribed distortion
limit, and data-privacy constraints are posed as limits on differential-privacy
parameters. The research will be conducted in three closely connected thrusts:
(i) coding schemes for fault-tolerant approximate matrix multiplication, (ii)
coding schemes for fault-tolerant approximate nonlinear computations beyond
matrix multiplications, and (iii) coding schemes for differentially private
computations. The techniques developed will combine ideas from information and
coding theories, mathematical approximation theory, and differential
privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.