* 2231807
* EAGER: Nanoplasmonic Mesh SERS Sensors for in situ Spatiotemporal Monitoring of Biofilm Activities
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2024
* Inyoung Kim, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 11/30/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Biological activities in multicellular systems, such as microbial biofilms and
cancerous tumors, are heterogeneous, dynamic, and adaptive. Resolving complex
spatiotemporal biological processes in multicellular systems is crucial for
biology studies and medical applications. One of the significant challenges for
having a holistic picture of systems biology lies in the lack of real-time
spatiotemporal biochemical characterization methods for living multicellular
systems. This research aims to develop an innovative mesh-based biosensor to
allow spatiotemporal biochemical monitoring of system-level biological
activities in multicellular systems, such as microbial biofilms. This project
incorporates outreach activities through lab tours and science demos coordinated
by the Virginia Tech Sustainable Nanotechnology center to engage public interest
and promote research dissemination in biosensing topics. In addition, the team
will collaborate with the Center for the Enhancement of Engineering Diversity to
promote STEM academic diversity through the "Imagination Summer Camp" program
for K12 students from rural areas and "Women's Preview Weekend" for admitted
female high school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological activities in
multicellular systems, such as microbial biofilms and cancerous tumors, are
heterogeneous, dynamic, and adaptive, coordinated by cellular interactions via
different signaling and regulatory pathways. Unfortunately, standard bioanalysis
methods do not allow in situ spatiotemporal biochemical monitoring of
multicellular systems due to their invasiveness. This project develops a
biomimetic microporous mesh-based surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS)
biosensor to integrate uniform nanoplasmonic hotspot arrays within multicellular
biofilm systems and enable in situ spatiotemporal SERS biochemical monitoring of
system-level biofilm activities. The research includes two research objectives:
(1) develop biomimetic nanoplasmonic mesh SERS biosensors to incorporate large
uniform hotspot arrays within biofilms for reliable spatiotemporal SERS
measurements in nontargeted molecular profiling and targeted pH sensing, and (2)
implement in situ spatiotemporal SERS molecular profiling and pH sensing of
biofilm activities during biofilm development and after antibiotic
treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.