* 2231082
* Collaborative Research: Mapping and comparing the link of the protein scaffold to quantum events in thermally activated enzymes and flavin-based photoreceptors
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2027
* Michael Thompson, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 03/31/2027
* USD 199,276.00

This project studies how biological macromolecules are able to efficiently
promote and utilize non-trivial quantum phenomena at or near room temperatures
that are necessary for function. This project will provide a new understanding
for how biology integrates quantum behavior into macromolecular function. There
is also the potential to inform and aid the advancement of new quantum science
and technologies, such as the development of de novo systems that harness
quantum phenomena. This project puts forth a highly collaborative, synergistic
research approach entailing a multi-disciplinary study in structural biology,
protein biochemistry, enzymology, chemistry, and physics. Mentorship is key to
the success of this project with multi-layered training opportunities, built on
the principles of “team science”, available to postdoctoral trainees as well as
graduate and undergraduate students. The project will also develop an
innovative, cross-institutional, course-based research experience to be
implemented in the undergraduate curriculum. This effort will be aimed at
biology-focused and primarily underrepresented students who will be engaged in
research that is related to non-trivial quantum effects in
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proteins, and possibly other
macromolecules, have evolved in a manner to initiate, sustain, enhance, and/or
communicate quantum phenomena, including tunneling and spin coherence. A full
mechanistic understanding into how nature accomplishes these interactions, and
how it leads to a biological outcome, resides in the successful interplay
between the scaffold of the protein and active site quantum behavior.
Investigations within this project will draw on cutting edge advances in
experimentation, including time-resolved and temperature-dependent structural
studies coupled with functional assays, and theory to create a complementary and
holistic data-driven understanding of the relationship between energy flow in a
protein structure and either thermal or light initiation of quantum behavior.
The research focuses on two disparate protein systems with distinct folds and
complementary quantum effects – hydrogen tunneling in lipoxygenase catalysis and
spin coherence in cryptochromes associated with magnetoreception and circadian
clocks. The underlying theme of the research will be the identification and
mapping of anisotropic protein networks that control vibrational motions and/or
conformational changes linked to a productive output. The principles that emerge
from this research go beyond the scope of hydrogen tunneling and spin coherence,
by expanding our knowledge base of function-coupled thermal and light activated
protein networks. The resulting insights could potentially be leveraged to
encode new functionalities into (re)designed proteins. This project is supported
by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.