* 2231037
* EAGER: Towards a Universal Roughness Model
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Robert Kunz, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 08/31/2023
* USD 181,652.00

Flows over rough boundaries arise in many scientific and engineering disciplines
including urban and vegetation canopies, maritime biofouling, additive
manufacturing of flow passages, pipe transport and others. This research
explores a new, accurate, general, physics-inclusive, and computationally
efficient modeling framework for these flows, based on space/time averaging and
attendant modeling of the Navier-Stokes governing equations. This research is
enabled by proposed large scale Direct Numerical Simulations of these rough wall
systems, which provide near-exact space/time distributions of model terms,
thereby enabling uncertainty quantification of model accuracy. A broadly
applicable Distributed Element Roughness Model, as proposed here, would be a
disruptive contribution to fluid dynamics communities involved in a wide range
of disciplines, including aero/hydrodynamics, atmospheric science, bio-fluid
dynamics, and energy science. Also, considering that progress in machine
learning has placed an ever-increasing premium on large data sets, the proposed
database of Direct Numerical Simulations will enable new physics discoveries,
new turbulence models, and, importantly, a significant increase in validation
data, for the fluids engineering and science communities. Also, the proposed
research activities will train a new generation of graduate students with
experience in high performance computing, computational fluid dynamics, and
turbulence modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project to explore
Double-Averaged Navier-Stokes closure as a universal roughness modeling
paradigm. Existing rough-wall models parameterize surface geometry/structure and
are empirical correlations between these parameters and hydrodynamic/aerodynamic
properties. There, physical processes responsible for the momentum loss and
transport are not explicitly modeled, so these models do not generalize well to
roughness geometries outside of their correlation basis. By contrast, the
horizontally and temporally averaged governing equations include terms
representing all physical processes present in the roughness-occupied layer, and
these can each be explicitly modeled. This approach, a Distributed Element
Roughness Model, is a necessary and sufficient framework for the development of
a universally applicable roughness model. In this approach, models are required
for the Reynolds stress, the dispersive stress, and the forces at fluid-material
interfaces. In the proposed research, the PIs will explore development of such a
complete roughness model, based on modeling these closure terms in the Double-
Averaged Navier-Stokes equations. The ultimate goal of the proposed research is
a universal modeling paradigm, and a universal rough wall
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.