* 2231558
* Collaborative Research: Conference: Interdisciplinary Antarctic Earth Science Conference &amp; Deep-Field Planning Workshop
* GEO,OPP
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Nathan Smith, Los Angeles County Museum of Natural History Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Allen Pope
* 08/31/2025
* USD 184,750.00

The unique Antarctic environment offers insight into processes and records not
seen anywhere else on Earth, and is critical to understanding our planet’s
history and future. The remoteness and logistics of Antarctic science brings
together researchers from diverse disciplines who otherwise wouldn’t be
presented with opportunities for collaboration, and often rarely attend the same
academic conferences. The Interdisciplinary Antarctic Earth Science (IAES)
conference is a biennial gathering that supports the collaboration of U.S. bio-,
cryo-, geo-, and atmospheric science researchers working in the Antarctic. This
proposal will support the next two IAES conferences to be held in 2022 and 2024,
as well as a paired deep-field camp planning workshop. The IAES conference is
important to the mission of the NSF in supporting interdisciplinary
collaboration in the Antarctic Earth sciences, but also fulfills recommendations
by the National Academy for improving cross-disciplinary awareness, data
sharing, and early career researcher mentoring and development. The size and
scope of the IAES conference allow it to serve as a hub for novel,
interdisciplinary collaboration, as well as help develop the next generation of
Antarctic Earth scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the IAES
conference are to develop and deepen scientific collaborations across the
Antarctic Earth science community, and create a framework for future deep-field,
as well as non-field-based research. Across a 2.5 day hybrid conference, the
IAES themes will include 1) connecting surficial processes, geology, and the
deep earth; 2) landscape, ice sheet, ocean and atmospheric interactions; 3)
exploring the hidden continent; and 4) evolution and ecology of ancient and
modern organisms, ecosystems, and environments. The conference will share
science through presentations of current research and keynote talks, broaden
participation through welcoming new researchers from under-represented
communities and disciplines, and deepen collaboration through interdisciplinary
networking highlighting potential research connections, novel mentorship
activities, and promoting data re-use, and application of remote sensing and
modeling. Discussions resulting from the IAES conference will be used to develop
white papers on future Antarctic collaborative research and deep-field camps
based on community-driven research priorities. Community surveys and feedback
will be solicited throughout the project to guide the future development of the
IAES conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.