* 2231078
* Collaborative Research: Integrating Nanoparticle Self-assembly into Laser/Powder-based Additive Manufacturing of Multimodal Metallic Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Yiliang Liao, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 06/30/2026
* USD 325,000.00

Design of multimodal microstructures has emerged as a promising strategy for the
discovery and development of metallic materials with a great strength-ductility
combination for structural applications. Such a design strategy is of particular
importance for elemental or single-phase metals. However, current manufacturing
methodologies for multimodal material fabrications face a major technical
challenge of controlling the three-dimensional microstructural heterogeneity.
This collaborative research award supports fundamental research towards
understanding the mechanisms of how nanoparticles assemble on their own in
laser/powder-based additive manufacturing (AM) to alter grain nucleation and
growth and achieve effective manufacturing of multimodal materials with desired
microstructural heterogeneity. By including special nanoparticles in powder
feedstock and plausibly achieving self-assembly of added nanoparticles in
solidification fronts, this fabrication means, capable of influencing grain
sizes and geometries if successful, will lead to a manufacturing technology for
a large variety of multimodal metallic materials with improved properties
towards critical applications in aerospace, automotive, military, and biomedical
industries. This joint project will also provide a training platform for a
diversified student body through research opportunities and will broaden
participations from women and underrepresented students in research. The theme
and results of this project will be utilized to enhance the engineering
partnership with local community colleges around the region of the two
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this research is to gain
fundamental understanding of the mechanisms that govern nanoparticle self-
assembly behavior, microstructure evolution, and property enhancement in AM of
multimodal titanium and its alloys using a laser heat source and powder
feedstock. The effect of nanoparticle self-assembly at the liquid-crystal
interface on solidification front stability and grain nucleation and growth
during laser AM will first be investigated using three-dimensional phase-field
simulation incorporating CALPHAD databases with experimental characterizations
of grain changes. Next, using micromechanical modeling and crystal plasticity
simulations, the team will elucidate the modified and improved strength-
ductility combinations as affected by the three-dimensional distribution of
multimodal grain structures. With the knowledge of grain modification and three-
dimensional grain structure designs, metal AM experiments, using both powder-bed
fusion (PBF) and directed energy deposition (DED), while integrating
nanoparticle self-assembly, will be systematically designed and performed to
investigate and establish the process-microstructure-property relationship. The
new knowledge of nanoparticle self-assembly at the liquid-crystal interfaces
during rapid solidification as in PBF and DED will be beneficial to other
fusion-based manufacturing technologies, including welding, casting, and
electron-beam manufacturing. Furthermore, basic knowledge of process-
microstructure-property relationship in metal AM will lead to the development of
novel multimodal materials with potentially unprecedented mechanical properties
for widespread applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by the Advanced Manufacturing program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.