* 2231357
* ExpandQISE: Track 1: Virtual Quantum Networks: From Foundations to Field Tests
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2022,11/30/2022
* Zheshen Zhang, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 11/30/2022
* USD 800,000.00

Non-technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;This project creates a general-purpose,
open-access, and programmable quantum network prototype for the quantum
information science and engineering (QISE) community to experiment new quantum
technologies and train teachers and students of all majors. The developed new
knowledge and prototype have the potential to reduce financial costs through
software-based rather than hardware-based solutions, support broad and
replicable quantum research and education, build an agile, flexible, and
scalable quantum network infrastructure for open and equitable access, and help
the U.S. out-compete global competitors in QISE. Moreover, the developed
prototype is ideal for QISE training and education through its easy access by
teachers and students without requiring their prior knowledge of operating
complex quantum hardware. A new curriculum based on this prototype will be
further created and disseminated through existing partnership programs to train
a large body of college students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;Existing quantum network systems are mostly local, small-
scale, and application-specific, reminiscent of the era of the internet onset.
The future expansion of quantum networks, without thoughtful planning, would
inevitably lead to the same pitfalls as the classical internet like network
ossification. In this project, the key applied methodology is virtualization
that permits rapid and flexible experimentation of new quantum technologies via
agile software controls, without resorting to daunting hardware modifications.
To this end, the research team initiates a comprehensive research agenda
consisting of three thrusts: (1) the team identifies and re-designs key quantum
components, e.g., entangled photon sources and detectors, based on which a
software architecture is further developed for the proposed virtual quantum
network (VQN) prototype. The goal of this thrust is to lay the foundation and
create the “skeleton” for the VQN prototype. (2) The team then develops a suite
of protocols to improve the efficiency of the VQN prototype. It includes virtual
slice placement and traffic routing for network load balance; queuing users'
requests for aggregated service and increased network capacity; and network
event, e.g., entanglement purification and swapping, scheduling, and control for
high-quality virtual services. This thrust’s goal is to functionalize and create
the “flesh and blood” of the VQN prototype. (3) The VQN prototype is implemented
in a quantum-network testbed and evaluated against several figures of merit.
Moreover, two Application Programming Interface (API) interfaces are developed
to allow nationwide universities to use this platform for replicable research
and educational activities. The goal of this thrust is to perform a quantitative
assessment on the VQN prototype and create an open and education-friendly
platform for the broad QISE community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.