* 2231128
* Planning: CDP: High-Resolution Seismic Reflection Site Survey Supporting Lake Victoria Scientific Drilling
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Christopher Scholz, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Keen-Zebert
* 08/31/2024
* USD 199,534.00

2231128&lt;br/&gt;Scholz&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support
acquisition of high-resolution seismic reflection data from Lake Victoria in
East Africa. Several seismic lines are proposed (2000 km) over a two-year period
in order to image the subsurface structure and stratigraphic framework of
basinal lake sediments. The intent is to determine the best areas of the lake to
drill as part of a future planned proposal to drill into lake sediment and
recover long and continuous sedimentary records to facilitate studies of
regional Pleistocene/Holocene paleoclimatology, paleoenvironments, and biologic
history of the region and lake organisms. A CHIRP seismic reflection instrument
would be towed by a contracted vessel. The data collected would be processed,
analyzed, and interpreted and legacy seismic reflection data collected in the
1980 and 90s using older technology would be reprocessed, the data sets
integrated and ultimately archived within the Marine Geoscience Data System
(MGDS) at Lamont Doherty Earth Observatory. Planning activities and proposed
seismic surveys are required to develop a future competitive proposal to conduct
a scientific lake drilling campaign on Lake Victoria. The PIs are part of an
international team of scientists who have already been supported by the
International Continental Scientific Drilling Program to host a planning
workshop in Tanzania in summer 2022. The proposed work would form the basis for
the thesis work of an incoming Syracuse University graduate student who is a
Tanzanian national and the work would be conducted in collaboration with
Tanzanian institutions, including the Department of Fisheries, the Geological
Survey Department, and the University of Dar es Salaam.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lake Victoria is the largest lake in Africa, is the source
of the White Nile, is home to hundreds of endemic organisms, supports the
largest lake fishery on Earth and contains important records of Quaternary
climate variability in the continental tropics. Given its shallow, broad
morphometry and large surface area- to- catchment ratio, the lake is extremely
sensitive to changes in hydroclimate. Fluctuations in the water levels of the
lake are important drivers for range expansion, contraction, fragmentation,
adaptation, and diversification for flora and fauna in the lake (e.g., cichlid
fish), as well as the broader watershed, and have contributed to the dispersal
of early populations of Homo sapiens across Africa. Prior studies of lake
sediment cores and seismic reflection data document the virtually complete
desiccation of the lake at the terminal Pleistocene, and terrestrial outcrops
within the lake’s watershed and seismic data from within the lake suggest the
lake has likely desiccated and refilled multiple times in its approximately
400,000- year (~400 kyr) history. A future drilling program would support
research on an array of topics, including 1) lacustrine basin formation and
development, 2) tropical climate and environmental change over multiple glacial-
interglacial cycles, 3) climate linkages to lake desiccation events, 4)
diversification and evolution of aquatic fauna responding to lake dynamics and
climate change, 5) climate and environmental pressures associated with lake
extent driving dispersal of early human populations, and 6) savanna ecosystem
changes and their biogeographic implications. The legacy seismic reflection data
available from the lake are not suitable however for siting scientific drill
cores from the basin, and this proposal will acquire modern, high- resolution
‘marine-type’ CHIRP seismic reflection data, which will image through the well-
documented late Pleistocene unconformity present across the
basin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.