* 2231723
* Conference: Water for a changing planet: Rethinking land use and water supply in the face of population growth and climate breakdown.
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2022,02/28/2023
* Steven Wondzell, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Aurali Dade
* 02/28/2023
* USD 99,910.00

Fresh water is a important resource for humans and ecosystems alike. Changes in
climate alongside population growth, inequities in water supply, and land cover
changes have impacted both the amount and quality of fresh water. The lack of
access to and availability of fresh water creates one of the biggest challenges
facing humanity in the 21st Century. Scientist and local, regional, and national
managers will need to work together even closer to share information to create
the new tools and solutions that can address these water challenges. We focus on
the knowledge coming from critical zone science, a field of diverse researchers
that examine how water moves from the top of the canopy (e.g., trees, grass,
crops) to the depths of groundwater. Information coming from this field shows us
how land cover change, climate, and disturbance alters how water is divided up
into two components, “green” and “blue” water. Meaning water that goes through
plants or directly from the land surface back to the atmosphere, “green” water,
compared to surface and groundwater, “blue” water, that is available to people.
Through a series of surveys, information sessions, and virtual workshops, we aim
to unite diverse groups of people to co-develop adaptive, actionable solutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our aim is to demonstrate that the convergence between
basic science, industry, non-profit, and government entities is primed to
accelerate solutions to water resources issues that directly benefit society in
the coming years to decades. In doing so, we will use our workshops to build new
partnerships and deepen existing relationships among resource managers, critical
zone scientists, and non-profit organizations. We will bring together public,
private, and civic-sector leaders from throughout the United States for
collaborative problem-solving with the goal of identifying water resource
solutions that are ready to be put into action within the next one to three
years. Knowledge transfer will be multi-directional with short presentations
from stakeholders across water resource sectors. Ultimately, these new
partnerships and solutions can lead to improved economic, food, energy, and
water security for the nation that will be synthesized and made publicly
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.