* 2231625
* IUCRC Phase I: University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign (UIUC): Center for Advanced Semiconductor Chips with Accelerated Performance (ASAP)
* ENG,EEC
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Qing Cao, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 12/31/2027
* USD 150,000.00

This Phase I award supports the Industry University Cooperative Research Center
for Advanced Semiconductor Chips with Accelerated Performance (ASAP) at the
University of Illinois - Urbana-Champaign. Integrated circuits or “chips”,
containing billions of transistors within the size of a fingernail, have had a
profound impact on human lives, and enabled many fundamental scientific
discoveries. However, in state-of-the-art microprocessors and associated
computing machines, interconnects or wires that transport data between different
components start to dominate the overall power consumption and performance,
which has become a critical bottleneck for future semiconductor technologies. In
alliance with industry members, the Center will develop breakthrough solutions
that alleviate interconnect challenges and improve the energy efficiency of
next-generation information-processing systems. The Center will address the
critical national need for US technology supremacy in future microelectronics.
In addition to technology development, the center will foster unique training
opportunities for a diverse workforce with technical competence, socially
responsible leadership, and entrepreneurship. The Center has a rich portfolio of
outreach activities, including working with under-represented and low-income
K-12 students, training students from two-year institutions of higher education
(community colleges/technical colleges), and developing a women-in-
microelectronics program. The Center will work closely with UIUC’s Institute for
Inclusion, Diversity, Equity, and Access to recruit, educate, and retain diverse
talents and empower them to become future leaders in US-based microelectronics
and other related industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Center’s research is
structured into three tightly integrated themes including materials discovery
for electrical and optical interconnects, heterogeneous 3D integration, and
highly energy-efficient circuits and architectures. The materials-to-
architectures co-design approach will allow the Center to address the
fundamental technological roadblocks toward enabling future microprocessors with
higher performance but lower energy consumption. By integrating disparate
components on silicon, such as interconnects based on quantum materials,
nanodielectrics, magnetic and ferroelectric memory, nano-photonics, and III-V
elements, the Center seeks to reduce the energy-delay cost of data communication
hundred-fold in chips adopting novel processing-in-memory architectures. Center
faculty members have cross-disciplinary expertise in materials science,
nanoscale electronic and photonic device fabrication and characterization,
computational modeling, and circuit and architecture design. By focusing on
technologies that are mutually beneficial for digital and RF applications, the
Center will collaboratively address the research needs of its industrial members
representing different microelectronics sectors and thus different research
priorities. The Center will engage with semiconductor foundries, chip
manufacturers, small startups, DOE national labs, and DoD labs and
collaboratively seek to make a sustained and meaningful impact on the next-
generation information-processing systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.