* 2231830
* I-Corps: Cyanobacterial enzymes and strains for removal of organophosphonates
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Qingfang He, University of Arkansas Little Rock
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of low-cost sprayable, fast-acting enzymes/microorganisms that
degrade organophosphonate into environmentally-friendly intermediates or final
products, reducing envirionmental pollution from these agrochemicals. The
increased use of phosphonates (as cleaning agents, coolants, and pesticides,
etc.) is problemmatic due to their slow degradability and resultant accumulation
in the environment. The proposed technology seeks to selectively degrade
organophosphonates including glyphosate herbicides. The proposed project will
support the development of strategies for safe and effective use of
agrochemicals and household chemicals for various essential
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
productio of three phosphonatases by overexpressing them heterogously in fast-
growing cyanobacterial strains. These enzymes can be used for the removal of
phosphonate contaminants in soil and water systems. Thermophilic cyanobacteria
species from Hot Springs, Arkansas are also identified as strains expressing
these enzymes in high levels. This projects seeks use the novel mechanisms of
organophosphonate degradation and to help clean the environment. Several
cyanobacterial species may be able to survive on organophosphonate as the only
source of phosphorus, breaking down
organophosphonates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.