* 2231124
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Microbiologic sampling of continental subsurface fluids from within the  Cornell University Borehole Observatory (CUBO)
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Stephanie Carr, Hartwick College
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 06/30/2024
* USD 15,222.00

This project will collect samples of hot salty groundwater from roughly 1.5 to
nearly 2 miles underground to study what microorganisms may live at these
depths. The unusual opportunity to collect these samples comes from a deep well
that is being drilled on Cornell University’s campus in upstate New York during
Summer 2022. This deep environment is considered to be an extreme environment
because of the warm temperature (150-200˚F), high salt concentration, lack of
sunlight (energy), and lack of nutrients. Microbial cells will be counted from
the collected samples to provide a better understanding of how much live lives
underground. DNA will be analyzed to identify which types of microorganisms are
living underground and to understand how those microorganisms survive in such an
extreme environment. Ad¬vancing our knowledge of the diversity of microorganisms
underground and how they survive can potentially provide insights into the
origins of life on Earth and elsewhere in the universe. Additionally, this study
will collect groundwater for chemical analyses that will better describe this
extreme environment and aid efforts to grow the collected organisms in the
laboratory. Collectively, cell counts, DNA, chemistry, and growth experiments
will improve our understanding of life in the subsurface and life’s impacts to
the chemistry of our planet. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As part of this project, deep
subsurface briny fluid samples will be collected upon completion of the Cornell
University Borehole Observatory (CUBO), a DOE-funded 3-km deep geothermal
exploratory well being drilled on Cornell’s upstate New York campus during
summer 2022. Key objectives of the project are to: (1) collect and preserve
water for geochemical analyses during a planned pump test, (2) quantify biomass
concentrations using microscopy, (3) filter and preserve 100s of liters of fluid
for genomic analyses, and (4) establish enrichment cultures. Sampling will
target the Precambrian metamorphic / crystalline basement and overlying
Paleozoic sedimentary sequences between 2.3 – 3.0 km depth where temperatures
are expected to be ~ 70-95˚C. The large volume fluid sampling for geochemical
and microbiologic characterization proposed here is not a part of the DOE-
supported scope.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.