* 2231647
* Special Issue of Oceanography: Building Diversity, Equity and Inclusion in the Ocean Sciences
* GEO,OCE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Jennifer Ramarui, Oceanography Society
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 09/30/2023
* USD 30,000.00

The Oceanography Society (TOS) will publish a special issue of the open-access
journal Oceanography on “Building Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion in the Ocean
Sciences” that highlights the successes and lessons learned from agency-
supported programs and initiatives focused on increasing the number of scholars
from underrepresented and marginalized groups who choose the ocean sciences for
their careers. The special issue will explore the structural and cultural
barriers that underrepresented and marginalized scholars come up against and
offer successful strategies for enacting meaningful changes to improve
diversity, equity, and inclusion. An online-only supplement will contain
autobiographical sketches of ocean scientists from diverse backgrounds, similar
to the highly successful “Women in Oceanography” profiles published in
Oceanography in 2005 and 2014 that have inspired a generation of women
oceanographers. The proposed special issue has three main goals: (1) to serve as
a resource for building diversity, equity, and inclusion in the ocean sciences;
(2) to inspire people and institutions to earnestly review practices and commit
to meaningful positive changes to achieve a truly equitable, inclusive, and
diverse ocean sciences field; and (3) to encourage scholars from
underrepresented and marginalized groups to become and remain ocean scientists.
The collection of articles, sidebars, and profiles will provide a useful
“handbook” for institutions prepared to take the necessary steps to increase—and
retain—diversity in their ranks, ensuring a vibrant, equitable, and inclusive
future for the ocean sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ocean sciences, and
geosciences in general, lack diversity at all levels. Articles scattered
throughout the published literature document the minimal progress toward
increasing diversity in the geosciences over the last 40 years. The Oceanography
Society seeks to publish a compendium that includes invited manuscripts written
by individuals and groups that showcase authentic voices and perspectives of
diverse scientists, students, program managers, cultural practitioners, and
educators who are engaged in initiatives and programs with diverse communities
in a variety of areas of ocean science. An important discussion will be the
specific barriers to entry, participation, success, and retention in the field.
Successful strategies to engage, recruit, retain, support, and advance
individuals and groups from diverse backgrounds will be highlighted with the
goal of assembling a critical resource for changing the dominant academic and
workforce culture. Individuals with authentic voices will be invited to share
their stories through a series of one-page autobiographical sketches that
amplify the importance of diversity for excellence, innovation, problem solving,
creativity, business acumen, and different ways of knowing and sharing
knowledge. This special issue of Oceanography will provide a coherent compendium
that can be used as a reference for building a diverse ocean sciences community
and inspiration for the next generation of underrepresented and marginalized
scholars to become—and remain—ocean scientists. To ensure the greatest impact
within the ocean sciences and beyond, a freely available PDF of the full issue
will be made available for download from the Oceanography website along with
individual articles and autobiographical sketches. TOS will promote these
materials through social media, authors’ networks at the time of publication,
and at conferences, and will make an effort to notify the deans and chairs of
marine and ocean science programs of the availability of this
document.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.