* 2231600
* Conference: 34th  Midwestern Conference on Combinatorics and Combinatorial Computing
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Amin Bahmanian, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 07/31/2023
* USD 26,085.00

This award provides support for participation by junior researchers, graduate
students, undergraduates, and high school teachers in the 34th Midwestern
Conference on Combinatorics and Combinatorial Computing (MCCCC34), which will be
held at Illinois State University in Normal, Illinois, on October 21-23, 2022.
The MCCCC began as the Carbondale Combinatorics Conferences which were held
(1986-1990) at Southern Illinois University in Carbondale. The conference has
since evolved into a prestigious national conference in all areas of
combinatorics and combinatorial computing. It has achieved recognition and
attracted scholars and researchers of various backgrounds from national and
international institutions. A recent trend in the MCCCC series is the increased
participation of graduate and undergraduate student researchers. The conference
will feature 6 principal 50-minute speakers and about 60 contributed 20-minute
talks by participants from throughout the nation and other parts of the world.
We estimate around 100 participants will attend. The selection process for
funding support will prioritize women, members of underrepresented groups,
people with disabilities, veterans, and students. The Conference is supported in
part by Illinois State University and by the Institute for Combinatorics and its
Applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;After a 2-year hiatus due to the pandemic, we
aim to nurture and expand the opportunities at the MCCCC34 by making mathematics
research more accessible and inclusive, and emphasizing recruitment and support
for both graduate and undergraduate students. MCCCC34 will cover a spectrum of
pure and applied combinatorics, including graph theory, design theory,
enumeration, and combinatorial computing. The conference will provide a
conducive atmosphere for research mathematicians, graduate students,
undergraduate students, and others interested in combinatorics and combinatorial
computing to explore and discuss a variety of research problems in these areas,
particularly problems that have a connection to both areas. The conference
organizers aim to publish the conference proceedings in a research journal. The
conference website can be found at:
https://about.illinoisstate.edu/mcccc34/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.