* 2231695
* EAGER: Progressive Derecho Initiation and Propagation in Specific Physical Corridors as Determined by Mesoscale D-PSI Vectors
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Michael Kaplan, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 08/31/2024
* USD 176,735.00

Derechos are one of the atmosphere’s most destructive phenomena. These
windstorms are associated with a rapidly moving, massive and growing group of
thunderstorms that can last for 10 or more hours and travel well over 600 miles.
They are typically accompanied by wind gusts of more than 65 mph as well as
damaging lightning, flooding rain, large hail, and even small tornados. They
adversely impact agriculture, transportation, and urban safety. A recent derecho
in the midwestern U.S. resulted in more than 11 billion dollars of property
damage and several fatalities from wind gusts greater than 140 mph. Presently,
we do not often predict the intensity, location, and duration of the most
devastating derechos nor do we consistently differentiate between the strong and
weak derechos only hours in advance. This project will create new technology
based on scientific theories and computer visualizations in 4 dimensions to
improve the prediction of this damaging phenomenon. The new technology will be
available to operational government and private weather forecasters in the form
of computer-generated predictions of the atmospheric conditions that are most
likely to create derechos. This will potentially enable more accurate prediction
of derechos farther in advance than we presently can do thus saving lives and
reducing property damage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Presently, operational computer
predictions of derechos suffer from a lack of proper synthesis of the precursor
physical environment to derecho genesis and motion. The research approach to be
undertaken synthesizes many more of the physical conditions that are likely to
create long lasting and devastating derechos than has been done before. The
larger scale organization of the strong thunderstorms that comprise derechos is
the result of the jet stream and unique atmospheric frontal systems that are
most likely to occur during extreme heat waves. The theory to be tested
represents a unique synthesis of physical processes not previously applied to
derechos in either the operational or research environments. Also, the
complexity of these physics requires innovative 4-dimensional computer
visualization techniques so that operational weather forecasters can understand
the many nonlinear processes that have to properly phase to produce derechos.
The goal is to substantially improve the reliability of the synthesis of
operational computational fluid model predictions of a favorable derecho
environment for forecasters and thus extend for the public the lead time of
warnings of these devastating windstorms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.