* 2231085
* CRII: SaTC: Towards Trustworthy and Accountable IoT Data Marketplaces
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Ahmad Alsharif, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 06/30/2024
* USD 168,176.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The huge amounts of Internet of
Things (IoT) data generated daily by billions of distributed IoT devices create
unprecedented opportunities for several fields and industries. IoT data
marketplaces are the key platforms to make IoT data flow from where it is
generated to where it is needed. With IoT data marketplaces, data consumers can
acquire historical or real-time IoT data streams to enhance data analytics and
offer innovative services, whereas data providers can monetize their IoT data.
However, the lack of mutual trust between data providers and consumers with the
absence of a central marketplace operator trusted by all entities is a
significant impediment to realizing a trustworthy marketplace. This project
investigates the foundations and implementation of a trustworthy and accountable
decentralized data marketplace to achieve secure IoT data sharing and trading
with enforced and flexible access control and post-trading accountability. The
project aligns with the NSF's Harnessing the Data Revolution Big Ideas vision
and supports emerging opportunities for U.S. leadership in Big Ideas that serve
the Nation's future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds on the general
properties of the present-day technology of trust (smart-contracts over
blockchain) and utilizes applied cryptography to develop the necessary
extensions to enable (i) flexible and enforced access control; (ii) secure and
verifiable fair-exchange in trustless environments; (iii) verifiable automatic
matching of data providers' bids to data consumersâ€™ requests; and (iv) post-
trading accountability against misbehaving data providers and consumers. Key
design challenges are supporting these goals and achieving scalability,
performance, and confidentiality and privacy of sensitive parts of data
transactions. The project provides training opportunities for the next-
generation of cybersecurity specialists. It also has the potential to unlock new
opportunities in various industries by facilitating the secure and trustworthy
exchange of IoT data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.