* 2231794
* I-Corps: Nurture Neurodiversity
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Maria Resendiz, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a software application that can be used by people on the autism
spectrum to identify the emotions of their conversational partners. The software
can be used by people from different cultural backgrounds. This tool for
children on the autism spectrum may enable them to understand and learn how
people express different emotions through facial, body gestures, and speech to
improve their communication and interaction skills into adulthood. The proposed
project combines the expertise of speech-language pathologists and engineers.
The technology and its commercialization may benefit people on the autism
spectrum, their family members, and their therapists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Social interactions can be challenging for people on the
autism spectrum. This I-Corps project seeks to integrate machine and deep
learning models in a single app that recognizes and provides emoticon feedback
of emotions detected. The app will be utilized by children on the autism
spectrum to understand and recognize emotional states with people they interact
with as a developmental tool in recognizing emotions. The app enables the
microphone and camera for the necessary visual and auditory inputs. The facial
expression model will classify the emotion based on the facial features, which
was trained in different lighting conditions and angles. The body-gesture model
will recognize the sequence of body movements to classify the emotional
expression of the person and the speech-emotion model will extract frequency
features to classify the emotion presented by the tone of speech. The challenge
is to assemble these models to provide an accurate overall emotion
classification, integrate machine and deep learning models to the code
development, and provide emoticon feedback to the child on the autism spectrum
through the screen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.