* 2231660
* SBIR Phase I:  High-performance, chloride-proof, ferritic steel for cold spray coating of steel rebar
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Samuel McAlpine, ALLIUM ENGINEERING, INC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 03/31/2024
* USD 274,993.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to develop and commercialize a new type of steel rebar which resists
corrosion but outperforms existing rebar and is cost competitive. The advanced
steel rebar from this project will enable safer and longer lasting concrete
infrastructure, requiring fewer repairs and replacements. This technology will
provide increases in the lifetimes of concrete structures thereby reducing
greenhouse gas emissions while also supporting a number of clean energy
technologies, such as offshore wind, hydroelectric, and nuclear power, all of
which require long-lasting reinforced concrete. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR
Phase I project aims to develop a novel custom composition of stainless steel to
serve as a protective outer cladding for low-cost carbon steel infrastructure.
Several technical challenges will be addressed including tailoring of the
composition to be highly corrosion resistant in high chloride environments,
maintaining a ferritic structure and mechanical compatibility with a carbon
steel substrate, and developing a cold-spray compatible processing technique.
This project promises to shift the paradigm in corrosion resistance of steel and
concrete infrastructure, enabling a novel coating composition and method to
integrate into existing steel mills. If successful, this technology will enable
low-cost steel components to reach the lifetimes of stainless steel components
at less than half the price, extending lifetimes of key infrastructure as much
as 3-fold and avoiding massive public costs and carbon
emissions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.