* 2231095
* AF: Small: Markov Chains and Mass Action Kinetics
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Alistair Sinclair, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 12/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

This project studies various types of dynamical processes that model
computational and physical phenomena, including equilibrium and non-equilibrium
statistical physics, genetic evolution via reproduction, and chemical reaction
networks. The overarching goal is to leverage mathematical techniques and
intuition developed for the analysis of algorithms in theoretical Computer
Science to improve our understanding of these complex processes. Thus the
project is an example of the application of a so-called “computational lens” to
questions in other scientific fields, such as physics, chemistry and biology,
which has proven very powerful in many cases. In addition to its scientific
diversity, the project also affords ample opportunity for the training of
graduate students, as well as curricular innovations at graduate and
undergraduate levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on three major
types of dynamics. The first type is classical reversible Markov chains, which
are widely used to understand the evolution to equilibrium of systems in
statistical physics, as well as algorithms for random sampling and approximate
counting, and optimization methods such as simulated annealing. The second type
is less classical “non-reversible” Markov chains, which describe the behavior of
physical systems that are held out of equilibrium by an interaction with some
external entity such as a heat-bath or particle reservoir. And the third type,
known as "mass action kinetics”, capture the behavior of systems of species that
repeatedly interact to produce new species, as in, for example, chemical
reaction networks, genetic evolution via reproduction, genetic algorithms and
Boltzmann’s model of an ideal gas. The project will add to our existing
knowledge of reversible Markov chains, which are already well understood using
sophisticated mathematical techniques, and will also develop the emerging theory
of non-reversible Markov chains and mass action kinetics, both of which remain
mathematically challenging and relatively far less well
understood.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.