* 2231959
* The Impact of Country of Origin on Group Consciousness in Political Behavior Research
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2022,01/31/2024
* Kenicia Wright, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Enrique Pumar
* 01/31/2024
* USD 67,243.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2). The goal of this project is to gain insights into the
political attitudes and behaviors of citizens with different countries of
origin. Scholarly knowledge of the effects of country of origin on political
opinions, behavior, and policy preferences remains limited, despite the fact
that these groupings comprise a sizable portion of the electorate. This project
will address this gap and develop an evidence-based understanding of the effect
of country of origin on the political behavior of American citizens. Consistent
with the mission of NSF, this study will contribute to a more informed and
nuanced understanding of the unique challenges and opportunities facing
democratic governance and national welfare in the United States in a period of
uncertain transformation. In addition to the proposed research, this project
will also support a small conference of diverse scholars with areas of expertise
related to citizens' country of origin and gender that will include
presentations by undergraduate and graduate students. This project will
therefore connect scholars from across the country who share research interests
and provide students from underrepresented backgrounds with a unique opportunity
to gain hands-on research experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research includes interviews and focus groups aimed at providing in-
depth insights about Latinx political attitudes and a nationally representative
survey of citizens. The resulting data will be used to evaluate how gender and
country of origin interactively influence the opinions and political behavior of
citizens and shape the scope and nature of group consciousness among American
citizens. This project therefore enables the development of an intersectional
theoretical approach to study how multiple social identities influence the
opinions and political behavior of citizens. This cross-cutting approach allows
this project to contribute to a gap in existing
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.