* 2231592
* I-Corps:  Chemical Fuel-Powered Braille Displays
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Robert Shepherd, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a portable, affordable, multiline braille display powered by
chemical fuels. In this increasingly digital society, computer screens serve as
the primary interface for consuming and communicating information. Blind and
visually impaired people cannot use computers by conventional means, instead
using audio-based, screen reading software and refreshable braille displays to
meet digital information needs. Braille displays, which are needed for precision
reading and writing tasks (such as checking spelling and grammar) can only
present a single line of information, usually 40 characters at a time. The
display limitations of these devices are exacerbated by their staggering costs;
Reliable displays are priced at $3,000 or more. Current actuation technologies
cannot meet the need for multiline devices due to their high material and
integration costs, and core technologies have remained essentially unchanged for
decades. Lowering the cost of a single-line display may increase accessibility
for the blind, while an affordable multiline display may result in even greater
impact. The goal for the proposed technology is to meet needs to both extend
access to businesses and institutions that seek to provide refreshable braille
to their own employees, customers, and visitors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is based on the development of a multiline braille display
powered by chemical fuels. The proposed technology is based on a soft
microfluidic system that distributes gaseous chemical fuels to microliter volume
cylinders. Sparks ignite the gas in individual chambers resulting in the pulsed
actuation of elastomeric membranes that cover the top of each cylinder. The core
innovation enabling this functionality stems from the realization that the
flames in each cylinder quench themselves at the microfluidic intake port. Thus,
valves are not required to control individual actuations, previously unrealized
in soft, pneumatic actuation arrays. Removing the need for valves simplifies the
system architecture, reduces system size, and substantially lowers the system
cost. The system level innovations in this project mayu resolve downstream
technical challenges present in other tactile display technologies. An all-
rubber composition allows for the design of a hermetically sealed platform which
prevents dust and liquid ingress, and which may eliminate damage from impact. In
addition, while maintenance is a large pain point for many braille display
customers, the proposed display interface is inexpensive and may be completely
replaced, as it contains small volumes of molded silicone rubber and
wire.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.