* 2231857
* EAGER: Highly sensitive optical biosensing using bound states in the continuum of high-Q all-dielectric metasurfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Hayk Harutyunyan, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 08/31/2024
* USD 250,000.00

Biosensors are devices that can recognize and quantitatively detect biological
analytes (chemical substances that can be analyzed). Optical biosensors work by
converting the concentration of analytes to changes in light-based signals. The
importance of such sensitive platforms has been demonstrated once again during
the recent pandemic. The goal of this research project is to study the
principles of a novel type of optical biosensing platform that can be used as
highly sensitive low-cost diagnostic tools for improved personalized and
stratified treatment at point of care facilities. The sensor design requires
engineering of novel surfaces and special layered mirrors in order to create
molecular vibrations that can be exploited to measure the concentration of
analytes with unprecedentedly low limits of detection, which can be crucial for
precise and early detection of pathogens. The approach does not require complex
alignment and stabilization which is promising for low-cost and robust
biosensing devices. In the framework of the project, a partnership with a local
non-profit organization will provide opportunities for K-12 students to broaden
their access to STEM learning and careers through lab tours, career talks,
science fair judging and other educational activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of the research is to study optical bound states in the continuum in all-
dielectric metasurfaces and explore their properties for the development of
highly sensitive optical biosensors. Currently, refractometric label-free
biosensing is typically based on resonant plasmonic and metamaterial systems or
more complex microring resonators and waveguide interferometers. Unfortunately,
most of these systems are either not very sensitive or rely on complex and
costly platforms requiring stabilization and precise alignment. This project
will explore the coupling of optical magnetic dipole mode of dielectric
nanocavities to Bragg mirrors which lead to the formation of unusually high-
quality factor resonances that can be used for optical sensing. Unlike the
typical state-of-the-art platforms, this novel approach achieves high quality
factor bound states in the continuum not via the breaking of local spatial
symmetry but through coupling of the optical modes to their mirror image. The
resultant resonances are expected to achieve an order of magnitude improvement
in quality factors and limit of detection compared to the existing solutions,
paving the way for highly sensitive, scalable, spectrometer-less, low-cost
optical biosensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.