* 2231921
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying the impact of oxylipin chemical signaling on microbial community dynamics and biogeochemical cycling
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Bethanie Edwards, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 05/31/2026
* USD 257,155.00

Diatoms are eukaryotic phytoplankton that are responsible for ~25% of
photosynthesis globally. Many species of diatoms produce chemical signals called
oxylipins under stressful circumstances such as nutrient limitation, wounding
due to grazing, and viral infection. These chemical signals are detrimental to
many organisms that make up microbial food webs in the ocean, like other
eukaryotic phytoplankton, microzooplankton and copepods that graze on
phytoplankton, and free-living bacteria. However, particle-associated bacterial
communities are stimulated by low doses of oxylipins, and diatoms can use these
chemical signals to communicate amongst themselves about impending stress.
Because these microbial food webs play a critical role in the Earthâ€™s carbon
cycle and these ecosystems ultimately support fisheries, it is important to
understand the role chemical signaling plays as diatom blooms spin up and crash
in productive upwelling regions. Here the investigators propose a field
expedition with a series of deck-board incubations to study the effects of
oxylipins on community dynamics in the California Current Ecosystem. The team
also proposes a series of laboratory-based predator-prey studies to quantify the
effects of oxylipins on microzooplankton grazers by documenting behavior with
microvideography. The major questions that will be addressed include: 1) how
does the concentration and diversity of oxylipins change over the course of a
bloom? 2) what is the net impact of oxylipin signaling on community dynamics? 3)
how do oxylipins impact carbon export and nutrient recycling (N, P, Si)?
Outreach activities undertaken during the lifetime of this grant have the
primary goals of introducing young people to microbial oceanography, training a
diverse oceanographic workforce, and creating content that can be accessed by
inquiring minds after the lifetime of this grant. To accomplish this,
undergraduate and graduate scientists are being trained during this project
through direct participation on the planned cruise, in the lab, and in
classrooms through virtual live-streaming cruise activities and in-person
teaching. Some of these students are recruited specifically from programs that
increase participation from underrepresented groups. This project also uses
cruise data to design data-analysis tutorials and workshops in order to engage
the broader science community. Middle and high school students from local urban
areas are also being trained on educational day trips in the coastal waters
around Cape Cod. A curriculum is being developed for grade 8-12 classrooms
related to the work of this project.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This is the first
study to profile the full diversity of oxylipins produced across dissolved,
cellular, and detrital (i.e., marine snow) fractions. It is the first study to
simultaneously assess in situ drivers of oxylipin production (nutrient stress,
grazing, and viral infection) within an ecosystem. The project is also be the
first to fully characterize oxylipin concentrations and diversity over the
course of a bloom within an Eastern Boundary Current. The ultimate goal of this
project is to understand how oxylipin-mediated signaling impacts the fate of
carbon, so the team will be monitoring export efficiency, net primary
productivity, bacterial productivity, and nutrient recycling throughout the
field campaign. This project adds to the relatively small number of
metatranscriptomic datasets from sinking particle communities and marine
lipidomic datasets available in public repositories. The data generated by the
Lagrangian Study can be used to ask more general questions about connectivity
between the surface and deep ocean, community succession, and the geochemical
evolution of blooms. Finally, the proposed research transforms our collective
understanding of how chemical signaling impacts grazing behavior and the
mechanism of oxylipin grazing deterrence by simultaneously assessing grazing
rates, selection, and behavior of microzooplankton in the presence of exogenous
oxylipins and when offered high and low oxylipin-producing prey. State-of-the-
art microvideography visualizes and quantifies microzooplankton grazing
behaviors, and the system will be adapted for measurements of natural
communities at sea. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the
Biological and Chemical Oceanography Programs in the Division of Ocean
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.