* 2231566
* I-Corps: Microplastic filtration from active waterways
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Jannette Carey, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the potential
development of a portable microplastic measuring and sequestration device. Every
year approximately 8 million tons of plastic enter US waterways, of which 80%
gets transported in polluted rivers as both macroplastics (above 5 mm in size)
and microplastics (below 5 mm in size). Microplastics are rapidly becoming a
global concern, as they can easily be ingested, introducing potentially
hazardous and carcinogenic additives into the diets of wildlife and humans.
Currently, there are no consistent protocols available for the accurate and
systematic recording of microplastic pollutant concentrations in water.
Furthermore, there is also no existing technology available to sequester
microplastics from tributaries, effluent streams, reservoirs, and lakes. This
technology could be used by aquatic emissions research organizations and
municipal riverkeepers, as it may provide them with a universal tool for
microplastic monitoring and sequestration. Additionally, this device can be
deployed as part of wastewater and drinking water treatment infrastructure, to
potentially remove microplastics from aquatic environments. Finally, this
technology could allow extracted microplastic collected from the device to be
upcycled and reused, creating a circular economy for microplastic
waste.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of
a proprietary filtration technology with the potential to physically entrap
microplastic sediments from active waterways. This technology is uniquely
designed to efficiently sequester microplastics from rivers and effluent streams
without potentially disrupting local ecosystems. Unlike fine mesh nets that can
easily get clogged with algae, slow down river flow, and entrap aquatic
wildlife, this device uses a patented ‘artificial root’ biofilter to entrap
microplastics. This biofilter is a dense mesh of fibers that physically ensnare
sediment in the upper strata of a river’s water column, which is where almost
all microplastic is found. When submerged in water, this network hosts bacteria
that produce sticky biofilms that can further adhere small aquatic sediments
like microplastics. The network, while dense, is uneven and has openings that
allow for the transit of small aquatic organisms. Each biofilter is attached to
a removable pad, making it easy to swap biofilters once they become saturated.
Each pad is housed within a hydrodynamic flotation frame, aimed to allow the
device to be deployed in both rivers, streams, and reservoirs. Due to it having
no mechanical components, this technology operates passively, requires no
electricity, and demands minimal maintenance to operate effectively. This could
make the device cheaper to produce, deploy and maintain compared to the existing
microplastic filtration systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.