* 2231849
* Computational modeling of volcanic eruptions and their seismic and infrasound radiation
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Eric Dunham, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 05/31/2026
* USD 422,120.00

Explosive volcanic eruptions similar to the 1980 Mount Saint Helens eruption can
be monitored from a safe distance using seismometers, which measure shaking of
the ground, and microphones, which measure sound waves in the atmosphere. The
overall goal of this project is to develop connections between shaking, sound
waves, whatâ€™s going on inside a volcano and its eruption plume, and why
explosive eruptions occur. One possibility is that the magma conduit gets
blocked, leading to pressure build-up which eventually destroys the blockage and
causes an eruption. The project team will develop computer simulations that
track magma as it travels through the volcanic conduit (in some cases, having to
break through blockages), becomes fragmented, and is discharged into the
atmosphere. These simulations can predict sound waves and ground shaking
generated by the eruption. Predictions from the models will be compared with
data from the 2013-2014 explosive eruptions of Tungurahua volcano in Ecuador,
which are probably the most powerful explosive eruptions ever recorded. This
research will be done in partnership with the Instituto Geofisico in Ecuador,
who will be providing data and expert knowledge of the eruptions. The project
will provide training for two to three PhD students and several undergraduates,
and all of the computer programs the team develops to simulate the eruptions
will be freely shared with other scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
develops models of seismic and infrasound radiation from vulcanian eruptions.
The goal is to use seismic and infrasound data to quantify the depth of
fragmentation, the forces associated with plug rupture at the onset of
eruptions, the mass eruption rate and total erupted mass, and the vertical
momentum exchange between the solid Earth and atmosphere. These are useful to
understand fundamental processes involved in vulcanian eruptions (e.g., under
what conditions does a plug form and what causes it to rupture) and to provide
inputs to eruption plume modeling. The project builds on previous NSF-supported
work by the project team that produced the theory and workflow to compute
synthetic seismograms from unsteady conduit flow models. The project team is
continuing work on an open-source code that couples conduit flow to a
compressible atmosphere, thereby also providing predictions of infrasound
radiation and the flow structure of the eruptive jet and plume. This overall
modeling framework will be used for generic studies to understand processes as
well as to study actual eruptions for which seismic and infrasound data are
available. For the latter, the project team has partnered with the Insituto
Geofisico, Ecuador, to model the well-recorded 2013-2014 eruption of Tungurahua
volcano. An additional component of the project is a study of seismic eruption
tremor (incoherent waves in the ~1-10 Hz band), a ubiquitous characteristic of
explosive eruptions that in some cases is correlated with plume height. The
project team will explore multiple hypotheses for eruption tremor, including
turbulence and particle-wall interactions above fragmentation, as well as
unsteadiness of the fragmentation process as magma with variable viscosity and
other properties passes through the fragmentation depth. Finally, the project
team is incorporating water (including phase changes) into their multiphase
modeling code, giving them the ability to study the interaction of magma with
groundwater and seawater, including submarine eruptions. The open-source codes
and modeling workflows will be provided to the community for use by volcano
observatories and other researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.