* 2231393
* EAGER: Experimental Methods and Measurements of Anomalous Properties of Supercritical Fluids and their Mixtures
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Vishwanath Prasad, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 07/31/2024
* USD 150,000.00

Fluids under supercritical conditions, where distinct liquid and gas phases no
longer exist, are good candidates for enhanced thermal transport and effective
thermal control and management. Supercritical heat exchangers are promising
solutions for direct solar energy conversion, power generation, thermal
management of space systems, to name a few. However, research on supercritical
heat transfer has been limited because of the lack of understanding of anomalous
behaviors, characterized by large variations in thermophysical properties in a
region around the critical point, and the associated thermal oscillations and
fluctuations. This EAGER project will develop experimental capabilities to
measure supercritical properties in the anomalous region to improve the
fundamental understanding of supercritical fluids and their performance in heat
transfer applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EAGER project seeks to explore:
(i) the use of anomalous behavior to achieve enhanced heat transfer, (ii)
thermal management and control using a small variation in supercritical
pressure, and (iii) change in critical temperature of supercritical fluid
mixture to tune the temperature at which the heat dissipates. The project tasks
are to obtain experimental data on critical properties for mixtures of CO2 with
Ar and R134a and conduct natural convection experiments to demonstrate the
effect of temperature and pressure in the anomalous region. If successful, this
EAGER project could build the foundation of using supercritical fluid mixtures
for heat dissipation at extreme temperatures and enable applications in solar
thermal and power generation systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.