* 2231988
* SBIR Phase I:  Versatile Polymers for Making New Components in Space and Eliminating Solid Waste
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2024
* Anthony Engler, POLYMER SOLUTIONS INC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 04/30/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) project is to address the need for recycling plastics that have
surpassed their useful life. The ‘plastic’s revolution’ of the mid-twentieth
century has greatly added value to society but has also created highly durable
plastics that are used to make objects of limited life-expectancy. There are
limited cost-effective alternatives to many of these polymers. Every day, 8
million pieces of plastic are thrown into the ocean amounting to 10 million tons
per year. Although there are approaches to decompose or depolymerize the
polymers used in common plastic parts, these methods are not generally efficient
across the dimensions of cost, energy use, time for degradation, or scalability.
An extreme example of the need for energy and time efficient depolymerization of
polymers is in space missions. There is a very high cost of disposing solids in
earth’s orbit and removing space-junk which must be monitored and avoided by
orbiting satellites. Even more challenging is the need for reusable materials
during extended space missions due to the lack of raw materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project proposes to develop a polymer-
based plastics technology that allows for rapid, low-energy, triggerable
disposal of plastics when a space mission has been completed. This project also
proposes to carry out the disposal of plastics so that the products can extend
their value and be recycled to make the same or different objects in space.
Closing the polymer-carbon cycle has potential to extend space missions, lower
the amount of supply materials needed, and reduce the amount of orbiting space
junk. This project is developing a unique family of polymers which can be easily
depolymerized back to the starting monomers via a photo or thermal trigger. The
polymers are composed of cyclic, low ceiling temperature polymers. The low
ceiling temperature means that once a single chemical bond in the polymer is
broken, two ends are formed which instantaneously lead to depolymerization of
the entire polymer molecule back to its original monomers. The depolymerized
monomers can be evaporated to make the plastic parts ‘disappear’ or can be
captured and used to repolymerize a new plastic component. This project will
develop specific depolymerization triggers and a continuous-flow polymerization
reactor for synthesizing plastic parts in space (and elsewhere for on-earth
applications).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.