* 2231377
* Expand QISE: Track 1:  RLQSC: Reinforcement Learning for the Optimal Design of Programmable Quantum Sensor Circuit
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Sathish Kumar, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 08/31/2025
* USD 799,985.00

Non-technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to create and evaluate
quantum and classical reinforcement learning-based agents for the optimal design
of programmable quantum sensor circuit. The resulting technology from this
research project will allow for better meters of the physical world with a
breadth of applications that bridge many fields of science. The outcomes from
this project will have a positive impact on the precision quantum-enhanced
metrology measurements systems, such as the Noisy Intermediate Scale Quantum
devices. The project will provide rich opportunities for Quantum Information
Science and Engineering (QISE) research training and professional development.
The project team will recruit, motivate, and train diverse and underrepresented
minority and female students in QISE research methods. The project will have a
positive impact on the Kâ€“16 QISE talent development pipeline and workforce
development for the city of Cleveland, where underrepresented minorities such as
African Americans and Hispanics constitute the majority of the population.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;Quantum sensing is a
mature technology that has achieved remarkable progress over the past decades.
The challenge going forward is to leverage potential gains from quantum
entanglement and superposition to enable the next generation of sensors and
thereby narrow the gap between the current performance and the fundamental
limits set by quantum physics. However, the optimal design of a quantum sensor
circuit that generates entangled qubits is a non-trivial task, which motivates
the consideration of machine learning to assist with this design. Current
efforts have in large part been limited to variational optimization of few
parameter systems corresponding to simple circuits with few elements. To advance
the state of the art, in this project, a reinforcement-learning-based optimal
circuit design is developed for programmable quantum sensors. The specific
objective is to create and evaluate quantum and classical reinforcement
learning-based agents to design the deep circuit. The method utilizes a learning
cycle of actions and rewards to generate the sequence of gates with optimal
performance, using the measure of quantum Fisher information as a means to
quantify the reward. The methodology involves multiple components such as
demonstrations of the ideal system, evaluation of noise and imperfections,
extensions to a quantum agent, and the performance evaluation of classical and
quantum agents towards the design of the programmable quantum sensor circuit.
Metrics used to evaluate the success of the research approach include
sensitivity, dynamic range, robustness to dissipation and decoherence, and
speed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.