* 2231454
* I-Corps: Efficient Methane-Hydrogen Separation on Metal Hydrides
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Devinder Mahajan, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the potential
development of a possibly safer and improved approach to hydrogen energy storage
and separation from a hydrogen-methane gas mixture. Hydrogen has emerged as a
promising potential alternative energy carrier to carbon-based fossil fuels due
to its advantages including abundance, high energy density, and high conversion
efficiency. It is necessary to develop a hydrogen economy as global oil and
natural oil use are could be drastically reduced by 2050 to help address climate
change. Hydrogen production, storage, and separation for end-use are critical
challenges in developing a hydrogen economy. The standard gas storage method,
which is to compress it under high pressure in a tank, can lead to perceived
safety issues. A potential solution is to blend hydrogen with natural gas for
specific uses and then separate it at the receiving
site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of a
potentially safer transient hydrogen storage and high-density transport
technology. This technology which may be a low-pressure, low-temperature storage
and separation system could be integrated into the power, chemical, and
transportation sectors to assist with reaching the decarbonization of global
energy systems. Hydrogen is an energy carrier, but it is devoid of carbon; hence
it has zero carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions from combustion. Multiple issues have
been identified for hydrogen deployment including gas storage, transport, and
delivery. One option is to repurpose the existing natural gas network where
hydrogen gas could be mixed with natural gas in the desired ratio in a
commercial pipeline and separated once at the destination. A class of metal
hydrides and their alloys that are intermetallic compounds are known to undergo
reversible hydrogen absorption/desorption reactions under controlled temperature
and could form an efficient and highly selective Natural gas/Hydrogen separation
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.