* 2231655
* Workshop: Mid-scale RI-EW: Knowledgebase of Mesoscale Modeling and Experimentation (KnoMME); Minneapolis, Minnesota; Fall 2022 or Spring 2023
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Ellad Tadmor, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 08/31/2023
* USD 49,883.00

This conference grant will support 30 researchers to attend a workshop that will
be held at the University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, tentatively in Fall 2022 or
Spring 2023 on mid-scale research infrastructure needs in mesoscale modeling and
experimentation. Engineering design is undergoing a revolution sparked by the
Materials Genome Initiative (MGI). Instead of making things out of existing off-
the-shelf materials, engineers are now exploring ways for designing engineering
components at the same time as the materials from which they are made. Advances
in cyberinfrastructure and multiscale theoretical and computational materials
mechanics frameworks offer pathways to in silico materials and component
modeling and design. Yet, in the context of designing strong and damage-tolerant
structural metals and products, there are several gaps in realizing the MGI
vision, particularly at the critical mesoscale of material microstructure: (1)
limited availability and access to high-fidelity experimental and computational
datasets, (2) lack of co-design of experiments and modeling, (3) lack of on-
demand access to verified and validated (V&amp;V) codes for simulation and
experimental analyses, and (4) limited opportunities for workforce training and
educational outreach. This workshop will convene to address the feasibility of
overcoming these shortcomings, which stifle major innovations in structural
materials design, through the creation of a cyberinfrastructure— Knowledgebase
of Mesoscale Modeling and Experimentation (KnoMME)—that engages experimental and
computational experts in mesoscale plasticity, along with mathematicians and
computer scientists with expertise in algorithms, data science and large-scale
cyberinfrastructure initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop is a first
step toward the vision of the mesoscale mechanics cyberinfrastructure KnoMME to
bring together leaders with cross-disciplinary expertise (mechanics, materials
science, data science) for a focused dialog on the design and long-term
sustainability of such an effort. The intent is for this workshop to lead to a
Mid-Scale Research Infrastructure submission to the NSF with aims to: (1) close
existing gaps to advance the field of mesoscale modeling and experiments, (2)
democratize educational access to materials-design knowledge, and (3) create a
sustainable pathway for optimal materials modeling via advanced data-driven
approaches. The application context of the workshop will be the infrastructural
needs in mesoscale materials mechanics for material design and advanced
manufacturing. The expected outcomes of the workshop include: (1) identifying an
optimal structure for the KnoMME framework, (2) consolidating strategies for
standardizing V&amp;V and uncertainty quantification (UQ) protocols for
mesoscale modeling codes, (3) identifying experiments and related software and
data that serve as accepted benchmarks for computational codes, and (4)
formulating approaches to integrate computational and experimental knowledge for
mesoscale modeling of structural metals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the Mechanics of Materials and Structures (MoMS) program in
the Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI) and the
Office of the Assistant Director (OAD) in the Directorate for Engineering
(ENG).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.