* 2231759
* Diagnosing Vehicles Using Automotive Batteries as Physical Root-of-Trust
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Liang He, University of Colorado at Denver-Downtown Campus
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 03/31/2026
* USD 554,945.00

Cyberization is the foundation of automated and intelligent vehicles, requiring
the deployment of ever-increasing onboard sensing, communication, and computing
services. However, vehicle cyberization also creates new problems, including the
potential for software bugs, security vulnerabilities, and erroneous sensor
readings, which can degrade vehicle reliability and disrupt the automotive
industry. For optimal performance, vehicle diagnostics must consider the
interactions across the physical and cyber domains, the reliance on vulnerable
in-vehicle networks, and the inability to address unknown anomalies. This award
will support fundamental research to address the cyber anomalies of vehicles
using automotive batteries. The approach will leverage topics from different
disciplines, including vehicular systems, battery management, data analysis, and
graph theory. The results will augment current vehiclesâ€™ diagnostic ability and
thus benefit all parties in the automotive ecosystem, from automakers to car
owners. As such, the results from this research will benefit the U.S. economy
and society. In addition, this muti-disciplinary research will help broaden
student participation in engineering and computing, especially from
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The battery-enabled diagnostic
system can overcome all the above-stated limitations of existing solutions, with
the advantages of being trustworthy, universally applicable to all vehicles, and
reliable throughout the vehicle life. However, some scientific barriers are yet
to be overcome to realize the full application potential. To this end, this
research will model the dependency between vehicle operation and battery power
using a cyber-physical approach, abstract the vehicle based on these
dependencies using a 2-layer graph model, and use the graph to guide the
diagnostics of vehicle anomalies with four progressive steps: a) detect
anomalies using the battery as a root-of-trust, b) verify the detected anomalies
to reduce false alarm, c) identify the faulty vehicle module via graph
decomposition, and d) mitigate anomalies to reduce their negative impacts on
vehicle operation via information recovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.