* 2231463
* EAGER: Neural Networks that Temporally Change  (NOTCH)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Hava Siegelmann, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 08/31/2024
* USD 249,884.00

A common feature of many real applications of national significance and of great
importance to people is the need to identify and characterize very early on, and
with limited data, changes that occur, requiring a rapid response. This is the
case with critically ill patients: Identifying early signs of sepsis, of cardiac
or respiratory impairment, of stroke – and beginning rapid treatment can save
lives; characterizing a natural disaster in advance, getting drones to take into
account variances or finding them if failed, and identifying the earliest signs
and type of a cyber-attack can prevent life-threatening or economically
devastating events and in some scenarios provides a shield of privacy protecting
national, business and individual interests. Like our brains, state-of-the-art
AI utilizes pattern recognition for identification: Our brains utilize temporal
pattern recognition as an integral part of modeling our environment and
predicting events, which in turn influences and decides our behavior. Unlike our
brains, AI lacks temporal awareness; this severely limits AI’s understanding of
and ability to model its environment and ability to predict outcomes, which in
turn limits its capabilities in real, out-of-the-lab scenarios. Our new
technology gives AI systems temporal awareness and vastly improves overall
pattern recognition and ability to operate safely, effectively and efficiently -
with major implications for emerging autonomous and intelligent
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technology is based on a new type of neural
networks, where much like the brain, the connections between neurons are no
longer scalar numbers, but rather temporal functions. Additionally, learning the
temporal connectivity among neurons does not require full reliance on training
data, instead the network continues to adapt to changing conditions and improve
its temporal understanding. The resulting network shows unparalleled capacity in
temporal assisted prediction, surprisingly strong accuracy, and ability to
remain effective even when most environmental measurements are minimal or are
lost. Interestingly, our temporally changing network while more capable, is
smaller in size and consumes significantly less power. Our project will develop
the technology and demonstrate its capabilities in a spectrum of uses including
autonomous and health applications, complex system prediction (e.g., weather and
natural disaster prevention), in analysis of human behavior and intentions, and
more.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.