* 2231280
* 2023 Micro and Nanoscale Phase Change Phenomena GRC: Connecting Experiments, Models and Simulations over Multiple Length Scales
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Van Carey, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 09/30/2023
* USD 15,000.00

The 2023 Gordon Research Conference and associated Gordon Research Seminar on
the topic of Micro and Nanoscale Phase Change Phenomena is the fourth such
Gordon Conference and will be held in Renaissance Tuscany Il Ciocco, Lucca
Italy. The conference program features a diverse group of speakers and
discussion leaders from institutions and organizations worldwide, with talks
that concentrate on the latest developments in the field and define its most
promising future directions. The technological and societal impacts include
advances in thermal management of electronic devices and spacecraft, micro- and
nanoscale manufacturing, water desalination, thermoelectric and nuclear power
generation, and energy harvesting. Graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers will have many opportunities to interact informally with the leaders
of the research community during the conference. Early-career researchers will
also be able to present their work, interact with each other, and participate in
mentoring activities during the associated Gordon Research Seminar, organized
and run entirely by students and postdocs. Topics on overcoming barriers to
inclusivity will be discussed during the “Power Hour”.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
conference topics reflect the breadth of fundamental research in the field of
micro and nanoscale phase change phenomena with emphasis on connections between
experimental studies, models, and simulations of processes such as evaporation,
condensation, solidification, and adsorption. The design and optimization of
structured and patterned surfaces for enhancement of heat transfer in cooling
systems and for prevention of ice formation, will be discussed. Gordon Research
Conference policies require that all work presented at the conference is recent
and at least a significant part of it is unpublished, thus making sure that the
meeting will focus on the cutting-edge research developments. The conference is
the fourth one in the series and will build upon the successes of the previous
three meetings by enhancing the depth and breadth of the discussions of topics
introduced at previous conferences while also adding a number of new research
areas. Of particular interest will be applying recent advances in multiscale
modeling, machine learning, artificial intelligence, and metrology techniques to
the study of phase change phenomena at the micro- and nanoscale. Emergent
research areas in need of investment in research funding will be
discussed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.