* 2231306
* EAGER: Design and Processing of Anti-microbial Surfaces Using Polymer Extrusion Additive Manufacturing Embedding Silver Nanoparticles with Enhanced Ion Releasing Kinetics
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Damon Smith, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 07/31/2024
* USD 196,920.00

Silver nanoparticles are appealing for healthcare applications because of their
strong antimicrobial ability against common bacteria and viruses. However, the
concentration of nanoparticles needed to manufacture antimicrobial products can
be prohibitively costly. Meanwhile, additive manufacturing has shown great
potential for the rapid production of biomedical devices and personal protective
equipment that desire an antimicrobial function. By incorporating silver
nanoparticles into polymer filaments for material extrusion additive
manufacturing, the nanoparticle quantity needed for antimicrobial parts may be
substantially reduced through controlling processing settings and part geometry,
while still maintaining antimicrobial characteristics. This EArly-concept Grants
for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award supports fundament research that will
gain knowledge on how silver nanoparticles incorporated as well as part
geometric and processing conditions may influence ion releasing kinetics and the
effectiveness in antimicrobial ability of fabricated parts. The research
outcomes may potentially improve the ability to reduce the spread of infection
diseases in medical care applications and thus benefit the well-being of the
society. This project will also contribute to the education in manufacturing for
students from underrepresented groups through the development of a workshop that
targets students from Delgado Community College, the largest minority-serving
community college in Louisiana. Students attending the workshop will gain
exposures to the materials of this project and additional education and research
opportunities in advanced manufacturing areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this research is to understand how additive manufacturing
processing and designs govern the concentration of silver nanoparticles on
fabricated surfaces that require antimicrobial properties. The adhesion and
growth of bacteria and the release of silver ions that eradicate bacteria depend
not only on surface topography but also the internal voids of a part. The
novelty of the approach lies upon employing deposition infill patterns, layer
heights, and nozzle sizes to produce specimens with (i) surface topography with
high tortuosity that limits favorable attachment sites and confines the growth
of surface bacteria, and (ii) increased internal voids, while without
sacrificing other component performance, for a higher release rate of
antimicrobial silver ions at part surfaces. The interdisciplinary research team
will test these outcomes by characterization of specimen morphologies, silver
ion release rates, and the adhesion and growth of the common bacteria
Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus by optical and electron microscopy,
mass spectrometry, and antimicrobial assays, respectively. The project will
offer a better understanding of how additive manufacturing processing and design
parameters influence the antimicrobial mechanisms, which can be used to develop
design strategies for a wide range of cost-effective healthcare applications
that can be used to limit infection rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.