* 2231349
* Collaborative Research: Scalable &amp; Communication Efficient Learning-Based Distributed Control
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Nikolai Matni, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 08/31/2025
* USD 240,000.00

Intelligent infrastructures (e.g., transportation, energy) are poised to play an
integral role in the ongoing societal transition towards a more sustainable
future. These systems must operate reliably, robustly, and efficiently in
uncertain and dynamic environments. Feedback control is the enabling technology
for providing such guarantees. Centralized control, where one system is
controlled by a single decision maker, is a mature technology with well-
developed theory and efficient algorithms, and has enabled engineering successes
across many applications, such as commercial aviation, process control, and
robotics. In contrast, distributed control, wherein multiple subsystems are
controlled by multiple decision makers, is much more challenging. While the last
ten years have produced a wealth of new theory and computational tools for
addressing the distributed control problem, it is nevertheless observed that the
practical impact of distributed control in emerging areas such as smart
infrastructure remains minimal. This project seeks to address this issue and
move distributed control from theory to practice by building a foundational and
integrated theory of distributed learning-enabled control and approximated
distributed optimization. On the educational front, the research outcomes of
this project will be integrated into graduate-level courses on learning-enabled
control (Penn) and distributed-optimization (Columbia). Longer term, this
project aims to create a new community of researchers working at the
intersection of distributed learning, control, and optimization, and
departmental efforts will be leveraged to recruit a diverse group of PhD
students for the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is motivated by the
observation that there remain significant barriers to the practical use of
safety-constrained real-time distributed control: (i) Existing methods are much
too slow for real-time control; (ii) Distributed optimal control has mainly
focused on linear models while many systems of interest are nonlinear; and (iii)
It is often assumed that high-quality structured models reflecting system
topology are available. Thrusts will cover the full control engineering pipeline
to address these gaps. In Thrust I, federated and statistical learning are
incorporated into structured system identification. Thrust II seeks to speed up
distributed predictive control by developing distributed imitation and federated
learning tools. Finally, Thrust III focusses on the design of distributed
controllers robust to uncertainty from learning, numerical methods, and
communication failures. In contrast to existing work, this proposal offers the
first integrated approach to designing controllers that can be realistically
deployed to societal-scale systems. Experimental validation of developed methods
will be conducted on robotic platforms at Penn and on data from an HBT-EP plasma
fusion tokamak at Columbia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.