* 2231168
* Conference: Climate Change and Quantum Computing
* TIP,ITE
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2023
* Annarita Giani, General Electric Global Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 12/31/2023
* USD 98,975.00

The goal of this project is to organize and host a workshop to identify
opportunities to address some of the most daunting climate change related
problems using advances in quantum computing information science and technology.
The core of this effort is to engage and bring together scientists and user
communities together to envision how best to leverage the advances in quantum
computing to accelerate development of solutions that can help some of the major
challenges posed by events related to climate change. The particular focus of
the workshop will be on the leveraging convergence between areas related to
energy and power, greenhouse emissions, and climate change related simulations.
The goal will be to bring experts from industry, academia, foundations, and
government agencies to discuss and identify opportunities in which quantum
computing as well as quantum technologies such as quantum sensors could offer a
unique advantage. The proposed workshop is expected to help identify efforts to
develop a track that will be based on using the power of quantum computing,
using development of quantum computing algorithms and hardware, to address
different areas including but not limited to energy, power grid, transportation,
renewable energy transition. The insights gained from this workshop, if
implemented into a track, could have transformative impacts on accelerating
translational research aspects of quantum computing science and technology in
the context of climate change related challenges. Hybrid approaches of classical
and quantum computing will also be considered. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
workshop effort plans include online ideation, virtual meetings of stakeholders,
and in-person synthesis. A particular focus will be on bringing together
researchers and user communities from different segments including climate
change, manufacturing, environmental monitoring, clean energy, power grid,
transportation, to demonstrate that quantum is a strong enabler for combating
climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.