* 2231076
* STTR Phase II:  Ultra-thin Laminar Flywheels for Utility Scale Energy Storage
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2025
* BenMaan Jawdat, REVTERRA CORPORATION
* Cooperative Agreement
* Anna Brady
* 05/31/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase II project is to reduce power infrastructure bottlenecks
to the deployment of electric vehicle fast chargers. Typically, it is expensive
to install high power electric vehicle fast chargers because of limited power
availability or demand charges. A large network of electric vehicle fast
chargers would reduce range anxiety among electric vehicle drivers and
accelerate the electrification of transportation overall. Energy storage systems
can be used to build a “buffer” between low power availability at a site and
high-power fast chargers by accumulating and then rapidly discharging energy,
but conventional chemical batteries have a limited cycle life which degrades
faster in high-power applications. Kinetic batteries (such as those based on
flywheels), on the other hand, could enable this without having to be replaced
and without hazardous byproducts. Modular, cost-effective “buffers” could be
deployed anywhere and everywhere an electric vehicle fast charger is required
and where power availability is limited.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase II
project proposes to fabricate, test, and deploy a pilot 100 kWh / 400 kW modular
kinetic battery system into a 350 kW electric vehicle charging station along
with commercial partners to validate whether the system can act as a drop-in
solution. This project enables high-power, fast electric vehicle charging
utilizing the existing, low-power grid connections. This project has three basic
objectives: 1) fabricate a kinetic battery module with 100 kWh energy storage
capacity and 400 kW power output, 2) conduct a rigorous test of the kinetic
battery as part of a high-power electric vehicle charger, and 3) design a high-
power, alternating current homopolar motor/generator which can provide damping
forces to the rotor passively via its windings. This kinetic battery system
implements a passively stable magnetic bearing system which enables larger
module sizes (reduces balance of system costs and operating expenses) and can
connect to the grid synchronously, eliminating the need for costly power
electronics and enabling it to provide grid-stabilizing physical inertia as an
ancillary service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.