* 2231597
* The 41st National Association of Black Geoscientists Annual Technical Conference: Beyond the Pandemic Event Horizon
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Stephen Boss, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 07/31/2023
* USD 49,800.00

HBCUs have limited capacity nationally to produce geoscientists. Of the 100+
HBCUs nationally, there are 23 that offer degree programs relevant to Earth and
Geosciences and consequently, of interest to the National Association of Black
Geoscientists (NABG). Most of these (20) are environmental science programs at
BS, MS, or PHD level, but they also include geology BS (1), geosciences MS (1),
and atmospheric sciences (BS, MS, PHD). Faculty in these HBCU programs, in
particular, are underrepresented at STEM and Geosciences-oriented national
conferences. A primary aim of this conference is to engage faculty in these
programs to enhance their awareness of NABG and aid their participation in the
organization as it strives to create a more inclusive 21st Century geosciences
workforce. The project will provide support for key faculty in these programs to
attend the conference, develop a network of professional NABG members with whom
they may interact going forward, and become active members in a vibrant
minority-serving STEM organization. The objective of the workshop is to
determine how NABG might better serve HBCU faculty and the many students-of-
color they serve nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks financial
support from NSF for approximately 50 student participants and up to 10 faculty
from historically black colleges and universities (HBCUs) to attend the 41st
Annual Technical Conference of NABG, 7-9 September 2022. For this year, the PI
is actively recruiting faculty participants from the geoscience oriented degree
programs (e.g. environmental and atmospheric sciences) at HBCUs. Faculty in
these institutions and programs are historically under-represented at the NABG
annual conference. The objective is to expand the disciplinary representation of
NABG to include more people of color interested in environmental issues through
engaging faculty at HBCUs. Expanding NABG membership with faculty in
environmental sciences and atmospheric sciences at HBCUs will also significantly
enhance visibility of NABG within the national cohort of 1890 Land Grant
Institutions, and thus, enhance the stability and long-term viability of the
organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.