* 2231157
* NSF-BSF: AF: Small: Advancing Coding Theory Through the Lens of Pseudorandomness
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Mary Wootters, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 04/30/2026
* USD 600,000.00

The goal of this project is to simultaneously advance both the theory of error
correcting codes (ECCs) and pseudorandomness by exploring connections between
them. ECCs are a fundamental tool to protect data from noise, and the past
decade has seen many breakthroughs, both theoretical and practical.
Pseudorandomness is the study of deterministic objects that “behave like random
objects,” and is a fundamental area in theoretical computer science. Connections
between ECCs and pseudorandomness have been noted before, and indeed there is a
rich interplay between the two areas. However, the time is right to revisit this
connection in light of recent breakthroughs in ECCs. In doing so, this project
leads not only to further progress in pseudorandomness by leveraging ECCs, but
will also lead to further progress in ECCs, as applications in pseudorandomness
highlight important questions in ECCs where current techniques fall short. This
project supports graduate and undergraduate education and research, as well as
outreach beyond academia. This is a joint NSF-BSF grant; the Israeli PI is Dr.
Dean Doron of Ben Gurion University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two main
thrusts of this research. The first thrust has to do with a notion called “list-
recovery,” which has become increasingly important in the study of ECCs.
However, recent progress in list-recovery has worked only in a particular
parameter regime, which unfortunately is not the parameter regime of interest in
pseudorandomness applications. This research investigates list-recovery beyond
the parameter regime that is currently understood. Studying list recovery in
this parameter regime also has algorithmic applications beyond either coding
theory or pseudorandomness. The second thrust has to do with the classical
problem of obtaining binary codes with efficient algorithms and the optimal
trade-offs between rate (the amount of communication overhead) and distance (a
measure of the amount of noise tolerated). This project leverages progress on
list-recovery to make progress on this difficult
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.