* 2231926
* I-Corps: Wearable Cardiovascular Abnormality Detector
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Negar Ebadi, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a wearable technology to benefit individuals with sustpected
cardiovascular abnormalities by early detection of disease through outside-the-
clinic monitoring. Early detection of cardiovascular diseases allows for timely
interventions including medication, surgical procedures, and valve replacement.
The unobtrusive nature of the proposed technology may contribute to a smooth and
comfortable experience, encouraging patients to comply with the diagnostic
process. This improved compliance, along with dietary and lifestyle
modifications, may lead to improvements in societal health outcomes by
decreasing hospitalization rates and the associated costs. Outside-the-clinic
monitoring may obviate the need for subsequent clinical visits, shortening the
diagnostic timeline from weeks to days and reducing cardiologistsâ€™
workload.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of a prescription-based wearable sensor patch for the continuous assessment of
cardiovascular patients for periods of up to two weeks. This sensor patch
leverages microphones and inertial measurement units (i.e. accelerometers and
gyroscopes) to capture heartbeat-induced sounds and vibrations on the chest
wall, respectively. A software tool based on artificial intelligence (AI) is
developed to inform cardiologists of abnormal events and patterns in the cardiac
signals along with their corresponding timestamps. The technology also offers
hemodynamic features such as systolic and diastolic time intervals and heart
rate variability parameters to assist cardiologists with the decision-making
process. This device is an alternative to traditional Holter monitors and
single-lead electrocardiography (ECG) sensors that are inconvenient to wear for
extended periods of time and do not represent the mechanical activities of the
heart. The machine learning (ML)-based fusion method designed for cardio-
mechanical and cardio-acoustic modalities may also be adapted to other bio-
mechanical and bio-acoustic monitoring applications such as joint and bone
health monitoring, where abnormal crepitus might be indicators of joint
malfunctions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.