* 2231328
* ExpandQISE: Track 1: Reimagining Adaptive Quantum Algorithms
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Christian Arenz, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 08/31/2025
* USD 800,000.00

Non-technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on new methods for
solving important problems in science using quantum computers, broadly
addressing a wide range of problems for various practical applications. In
particular, the project will develop a family of quantum algorithms that are
able to solve important problems of societal impact, including in health,
agriculture, and climate. The education and outreach activities play a critical
role in the growth and diversification of a strong quantum information science
and engineering (QISE) workforce. The developed textbook from this project will
make QISE accessible to all students and may also influence how linear algebra
is introduced. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;Quantum
simulation algorithms face several challenges associated with ansatz selection,
noise, rugged optimization landscapes, and applicability to large-scale
problems. The project aims to overcome these challenges by developing a family
of quantum algorithms that adaptively create the quantum circuit needed to carry
out ground state quantum simulation. This is achieved through a broad family of
adaptive algorithms that leverage deterministic as well as random elements and
variational and non-variational approaches, to efficiently prepare ground states
in a noise-robust and reliable manner. Randomized adaptive strategies that do
not involve classical optimization routines are expected to provide convergence
guarantees, while additionally adding classical optimization enhances the speed
of convergence. Performance is benchmarked and tested under realistic conditions
using IBMâ€™s largest quantum devices. The insights gained are leveraged to design
the most efficient adaptive quantum algorithms that are noise-robust and yield
high convergence guarantees. While the research activities are expected to have
a profound effect across the sciences by providing solution strategies that use
existing and near-term, noisy quantum hardware to solve a wide range of
problems, the research also establishes the much-needed algorithms for reliable
and efficient quantum state preparation in the fault-tolerant era. The project
includes educational and outreach activities that make quantum science
accessible to students from all backgrounds and that could play a critical role
in the growth and diversification of a strong QISE workforce. The research is
tightly integrated into the workforce development program by engaging students
in research early on. The cornerstone of the workforce development program is a
pictorial formalism that exposes students to quantum computing without the need
for elaborate mathematical concepts. This formalism is developed in a textbook,
which simultaneously serves as a guide to designing a freshman quantum
information science and engineering course and training high-school teachers and
K12 students in QISE summer programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.