* 2231632
* IUCRC Phase I Iowa State University: Center for Soil Technologies (SoilTech)
* ENG,EEC
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Carmen Gomes, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Prakash Balan
* 02/29/2028
* USD 130,000.00

Healthy soils are needed to sustain life, to grow food, to provide shelter, to
provide resilient infrastructure, and to enable mobility, but there is presently
a lack of knowledge about many key aspects of soil and its dynamics such as
variations in the moisture and organic matter content, and how these variations
affect soil health and stability. The Center for Soil Technologies (SoilTech) is
a partnership among the University of Southern California, Iowa State
University, the University of Connecticut, and the University of Washington to
address this knowledge gap with a mission to support industries related to
agriculture, defense, energy, and environment. By convening researchers across
the nation with complementary areas of expertise, and by recruiting Industry
Advisory Board members from a broad range of industry, foundation, and
government organizations, SoilTech will make crucial progress in understanding
soil dynamics. SoilTech will serve as a first-of-its-kind hub for technical
exchange and research among these organizations, providing inter-disciplinary
knowledge synthesis and broad applications of its research. SoilTech’s
participating sites have strong education and outreach programs addressing
underrepresented populations in STEM fields. These programs will train the next
generation of workforce in soil measurement and monitoring practices that will
broadly benefit society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research teams at the
SoilTech Center are poised to make significant advances in the understanding of
dynamic processes in soils through four research themes - Soil Sensors and
Sensor Networks; Soil Modeling and Data Analytics; Soil Carbon Capture and
Accounting; and Soil Health and Sustainability – SoilTech-enabled research will
meet a number of as yet unaddressed needs in several industry sectors. SoilTech
will provide the underlying research necessary to develop new, more efficient,
and more sustainable ways of understanding soil properties and managing soils
and natural resources. Iowa State University contributions will focus on
resilient in-ground sensors, space-based remote sensing, carbon accounting
methodology standardization, and developing deployable soil health initiatives
such as contaminant mitigation and support for precision agriculture, leveraging
multiple world-class facilities for support. These include BioCentury Research
Farm, Bioeconomy Institute, Plant Sciences Institute, Iowa Nutrient Research
Center, Center for Agricultural and Rural Development, Leopold Center for
Sustainable Agriculture, and Artificial Intelligence Institute for Resilient
Agriculture. Our workforce development plan includes the creation of inclusive
internship, training modules and experiential learning modules. This center site
will leverage existing mechanisms for incorporating underrepresented students
into the work, including the McNair Scholars Program, Louis Stokes Alliance for
Minority Participation, and First-Year Honors Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.