* 2231667
* Strateole-2: Atmospheric Wave Influences on Cirrus, Water Vapor, and Global Circulation Near the Tropical Tropopause
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* M Joan Alexander, NorthWest Research Associates, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 08/31/2026
* USD 768,924.00

This award supports analysis of observations collected in the first two
deployments of the Strateole-2 field campaign, which took place in the winters
of 2019/2020 (8 flights) and 2021/2022 (17 flights). Strateole-2 is a long-
duration ballooning campaign organized by the Centre National d'Etudes Spatiales
(CNES), the French national space agency. The balloons were launched from the
Seychelles and drifted around the equator for up to two months following the
winds of the lower stratosphere. The campaign used a variety of instruments to
observe the tropical tropopause layer (TTL), the transition zone between the
troposphere (the domain of clouds, precipitation, and weather systems) and the
stratosphere (the cold and dry region above it which contains the ozone layer).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A primary focus of Strateole-2 is gravity waves, meaning
wave motions in the atmosphere for which the primary restoring force is gravity.
Such waves are generated by vertical motions occurring in the deep convective
clouds over tropical oceans but they can have horizontal wavelengths much larger
than convective systems, with sufficient extent in latitude to be affected by
the Coriolis force and its variation with latitude. These waves are of interest
because they provide the vertical transport of horizontal momentum which drives
the quasi-biennial oscillation (QBO), a reversal of the winds in the equatorial
stratosphere that starts at high levels and descends over the next two years.
The up-and-down motions in the waves also affect the temperature of the TTL, and
the colder temperatures occurring in the upward displacements promote the
condensation of ambient water vapor, promoting the formation of thin cirrus
clouds which block outgoing infrared radiation and thus have an effect on
Earth's energy balance. The formation of ice particles in cirrus clouds also
reduces the amount of water vapor entering the stratosphere, where it has
additional effects on the planetary energy balance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work
performed here focuses specifically on waves which are long, with horizontal
wavelengths of perhaps 1,000km, but shallow, with vertical wavelengths less than
a kilometer, and periods of a few days. The project takes advantage of the NSF-
funded suite of instruments flown in the deployments, including the radio
occultation receiver (ROC) supported under AGS-1642650, the fiber optic
temperature profiler (FLOATS) developed under AGS-1642277, and the reel-down
instrument package (RACHuTS) developed under AGS-1643022. It also uses data from
instruments developed by researchers in France, including a balloon-borne lidar
(BeCOOL) and an infrared water vapor sensor (PicoSTRAT), as well as onboard
thermometers, barometers, and GPS receivers. These data sources are used in
combination with satellite data and reanalysis products, and specialized
simulations with enhanced vertical resolution are performed by unfunded
collaborators at the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecasts. One
issue to be addressed is the generation of these pancake-like waves, which must
somehow be generated by localized convection despite their long horizontal
wavelengths. Work on momentum transport considers wave breaking and subsequent
generation of turbulence as well as the calculation of wave momentum
flux.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has broader impacts through its potential
for improving the representation of the QBO in models used for long-range
weather prediction. Models have difficulty representing the QBO, in part due to
the difficulty of representing the effect of gravity wave momentum transport,
and the QBO plays important roles in modulating the potentially predictable
forms of subseasonal weather variations. In addition, the radiative effects of
cirrus clouds and stratospheric water vapor are among the factors that matter
for understanding and anticipating anthropogenic climate change. In addition,
the PIs conduct public outreach and education by participating in an effort to
correct scientific misunderstanding in social media, working with colleagues to
develop easy-to-use tutorials that give users access to scientific data and
information. The project provides support and training to a postdoctoral fellow,
thereby promoting the scientific workforce in this research
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.