* 2231605
* Conference: Student and Early Career Participation for the Solving Water Availability Challenges through an Interdisciplinary Framework Chapman Conference
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2022,01/31/2023
* Royce Hanson, American Geophysical Union
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 01/31/2023
* USD 49,500.00

This award provides funding to support participation of early-career researchers
in the American Geophysical Union (AGU) Chapman Conference titled, “Integrated
Assessments: Solving Water Availability Challenges through an Interdisciplinary
Framework.” Early career scientists will: (1) get information via presentations
and discussions about current challenges and leading research, (2) get
introduced to experts or interested researchers seeking collaborations through
participation in sessions and workshops, and (3) achieve a better understanding
of how to broaden their research to incorporate integrated goals and objectives
to contribute towards current interdisciplinary challenges. Discussions,
outcomes, and working groups or relationships that result from this conference
will directly impact the future of integrated water availability assessments and
how water resource challenges are addressed throughout the U.S. and around the
world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference aims to explore divergent views,
assumptions, data types, and research methods to facilitate integrated
assessments of water availability and move the state of the science forward.
This conference will provide an overview of current challenges, recent progress,
and pathways toward the improvement of integrated assessments and
interdisciplinary science to address water availability research. Despite the
inherent complexity of water availability, the hydrologic cycle has historically
been studied from narrow disciplinary perspectives and isolated from societal
context. This conference is structured to facilitate discussion between
researchers, practitioners, and disciplinary experts to propel interdisciplinary
collaboration forward.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.