* 2231510
* Supporting Professional Development of Undergraduate Researchers
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Ian Billick, Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 06/30/2025
* USD 422,560.00

A capable STEM (Science Technology Engineer and Math) workforce is critical to
the nation’s ability to sustain the innovations that fuel economic growth and
allow the country to maintain a high quality of life. Consequently, creating a
diverse STEM-capable workforce is a strategic priority for NSF. Most students
who start college with plans to obtain a STEM degree fail to finish, with
students from disadvantaged backgrounds having particularly high attrition
rates. Participation in undergraduate research, in part by improving the self-
efficacy of students and leading to self-identification of students as
scientists, has been shown to increase retention of students. When students of
all backgrounds are reached, this has improved diversity in STEM careers. To
further promote retention of diverse students in STEM careers this program will
offer professional development opportunities, including support for cohorts of
students to present results of their research at professional
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed program will provide professional
development opportunities for biology, computer science, ocean sciences and
geology students conducting undergraduate research, targeting students of
diverse backgrounds including from minority-serving institutions and
participants in NSF’s Research Experience for Undergraduates program. Students
who have identified a professional development opportunity (e.g., presenting
results at a conference) will submit online applications which will be vetted to
ensure students meet basic qualifications (e.g., have conducted high quality
undergraduate research, are coordinating their research mentors) and to
determine whether the experience will have a meaningful impact on their career
development, including evaluating the extent to which students have had limited
access to other professional development opportunities. Students will provide
basic tracking data to allow assessment of the extent to which the program
reaches diverse participants and to determine the impact of making presentations
at professional societies. This award is supported by the Division of Biological
Infrastructure (DBI) in the Directorate for Biosciences, the Division of
Computer and Network Systems (CNS) in the Directorate for Computer and
Information Science and Engineering, and the Divisions of Ocean Sciences (OCE)
and Earth Sciences (EAR) within the Directorate for
Geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.