* 2231990
* Questions at the Interface of Analysis and Number Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Theresa Anderson, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2024
* USD 98,173.00

Harmonic analysis and number theory are fundamental fields of mathematics that
are used to describe and interpret many real-world phenomena. Harmonic analysis
involves breaking up a mathematical object such as a function into pieces that
are easier to understand. The beauty of this area is that the pieces are
oftentimes simple, yet represent the whole with accuracy. Number theory involves
deceptively simple statements about the integers, easy to test, yet often
difficult to prove. Though seemingly disparate, analysis and number theory share
many interactions. For instance, one can use intricate analysis of complex
functions to answer fundamental questions about prime numbers. This project
explores a variety of problems at the interface of these two areas. In
particular, the PI will consider discrete variants of operators in analysis,
which enjoy applications in fields such as medical imaging and cosmology. To
analyze these operators, continuous techniques often fail, and one has to
develop number theoretic techniques adapted to the underlying geometry of the
analytic problem. The PI seeks to provide new bounds, new techniques, sharper
analysis and broader connections. The PI also plans to bring Fourier analysis, a
fundamental decomposition of the time-frequency domain, such as that used to
understand waves, into the emerging field of arithmetic statistics. Here she
seeks to provide sharp counts of a wide variety of objects of arithmetic
interest, such as elliptic curves used in cryptography. As a broader impact, the
PI will spark new mathematical conversations between analysts and number
theorists and also improve the educational and scientific climate for
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses several
fundamental questions at the interface of analysis and number theory. Firstly,
the PI pursues bounds for discrete variants of continuous operators in harmonic
analysis that involve integration over a curved subvariety. These bounds provide
quantitative distributional facts about the underlying Diophantine equations
that define these varieties, which makes them different from their continuous
counterparts. In particular, since continuous techniques usually do not carry
over in this setting, the PI will develop refined number theoretic techniques to
bound several operators, including multilinear spherical variants, variants
defined over the primes, and higher codimensional analogues. In particular, the
higher codimensional study should open new avenues of problems as very little is
known in this setting. Solving these problems has connections to discrete
geometry, lattice point counts of surfaces, and Falconer's distance conjecture.
In another series of problems, the PI will pursue "sparse bounds" for both
continuous and discrete operators. Sparse bounds are a refinement of Lebesgue
space bounds that allow one to deduce weighted estimates. Finally, the PI plans
to pursue a far reaching program in arithmetic statistics. This is an area
greatly developed on the algebraic side recently. The PI plans to inject Fourier
analytic techniques to obtain precise lattice point counts that are adaptable to
take advantage of the power of the algebraic techniques and push those bounds
even further. In particular, the PI hopes to obtain counts on certain objects
such as elliptic curves, with an eye to not only developing techniques, but also
fostering interactions between number theorists and analysts in new
ways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.