* 2231658
* Citizen CATE at the 2024 Total Solar Eclipse
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Paul Bryans, Southwest Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* Carrie E. Black
* 05/31/2024
* USD 299,407.00

In August of 2017, the Great American Eclipse traversed the continental United
States from Oregon to South Carolina. The Citizen Continental-America Telescopic
Eclipse (Citizen CATE) successfully deployed over 300 volunteer citizen
scientists at 68 sites to continuously observe totality from coast to coast.
That effort resulted in a novel and unique dataset containing 90 minutes of
continuous coverage of the inner solar corona. On April 8, 2024, a total solar
eclipse (TSE) will again traverse United States, this time from Texas to Maine.
The project outlined here is to build on the successes of CATE 2017 and improve
the observations with upgraded instrumentation to include a larger-format camera
and polarization measurements, providing a wider field of view and diagnostic of
coronal density not previously possible. CATE 2024 project will deploy 40 teams
of citizen scientists along the path of totality to collect over 60 minutes of
high-resolution data, which will be used to study the hard to observe middle
corona. Previous planning work including site selection, identification of
necessary equipment, and initial development of the citizen science network has
already been carried out. This project will begin the implementation of the
planned activities, which includes equipment purchase and telescope building;
training on equipment and in solar astronomy for citizen science teams that will
train teams within their regions; and implementing software upgrades to ensure
consistency in data collection. Practice with the equipment for the citizen
science training teams includes a workshop to be held at the Southwest Research
Institute campus and travel to Australia for the April 2023 total solar eclipse.
The projectâ€™s broader societal impact includes engagement with Native American
and other underrepresented community groups along the eclipse path and the
donation of telescopes to community groups for their use after the eclipse.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CATE 2024 will use high-cadence high dynamic range (HDR)
polarimetric observations of the corona to characterize the physical processes
that shape the heating, structure, and evolution of the solar corona at scales
that cannot be studied outside of a TSE. The science objectives of CATE 2024 are
to (1) determine the connectivity of structures that span the middle corona,
where the coronal magnetic field transitions from primarily closed to primarily
open; (2) measure the flow of the nascent solar wind, by characterizing small
scale dynamics that occur during the eclipse; and (3) identify and characterize
magnetic reconnection, which is believed to generate structure in the solar wind
and to heat the low and middle corona, by identifying features and dynamics
related to this process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.