* 2231482
* RTG: Numerical Mathematics and Scientific Computing
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2028
* Matthias Heinkenschloss, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 07/31/2028
* USD 1,202,235.00

This Research Training Group (RTG) in Numerical Mathematics and Scientific
Computing (NASC) at Rice University will serve national interests by training
the next generation of scientists to advance NASC and its applications. NASC are
continuously evolving areas which are increasingly important for discovery and
decision making in a wide variety of engineering and science applications and
beyond. This RTG will train the next generation of scientists to participate and
push the advancement of these areas and their applications, it will increase
participation, especially of women and underrepresented minorities, in
mathematical sciences, and it will strengthen the preparation of researchers in
computational and applied mathematics for industry and academic careers. RTG
activities will facilitate and increase interactions between RTG trainees and
faculty at Rice University and the neighboring MD Anderson Cancer Center and
Baylor College of Medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RTG participants
will be trained in mathematical modeling, the design and analysis of numerical
methods, and best practices in scientific software engineering. This training
will build mathematical and scientific computing foundations across all
applications, but also bring trainees to frontiers of research in areas such as
next-generation high-order numerical methods for physics-based simulations,
structure-preserving and data-driven reduced order modeling, and large-scale
optimization methods for problems governed by differential equations. RTG
trainees will also join teams with domain experts from biology, computational
neuroscience, and the geosciences in order to understand the specific
mathematical and computational challenges arising from each application, and to
ultimately provide mathematical and computational tools tailored towards
application-specific challenges. Vertically integrated research pods centered
around a single application area will provide research and mentoring experiences
to postdocs and students. The RTG will broaden and diversify the pool of
postdoctoral scholars, graduate students, and undergraduates who will pursue
graduate studies in NASC by providing community-building and professional
development activities. Activities are planned to increase the number of
undergraduate majors in computational and applied mathematics as well as
strengthen their backgrounds for industry and academic careers. The RTG will
also introduce a bridge program to facilitate social and academic integration
for incoming graduate students. Professional development activities, teaching
opportunities, and the integrated research experience will increase the career
preparation of graduate students and postdoctoral associates. The RTG program
will also enhance the training of non-RTG students via participation in
workshops, topics courses, and graduate student seminars. Finally, outreach
activities will expose high school students to undergraduate studies in NASC, as
well as career opportunities in the mathematical
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.