* 2231299
* RAPID: Diversity and symbiotic relationships of annelids in a poorly known region of the deep Pacific
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2024
* Candace Grimes, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 06/30/2024
* USD 107,839.00

While the oceans occupy more than 70% of the Earthâ€™s surface, the diversity of
the deep-sea is still vastly understudied due to the difficult and expensive
nature of sampling. Based on the limited sampling of the deep seafloor,
researchers have found that biodiversity in these environments is dependent upon
factors, such as temperature, salinity, geomorphology, and depth. One area
lacking data is oceanic trenches which sometimes reach depths over 7,000m. Given
the environmental extremes of oceanic trenches, they may harbor unique sets of
species but biodiversity from these regions is almost completely unknown.
Annelids, or segmented worms, are a diverse and dominant representative of
communities in marine environments, including deep-sea habitats. However,
limited sampling from the deep sea has restricted our ability to characterize
annelid biodiversity from these widespread environments. In addition to
exploring, describing and cataloging the biodiversity of annelid worms from the
deep sea, this project will result in two new outreach activities. In
collaboration with the MarineQuest program at the University of North Carolina
at Wilmington, two new outreach activities for K-12 students will be developed
to illustrate life aboard a research vessel and how researchers study
adaptations of organisms to life in the deep sea. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will collect annelids from hadal sites of the Eastern Aleutian Trench in
the Northeast Pacific Ocean and abyssal depths of the nearby continental shelf
in the Bering Sea aboard the German R/V Sonne under the leadership of Dr.
Angelika Brandt of The Senckenberg Research Institute and Natural History
Museum. The samples will be preserved in formalin and RNAlater for morphological
and molecular work, respectively. The goal is to document and describe annelid
diversity and their symbionts from these remote and extreme environments using
morphological and molecular sequencing techniques. Traditional taxonomy,
fluorescence in-situ hybridization (FISH), and -omics techniques will be used to
characterize annelid diversity in this relatively unstudied region of the deep-
sea and determine if there is a greater abundance of symbiotic taxa in annelid
microbiomes at hadal depths compared to abyssal
depths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.