* 2231036
* ASCENT: Using Optical Frequency Comb for Ultrafast Nature-Based Computing for Machine Learning Algorithms
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Qiang Lin, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,499,921.00

Expanding the boundaries of current computing system performance calls for
disruptive innovations to enable next-generation architectures beyond the
traditional, so-called von Neumann paradigm. In this project, a novel photonic
non-von Neumann system will be developed that pushes the envelope of nature-
based computing in efficiency, capability, and applicability. Products and
insights from this ASCENT collaboration have strong transformative potentials to
bring nature-based computing to the state of compelling infrastructure and
directly impact the gamut of application domains of machine learning (ML) in
scientific discovery, industry, assistive technologies, robotics-aided
healthcare, economic development, and consequent improvements in quality of
life. Envisioned broader impacts will permeate to the integrated photonics
community, with new functions being realized at the chip level for microcombs
that can serve as key enablers in new sensing and communication platforms.
Project outcomes will generate new knowledge and disruptive innovation for
hybrid photonic and electronic interfaces; enable systems and architectures
beyond the von Neumann paradigm, and thus impact Future Semiconductor Technology
(FST) platforms -- a strategic national priority; and train next generation
engineers for continued innovation in this area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While
nature-based, non-von Neumann computing machines such as D-Wave’s quantum
annealers are showing promise, these current machines are far from compelling
due to their demanding (e.g., cryogenic) operating conditions, significant bulk,
their relatively high energy consumption, and their limited applicability to
combinatorial optimization problems. They will only be truly viable when they
are significantly more capable and efficient than state-of-the-art von Neumann
platforms in solving a non-trivial section of real-world problems. This
project’s ambitious and broad vision is to bring such a machine to fruition,
which can only be realized via convergent research in devices, circuits,
algorithms, and ML. Nanophotonics is a promising direction to catalyze the
required transformative advances, through an optical frequency microcomb that
can be controlled to function as a large-scale computing system. A microcomb-
based non-von Neumann system will be developed, which can accelerate a variety
of ML algorithms. Building medium- to large-scale system prototypes calls for
developments in physical hardware for learning systems, integration of silicon
photonic circuits exploiting microcombs, and co-design of novel ML algorithms
that leverage the unique features of this machine. This project will educate and
train the next generation of researchers to think outside the box of their niche
discipline, instill in them the excitement of crossing disciplinary boundaries,
and give them first-hand appreciation of the need for convergent efforts towards
making progress in engineering system applications with high societal
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.