* 2231526
* Conference: Chemical Sensing Innovation: Harnessing Recent Advances in Biological, Physical, Chemical and Data sciences for Engineering Next Generation Electronic Noses
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2022,02/28/2023
* Baranidharan Raman, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 02/28/2023
* USD 99,992.00

This project will organize and host a workshop to identify the parameters and
sub-elements for a potential Convergence Accelerator track related to chemical
sensing. The core of this effort is to engage and bring together scientists and
user communities together to envision how best to leverage the advances in
chemical science sensing research, focusing especially on the convergence
between areas related to biological olfaction, material science, bioelectronics
and manufacturing, genetic engineering, AI/ML/Data Science, to define use
inspired approaches that could lead to development of sensors for several
applications. including diagnosis of diseases, homeland security, environmental
monitoring. The proposed workshop is expected to help identify pilot efforts for
a track in that it can facilitate development of several applications, including
diagnosis of diseases, homeland security, environmental monitoring. These
insights, if implemented in a track, could have transformative impacts on the
translation of scientific research related to olfactory circuits into portable
detectors/sensors with high selectivity and sensitivity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop effort plans include online ideation,
virtual meetings of stakeholders, and in-person synthesis. A particular focus
will be on bringing together researchers and user communities from different
segments including climate change and environmental monitoring, homeland
security, agriculture. Representatives from different federal agencies as well
as industry will also be part of the workshop organizing teams. This will bring
in perspectives from experts in disparate fields and user communities and this,
in turn, will lead to identification of key areas where opportunities for
translational research exists at the intersection of many fields such as
biological olfaction, neuromorphic computing, and materials
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.