* 2231662
* IUCRC Phase I University of Southern California: Center for Intelligent Distributed Embedded Applications and Systems (IDEAS)
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Cauligi Raghavendra, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 03/31/2028
* USD 121,990.00

Internet of Things devices – more than 43 billion in use – make our lives
easier. Today’s devices mostly watch, collect, and transmit data to be analyzed
elsewhere. The IDEAS Center will drive current technology to enable devices to
analyze the data, learn from data, make decisions and act on those decisions in
coordination with other devices. These smarter devices will revolutionize every
aspect of life: healthcare, infrastructure, agriculture, ecommerce,
transportation, microelectronics, manufacturing, entertainment, aerospace and
many more. IDEAS will collaborate with companies in all these industries to
improve their business practices and provide them with employees trained in
these technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IDEAS’ work, “Intelligent, Distributed,
Embedded, Applications and Systems,” addresses fundamental challenges as the
present two-layer structure of the internet (user-end devices at one end and
datacenters at the other), evolves into a massive, distributed network of
computers that will provide computing as a service. Companies in critical
industries must exploit emerging opportunities that are possible as IoT, edge-
cloud infrastructure, 5G communications and intelligent computing converge. USC-
IDEAS will focus on edge applications such as data driven asset monitoring
enabled by low latency inference, multi-agent planning and reconfigurable
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IDEAS’ technologies will help make access to data,
information, and decision making through computers as pervasive and common place
as roads, public transportation, hospitals, and other public services that are
part and parcel of our daily lives. The technology will also be extremely energy
efficient so that businesses can not only radically improve their operating
efficiency, but also make their enterprises more environmentally sustainable.
IDEAS will train future engineers and scientists from all segments of society to
further advance these technologies. Collaborative mentoring will promote
entrepreneurial research among the students to foster the next generation of
ground-breaking discoveries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IDEAS will build and maintain
a single Center-wide data repository. It will be maintained for IUCRC Phases I
and II, and for any subsequent years of center operation. It will be developed
following IUCRC best practices for securing, documenting, and reporting data.
While initially it will be cloud-based, we will integrate any physical
infrastructure requirements such as servers or other hardware as needed. Strong
password-protection and duo-authentication properties will be integrated as
needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.