* 2231498
* Collaborative Research: Conference: Workshop on Computational Structural Biology 2022
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Chinwe Ekenna, SUNY at Albany
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 09/30/2023
* USD 14,953.00

The Computational Structural Bioinformatics Workshop (CSBW) is a single-track,
one-day workshop featuring peer-reviewed works on advances in computational
methods in structural biology. Understanding the fundamental role of protein and
nucleotide structures in life processes involves many computational challenges.
It is held as part of the IEEE-Bioinformatics and Biomedicine. New experimental
and computational techniques that generate and use large amounts of structural
data have enabled novel analysis approaches, leading to an increased
understanding of different biophysical phenomena. CSBW provides a forum for
discussion of the newest computational approaches related to protein structure
discovery and analysis. Structural biology is an interdisciplinary field, and
CSBW connects scientists who work on this topic through the lens of various
academic areas, such as computer science, bioinformatics, biochemistry, and
computational biology. One of the main goals of the proposed workshop is to
connect undergraduate and graduate students to the computational bioinformatics
community, giving them an opportunity to present their work to top scientists in
the field and to network with their peers. Such interactions have a lasting
impact in a student’s academic life, as they expose students to state-of-the-art
research and creates the professional connections needed for career
advancement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed workshop will bring together
senior researchers and students working on exploring the relationships between
sequence, structure and protein function via computational structural
bioinformatics. The workshop will showcase the newest developments on a diverse
set of problems and computational methods, including: Structure representation,
prediction, and alignment, biomolecular interaction and docking, molecular
dynamics simulations, biomolecular graphics, coarse-grained modeling, data
mining of structural data, structural genomics, optimization in structural
problems, high-performance computing in modeling, graph theory applied to
structural problems, and biomolecular structure refinement. The participation of
researchers from diverse backgrounds will advance understanding of common
scientific themes and may facilitate collaborations around shared research
goals. Papers accepted to the workshop will be published in IEEE Xplore Digital
Library. Workshop participants will also receive invitations for a special issue
in a peer-reviewed journal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.