* 2231701
* RCN-UBE: Statistical Thinking in Undergraduate Biology (STUB) Network: A network for coordinating the teaching and assessment of statistical thinking in introductory biology
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Karen McGaughey, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 09/30/2023
* USD 252,527.00

The practice of biology has transitioned over the last two decades to become
increasingly reliant on quantitative approaches to drawing conclusions from
data. Consequently, an introduction to both descriptive and inferential
statistical thinking is now standard practice for the undergraduate biology
course "Bio 101" - a course taken by over 1.2 million students in the U.S.
annually. Despite the large numbers of students in introductory biology courses,
there is a dearth of active discussion about teaching and assessment when
integrating statistical thinking into biology courses. Recently, the statistics
education community has established guidelines for assessment and instructional
best practices when teaching statistics. Furthermore, there is a prominent
movement to use modern, computationally-intensive statistical methods
(simulation, randomization tests, and bootstrapping) that utilize active
learning pedagogical strategies and have preliminary evidence of improving
student learning. Despite these recent changes, there are limited venues to
discuss and coordinate best practices for the teaching and assessment of
statistical thinking for biology students - many of whom may never take an
Introductory Statistics course or will take such a course at a very different
time than their introductory biology course. To address these challenges, the
Statistical Thinking in Undergraduate Biology (STUB) network will be formed,
consisting of over 500 biology and statistics instructors. The network will
directly impact over 100,000 students during the five-year period of the award,
with many thousands impacted in the following years. With particular focus on a
diverse set of institutions, backgrounds, and learning environments (e.g.,
institutions serving large numbers of underrepresented and underserved students,
including two-year colleges), the project has the potential for effecting a
substantial change in the content and focus of the teaching of statistical
thinking in undergraduate biology across the country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As
part of the network, participants will engage in workshops and an online
learning community dedicated to the discussion and sharing of ideas, resources,
and techniques. A key tangible outcome of the workshops and online learning
community will be freely available, class-tested, and edited modules co-
developed by biologists and statisticians for use in teaching statistical ideas.
The STUB network will also serve to assist in coordinating the assessment of
statistical thinking and student attitudes in introductory biology courses. The
network will share best practices on assessment, vet potential assessment items,
and share assessment results, as well as evaluate the efficacy of the workshops
and the online learning community in improving instructor and student outcomes.
The STUB network will provide a forum for serious and impactful discussions
about teaching statistics in introductory biology courses, resulting in (a) the
development and wide dissemination of numerous freely available modules and
assessment items for teaching, (b) published peer-reviewed articles on teaching
best practices and assessment results related to statistical thinking in
undergraduate biology courses, (c) a long-lasting improvement in the teaching of
statistical thinking in the undergraduate biology curriculum, and (d)
introductory statistics courses reflecting the needs and perspective of biology
(and other quantitative science) students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences (BIO), Division
of Biological Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education and Human
Resources (EHR), Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to
address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology
Education: A Call to Action (http://visionandchange/finalreport/). This project
is also co-funded by the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences (MCB) in
the BIO directorate and the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) in the
Directorate for Mathematical &amp; Physical Sciences (MPS).