* 2231388
* ExpandQISE Track 1: Quantum information exchange over spatially-multimode and multi-core optical fibers
* MPS,OMA
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Prem Kumar, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 08/31/2025
* USD 800,000.00

Non-technical description:&lt;br/&gt;Quantum communication uses fundamental laws
of physics to securely exchange private information over untrusted networks and
to establish quantum correlations among distant network nodes, which could be
used for high-performance distributed quantum computing and ultra-precise
quantum sensing. The capacity of quantum communication links is limited by the
unavoidable losses of optical fibers connecting the nodes, and the only way to
grow the quantum information exchange rate at a given distance is to increase
the number of degrees of freedom (modes) over which the information is
transmitted. While polarization and frequency / time modes have already received
a lot of attention, one untapped resource for quantum information exchange over
long fiber links is the spatial degrees of freedom of light in few-mode,
multimode, and multi-core optical fibers. In this project, the research team
harnesses the spatial degrees of freedom of light for carrying the quantum
information over significant distances in optical fibers. Several types of high-
capacity quantum communication links are investigated, ranging from a set of
totally independent spatial quantum channels to links using spatial modes for
high-dimensional data encoding. The project pairs University of Texas at
Arlington, which has a nascent Quantum Information Science and Technology (QISE)
program, with well-established and vibrant QISE research effort at Northwestern
University. Through the joint research and student exchange, as well as
collaboration with industrial and worldwide partners, the students of all
levels, including those of underrepresented groups, are being trained at the
forefronts of quantum science and optical communications. This collaborative
work and the associated broad public and K-12 outreach activities, such as high-
school summer camps and Engineering Week’s open lab visits and demos, aim to
establish University of Texas at Arlington as a center for the emerging and
productive QISE research community in North Texas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description:&lt;br/&gt;This project’s goal is to
increase the quantum communication capacity by exploiting spatial degrees of
freedom of optical fibers. It extends the methods used in classical space-
division multiplexing to the quantum domain to develop several types of high-
capacity quantum communication links. These range from a set of totally
independent spatial quantum channels to links maintaining full spatial coherence
across many fiber modes or cores for transmission of quantum information encoded
in high-dimensional spatial Hilbert space. The project employs a systematic
approach to real-time characterization and inversion of the input-output
transfer matrix of an optical fiber to enable the delivery of parallel-channel
or high-dimensional qubits over metroscale distances, thus dramatically
increasing the quantum communication capacity or rate at such reach. These
techniques may also enable the transmission of spatially-broadband quantum
states (quantum images) over km-scale lengths of multimode fiber, which can be
useful in quantum sensing and metrology applications. The work engages the
students with several industrial partners on development of customized few-mode
and multi-core fibers, as well as fiber in/out couplers. A field-test of the
developed methods is to be conducted over installed
fibers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.