* 2231771
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Experimental and comparative research on skeletal trauma patterns and fracture behavior
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Nicholas Herrmann, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 03/31/2025
* USD 30,091.00

The variety of forces that can cause bones to break presents challenges for
reconstructing bone fracture patterns in bioarchaeological and forensic
contexts. Researchers therefore rely on experimental research and comprehensive
examination of real-world case studies to more accurately determine the cause of
fractures. This doctoral dissertation research project examines relatively
understudied skeletal fracture patterns caused by high-velocity forces,
advancing fundamental knowledge about physical trauma patterns in the past and
present. The results of this project also can aid in identification of military
personnel from previous conflicts, distinguish between blast and other types of
trauma in humanitarian contexts, and provide important threat assessment data
for military and law enforcement personnel. The project supports K-12 science
outreach activities as well as student training and mentoring opportunities in
STEM for women and underrepresented scholars at a Hispanic-serving institution.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides an important resource for
investigating blast events and for developing a more comprehensive understanding
of skeletal trauma. Data collected for this project come from medical examiner
and coroner offices from across the country, from warfare trauma of previous
conflicts, and from experimental research. These data are analyzed with respect
to demographic characteristics, trauma information (including location, type,
and direction), and type and cause of blast. In addition, trauma details from
comparative traumatic events are collected to further examine how blast events
differ from other trauma events. Spatial and data analyses are used to assess
spatial distribution patterns of trauma and trends in trauma event types.
Through the fracture triad, which states that fracture behavior is influenced by
the internal (bone structure) and external (force, size of impacting object)
factors, these studies can enhance understanding of what determines the shape
and pattern of fractures and help to validate current forensic
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.