* 2231403
* Molecular mechanisms regulating Poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation pathway in living cells
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Alexei Tulin, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 03/31/2026
* USD 740,691.00

Developmental processes are tightly regulated, and their disruption leads to
pathologies. Chromatin factors regulate developmental processes by controlling
the chromatin state of specific loci to coordinate expression of multiple
developmental genes. Much remains to be learned about how chromatin is
programmed and how active or inactive domains are maintained during development.
Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP1) and poly(ADP-ribose) glycohydrolase (PARG)
(PAR enzymes) play a vital role during organismal development by controlling
chromatin state and transcription. In this project, researchers will use the PAR
pathway as a model to understand how cells undergo quick, localized and
reversible chromatin reprogramming to fine tune gene activity. The findings will
enhance our knowledge of developmental gene regulation and facilitate new
methodology for reprogramming genes, for example through activation of PAR
enzymes present in repressed chromatin loci. This project will reinforce the
research environment at University of North Dakota by providing local high
school and undergraduate students of different backgrounds with new
opportunities to learn fundamental and biomedical aspects of developmental
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on the study of
molecular mechanisms of PARG enzyme regulation, using Drosophila as a model. The
research will be driven by the hypothesis that regulation of PARG activity is
crucial for tissue-specific and cell cycle-specific differences in poly(ADP-
ribosyl)ation rates. The preliminary data show that PARG, which does not have a
DNA-binding motif, has two distinct roles in chromatin: 1) PARP1-independent
binding to gene body of silent genes, likely to repress their expression; 2)
binding of PARP1-occupied active loci, likely to maintain their expression in
cooperation with PARP1. This project will focus on characterizing the molecular
mechanism targeting and regulating PAR enzymes in living cells in steady-state
conditions and in mutant backgrounds. The experiments will probe 1) what
mechanisms recruit PAR enzymes to specific loci and 2) what triggers and fine-
tunes PAR-dependent processes, including underlying mechanisms. The outcomes
will advance understanding of the PAR pathway and how it might be modulated in
new ways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Genetic
Mechanisms program in the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division of the
Directorate for Biological Sciences and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.