* 2231940
* Planning: Academic Center of Excellence in STEM (ACES) through the Arts
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Samuel Darko, Florida Memorial University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Guinn
* 08/31/2023
* USD 99,969.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP) provides support to strengthen STEM undergraduate education and research at
HBCUs. Using the Fine and Performing Arts as vehicles for teaching STEM provides
opportunities to engage a broader audience of undergraduate students. Florida
Memorial University seeks to innovate curriculum design and institutional change
to increase recruitment and retention of HBCU students in STEM fields. As a step
towards the advancement of integrated Arts and STEM instruction, this planning
project brings together a collaborative interdepartmental team to execute a set
of activities to establish the foundation for full development of a Center for
STEM Academic Excellence through the Arts. The project aims to assemble a team
to unlock effective pathways for a seamless and cohesive institutional paradigm
shift in teaching STEM through the Arts. This planning project aligns with the
goals of the HBCU-UP program in building opportunities to increase the number of
HBCU undergraduate students in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
aims to co-design a plan to identify the most appropriate Arts and STEM courses
for integration and co-teaching, explore co-teaching models that pair Arts and
STEM faculty for teaching traditional STEM courses with modified pedagogy,
identify designs for teaching concepts of algebra, calculus, and chemistry in
non-math/non-chemistry courses, and plan curriculum based on gamification
principles that heighten student engagement. Student feedback will be
incorporated in the plan through formal assessments. The project is consistent
with the institutionâ€™s unified immersive experiential learning plan for
increasing the number of prepared, competitive, and employment-ready graduates
who enter the workforce as scientists, technologists, engineers, and
mathematicians or pursue STEM graduate education and research careers. The
institution aims to use the lessons learned from the planning activities to
develop an implementation proposal submission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.