* 2231160
* I-Corps: Interoperable Building Information Modeling and Construction of Robotic Systems for Building Construction Automation
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Jiansong Zhang, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a software technology that analyzes and plans construction
automation. The productivity of the construction industry has stagnated and
there is a critical skilled workforce shortage. The proposed technology seeks to
more effectively harness the benefits and facilitate the adoption of robotics
and automation in construction. This efficiency may boost the overall
productivity of the architecture, engineering, and construction (AEC) industry
and relieve some of the strain imposed by the current workforce shortage.
Potential customers of the proposed technology include, but are not limited to,
building designers, construction planners, contractors, subcontractors, and
manufacturers of the off-site constructed (pre-fabricated) components of a
building. Construction automation is a significant market sector; for example,
the drywall installation market is estimated at $25 billion annually. The
proposed technology is targeted at the construction automation market,
especially wood framing and drywall installation
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a technology that leverages a logic-based approach for the
analysis and simulation of construction tasks in downstream applications. The
proposed technology seeks to provide input for robotic simulations by analyzing
the constructability of the building design using simulated construction
operations based on selected robotic systems, which can be off-the-shelf or
redesigned/customized. Research results on logic representation and reasoning
used to extract, classify, filter, and infer the target information from
Industry Foundation Classes (IFC)-based building information models form the
basis of the technology. The proposed technology may provide a way to
automatically analyze building information modeling (BIM)-based building designs
and infer construction level information through logic representation and
reasoning. In addition, the algorithms may provide a useful tool to generate
information automatically from BIM as input for robotic system analysis of
construction automation. An end-effector system is provided to facilitate the
use of industrial robotic arms in timber framing and drywall installation
construction operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.