* 2231469
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: ADAPT: Machine Learning Thermodynamic Speed Limits for Dynamic Materials
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Jason Green, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 07/31/2024
* USD 250,000.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods (CTMC)
program in the Division of Chemistry and the Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities (OMA), Jason R. Green of the University of Massachusetts Boston and
Igor Mezic of the University of California-Santa Barbara will work to advance
the fundamental understanding of how to regulate transformations of energy in
chemically-active materials. To benefit applications across the energy,
biomedical, and healthcare industries, it is necessary to design materials that
execute functional behaviors on chosen time scales. Predicting these dynamical
processes requires new theoretical methods to simultaneously navigate their
large design space, control the timing of dynamical functions, and regulate the
dissipation of energy. This project aims to address this need by combining
machine learning and physical theory to create new methods for the design and
optimization of functional materials with tailored optical, mechanical, or
photonic properties on finely tuned time scales. Coupled to these scientific
aims, the project will collaboratively create an active learning curriculum to
teach chemists the statistical techniques of data science and contribute to the
training of a diverse AI(artificial intelligence)-aware
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Materials chemistry now aims to create
dissipative materials that function dynamically, forming patterns and generating
work on finite time scales. Recent experiments have taken the first steps to
identify chemical systems that drive transient formation of materials
structures. However, further progress requires navigating their large design
space and regulating flows of energy from the nanoscale up. Machine learning has
potential to guide experiments and accelerate this process but is not yet able
to optimize the energy efficiency and timed delivery of structure. The proposed
project will address this challenge by strategically incorporating recent
advances in statistical mechanics into predictive models from machine learning.
The specific objectives will be to (i) construct the data-driven dynamics of
active hydrogels with techniques from AI, (ii) show that thermodynamic speed
limits can be cast as optimally predictive models in machine learning, and (iii)
implement these speed limits as design principles for maximizing yield and
minimizing dissipation. The project includes dedicated activities to develop
strength in STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) at the
intersection of data science and theoretical chemistry and to broaden
participation in STEM through targeted outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.