* 2231692
* Conference: Scientists as Allies: Community-centered Approaches to Climate Resilience
* TIP,ITE
* 09/15/2022,04/30/2023
* Rajul Pandya, American Geophysical Union
* Standard Grant
* Aurali Dade
* 04/30/2023
* USD 99,992.00

This project will organize and host a set of workshops to identify the
parameters and sub-elements for a Convergence Accelerator track enhancing
community resilience using citizen-science and community-science. The core of
this effort is to engage society and scientists together to envision how best to
links discoveries to solutions that matter for real communities’ resilience.
This effort will bring scientists and non-scientists together, focusing
especially on the needs and concerns of historically neglected or marginalized
groups, to define community-science approaches that lead to a more just and
sustainable future. The proposed track is expected to identify pilot efforts
that can facilitate cultural and systemic change that can help the sciences be
more inclusive, relevant, and responsive to community needs. These insights, if
implemented in a track, could have transformative impacts on scientific
engagement with communities – dramatically changing how scientists and
scientific institutions engage and how the public views science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multimodal workshop effort plans to include online
ideation, inspirational micro-presentations, interactive virtual workshops, and
in-person synthesis. A particular focus will be on building bridges between
traditional scientific approaches and other ways of knowing more prevalent among
non-scientists. Bringing these approaches together is expected to improve
scientific literacy, build trust in science, and expand the conception of what
counts as science. This effort will especially focus on communities that have
been historically neglected or marginalized groups, ensuring that future
community-science and citizen science efforts that develop from this workshop
can also enhance equity and justice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.