* 2231097
* GOALI: ASCENT: Wafer-Scale Computational System (WaSCoS) with heterogeneous integration, power-heat transport, and optical interconnects
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Chee Wei Wong, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,318,607.00

Wafer-scale systems have the potential to condense a rack's worth of electronics
into a single wafer along with a much lower carbon footprint. This proposal
seeks to explore and demonstrate technologies needed to make this potential a
reality. The main technology of concern will be fine-pitch heterogeneous
integration, wherein a great number of very small and diverse (i.e.
heterogeneous) electronic parts (so-called chiplets or dielets) are
interconnected very closely together; the number of connections between the
chips is about 10 to 100 times more than today’s conventional systems. These two
features allow for shrinking the footprint of the system considerably.
Traditional printed circuit boards are replaced by large silicon wafers and
coarse soldered connections will be replaced by microscopic solderless welded
connections that are 10 to 100 times denser. The compact nature of such systems
means that more power needs to be delivered in a smaller space and more heat
needs to be extracted from a smaller space. The immense computing density
possible with this system requires new methods of moving data in and out of the
system using precision micro-aligned optical fibers combined with high density
electrical connectors. This technology will take off where Moore’s law for chips
leaves off and allow for sustainable scaling of computing capabilities. The
development of these technologies will also provide a valuable and practical
learning vehicle for our students that will be needed for the manufacturing
resurgence that is planned for packaging and semiconductor technology and will
also flow into existing outreach programs to attract high school students
organized by UCLA faculty to STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims
to produce a system wherein dies are assembled on Si-IF to pitches of sub-10-μm
(compared to 500-μm ball grid array (BGA) pitches on a traditional printed
circuit board). The wiring pitch on the Si-IF will be sub-μm, compared to the
tens of μm typically seen on a PCB using precision aligned thermal compression
bonding. This permits the packaging of heterogeneous dielets (processors,
memory, communication chips, etc.) with very high bandwidth, low latency, and
low energy per bit - well beyond the metrics of even the most advanced silicon
interposer packaging approaches today. Ideally, such an approach will allow near
10-TB of uniformly accessible memory with bisection bandwidths near 75x larger
than today’s systems, an aggregate bandwidth increase of about 250x and a
uniform latency reduction of about 40x. Such results could support unprecedented
workloads in computing. Aside from die assembly, challenges to this goal include
architecture and design infrastructure needs for synthesizing such a system;
power delivery and thermal dissipation solutions able to both provide the
projected  25-kW required by such a system and safely and efficiently extract a
similar amount in heat; and wavelength division multiplexing approaches capable
of delivering up to 20-100 Tb/s of data while conforming to a sufficiently small
form factor using a flexible fan-out wafer-level packaging approach titled
"FlexTrate."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.