* 2231697
* 2023-2025 Iowa Colloquium on Information, Complexity, and Logic - Summer Research Conference (ICICL-SRC)
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Adam Case, Drake University
* Standard Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 09/30/2025
* USD 16,344.00

The Iowa Colloquium on Information, Complexity, and Logic - Summer Research
Conference (ICICL-SRC) promotes collaboration among researchers whose interests
are related to the theory of computation (ToC). One of the primary goals of this
conference is to reinforce Iowa as a hub for ToC research within the national
and international scientific communities. This conference will be held during
the course of two days and will feature two invited speakers and several
contributed talks. Students of underrepresented minority groups are especially
encouraged to participate. This award will fund the conference during the 2023,
2024, and 2025 calendar years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference will benefit
both experts and students whose research areas are related to ToC and will also
increase the visibility of the scientific contributions made by Iowa-based
researchers to this field. Both undergraduate and graduate students are
encouraged to participate and will gain experience presenting their work and
interacting with other experts within ToC. As part of ICICL-SRC, there will be a
community outreach program to educate high school computer science teachers
about the history and significance of ToC and the value of teaching this topic
to students. This outreach program will be a half-day event that will take place
prior to the research conference. High school teachers are encouraged to attend
and may choose to participate in-person or online.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.