* 2231620
* IUCRC Phase I Arizona State University: Center for Intelligent, Distributed, Embedded, Applications and Systems (IDEAS)
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2028
* Sarma Vrudhula, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 02/29/2028
* USD 205,966.00

Internet of Things devices – more than 43 billion in use – make our lives
easier. Today’s devices mostly watch, collect, and transmit data to be analyzed
elsewhere. The IDEAS Center will drive current technology to enable devices to
analyze the data, learn from data, make decisions, and act on those decisions in
coordination with other devices. These smarter devices will revolutionize every
aspect of life: healthcare, infrastructure, agriculture, e-commerce,
transportation, microelectronics, manufacturing, entertainment, aerospace, and
many more. IDEAS will collaborate with companies in all these industries to
improve their business practices and provide them with employees trained in
these technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IDEAS’ work, “Intelligent, Distributed,
Embedded Applications and Systems,” addresses fundamental challenges as the
present two-layer structure of the internet (user-end devices at one end and
data centers at the other), evolves into a massive, distributed network of
computers that will provide computing as a service. Companies in critical
industries must exploit possible emerging opportunities as IoT, edge-cloud
infrastructure, 5G communications, microelectronics, and intelligent computing
converge. ASU-IDEAS will focus on domain-specific robotics, hardware-software
codesign of AI/ML accelerators at the edge, intelligent sensors at the edge, and
design of distributed edge-cloud computing systems – all targeting extreme
energy efficiency for sustainable computing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IDEAS’
technologies will help make access to data, information, and decision-making
through computers as pervasive and commonplace as roads, public transportation,
hospitals, and other public services that are part and parcel of our daily
lives. The technology will also be extremely energy efficient so that businesses
can not only radically improve their operating efficiency, but also make their
enterprises more environmentally sustainable. IDEAS will train future engineers
and scientists from all segments of society to further advance these
technologies. Collaborative mentoring will promote entrepreneurial research
among the students to foster the next generation of ground-breaking
discoveries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IDEAS will build and maintain a single Center-
wide data repository. It will be maintained for IUCRC Phase I and for any
subsequent years of center operation. It will be developed following IUCRC best
practices for securing, documenting, and reporting data. While initially it will
be cloud-based, we will integrate any physical infrastructure requirements such
as servers or other hardware as needed. Strong password protection and duo-
authentication properties will be integrated as
needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.