* 2231032
* Collaborative Research: Bioinspired High Energy Recycling Mechanism Ankle Foot Prosthesis
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2025
* Hwan Choi, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 12/31/2025
* USD 315,578.00

Persons with lower limb amputation rely on ankle foot prostheses for walking. An
ideal ankle foot prosthesis has stiffness and energy return adjustment features
that can optimally adapt its settings to allow for efficient gait in different
environments and at various speeds. However, state-of-the-art ankle foot
prostheses use conventional elastic components such as springs, carbon fiber
blades, or beams that do not provide optimal energy return during gait. This
study proposes an ankle foot prosthesis that integrates a high energy return
mechanism to provide improved assistance and evaluates its impact on walking
function for persons with lower limb amputation. The proposed research has the
potential to improve the quality of life for the 2.1 million people with lower
limb amputations in the United States. The project will also educate high
school, undergraduate, and graduate students with outreach programs. This
outreach program will focus on exploring engineering-related principles with the
human musculoskeletal system and assistive devices. This will be done by
demonstrating how motion capture systems can create muscle activation signals in
real-time, and also demonstrating the usage of an open-source musculoskeletal
simulation software to interpret these examples. The program will be presented
through a week-long summer science camp at the University of Central Florida and
Region V Mississippi Science &amp; Engineering Fair program at Mississippi State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main motivation for this project is to
develop a prosthetic device, completely distinguished from the current state-of-
art prosthetic devices to decrease the excessive effort lower limb prosthetic
device users require when walking. This project is the first attempt to employ
this unique highly efficient energy recycling mechanism into a prosthetic device
to enable optimal walking motions for persons with lower limb amputation. This
study will also address the critical need for a lightweight semi-active ankle
foot prosthesis that provides optimal stiffness and greater energy return at
different walking speeds. To do this, a machine learning-based design
optimization will be used to determine the curvatures and contours of the
elastic spring of the prosthesis. The established elastic spring model will be
evaluated with finite element analyses and bending tests. Then, participants
with lower limb amputation will walk with the developed prosthesis to identify
the efficacy of the prosthesis. Designing a prosthetic device that meets these
critical needs will not only identify the impact of stiffness on walking and
musculotendon function but also fill the clinical need for an efficient
prosthesis for use in daily living.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.