* 2231174
* EAGER: ADAPT: Hypotheses Generation in Heterogeneous Catalysis using Causal Inference and Machine Learning
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Suljo Linic, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 07/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

With support from the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry
(CHE), the Catalysis program from the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental and Transport Systems (CBET), and the Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities (OMA), Bryan R. Goldsmith, Yixin Wang, and Suljo Linic of the
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor will work to advance knowledge generation in
heterogeneous catalysis using machine learning. They will develop the methods of
interpretable machine learning and causal inference to generate hypotheses and
extract insight of catalytic materials that are expected to lead to more
predictive models of heterogeneous catalysts. This team’s research seeks to
advance machine learning methods to find descriptors of catalytic performance
(e.g., activity and selectivity) and, in this way, identify structure-property
relationships that have the potential guide catalyst discovery efforts for
important reactions pertaining to sustainability and energy applications. Their
research addresses the National Science Foundation focus area of “AI for Concept
Discovery”, and will benefit many areas beyond catalysis, such as enabling
researchers to apply state-of-the-art machine learning algorithms to generate
hypotheses and find new electrolytes or systems for renewable energy storage
applications. This team will provide interdisciplinary training at the nexus of
machine learning, statistics, and catalysis, which will help train an AI-aware
workforce. They also will use a summer research internship program as a
mechanism to broaden participation in AI-related STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Physically transparent models that can accurately
quantify chemical and physical interactions between a surface of a material and
adsorbate molecules (i.e., chemisorption) are crucial in many fields of
chemistry and materials science. It has been known for a long time, going all
the way back to the early 1900s, that chemisorption energies of adsorbates at
gas/solid and liquid/solid interfaces are predictive descriptors of catalytic
performance. There is a need to develop predictive theories of chemisorption
that give insight into the underlying physical principles that govern chemical
interaction at catalytic interfaces. Physically transparent and simple models
that can accurately relate electronic and geometric features of a surface to its
chemical properties and catalytic activity can allow us to rapidly predict or
intuit which materials have specific chemical and catalytic features required
for a particular application. This team will develop interpretable machine
learning (i.e., models that can give researchers meaningful physical insights)
and causal inference tools to generate hypotheses and extract insight that could
lead to more predictive chemisorption models of heterogeneous catalysts. The
team will focus on two state-of-the-art approaches; namely, generalized additive
models and causal representation learning, and will advance these methods to
understand adsorption of molecules on dilute alloy surfaces. A major goal is to
identify causal links between electronic-structure, geometry, and chemisorption
for dilute alloy catalysts. Although the focus here is on chemisorption and
chemical catalysis on alloys, the developed methods are expected to be
seamlessly integrated for use in other fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.