* 2231765
* Engineering gene expression noise to modulate the collective inflammatory response
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Andre Levchenko, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 02/28/2026
* USD 720,840.00

The significance of this project is to show how critical biological functions
can be modified by synthetically engineering modest changes in the distribution
of gene expression across cells, sometimes referred to as “noise”. While
synthetic genetic engineering approaches are often used to change average gene
expression, modulating noise is under-explored. In addition, this research seeks
to improve the persistence of students in pursuing more advanced careers in
science and engineering. Summer research internships in computational and
molecular biology will be provided to local community college. This research
will broadly impact the field of systems and synthetic biology by developing
synthetic approaches to precisely modulate gene expression noise.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this research is to
systematically alter gene expression noise following activation of inflammatory
signaling and demonstrate how it impacts collective cell activation of the
inflammatory response in innate immune cells. The central hypothesis to be
tested is that the chromatin environment at the promoter and RNA polymerase II
regulation are major determinants of gene expression noise. These processes can
be synthetically targeted to rationally alter cell-to-cell variability during
transcription to change cell-population responses. This hypothesis is supported
by preliminary data demonstrating that a promoter’s permissiveness for
transcription affects transcriptional noise. To achieve the objectives of this
research, CRISPR-Cas9 technology will be used to recruit epigenetic regulators
to target promoters to alter gene expression noise. A mathematical model will
also be developed to predict how specific molecular steps in transcription
modulate noise. Finally, to explore the biological significance of modulating
noise, these tools will be used to predict and test how altering transcript
distributions changes the inflammatory response in a cell
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.