* 2231429
* IUCRC Planning Grant New York University:  Center for Decarbonizing Chemical Manufacturing Using Sustainable Electrification (DC-MUSE)
* ENG,EEC
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Eray Aydil, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Crystal Leach
* 01/31/2024
* USD 20,000.00

Electrifying and decarbonizing chemical manufacturing could improve global
environmental health and support the economic security and prosperity of the US
chemical industry. This industry currently impacts 25% (~$5T) of the US GDP and
4.4 million American jobs while producing 14% of all the worldâ€™s chemicals used
in 96% of all manufactured goods (lifesaving drugs, personal care products,
agricultural fertilizers and pesticides, textiles, etc.). Global trends and
social pressures to curb climate change are a looming threat to the US chemical
industry because current US manufacturing practices are not compliant with
international CO2 emission policies and impending carbon taxing, trading,
pricing, and penalties. For example, Europe requires a reduction of greenhouse
gas emissions of 95% of 1990 levels by 2050, and China has pledged to become
carbon neutral by 2060. Such policies place 12% of all US exports (~$220B) in
jeopardy if the US chemical industry is not timely decarbonized, underpinning
the importance of the proposed IUCRC. Diversification into renewable electricity
sources is critical to ensure US leadership in climate change action in future
chemical manufacturing. The proposed Center for Decarbonizing Chemical
Manufacturing Using Sustainable Electrification (DC-MUSE) could enable this
industry transformation by providing foundational cross-industry tools for the
deployment of electrochemical and plasma processes powered either by on-site
clean energy resources (e.g., renewables or hydrogen) and/or by electricity
supply from the decarbonized power grid, and a trained workforce to implement
them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning grant supports investigation of a new
IUCRC (DC-MUSE) comprised of two sites - New York University (NYU) as the lead
site and University of Colorado at Boulder (CUBoulder) as a partner site - that
have complementary research strengths. NYU brings a unique set of capabilities
in the areas of electrocatalytic materials, electrochemical reactor design, and
reaction optimization. Specific areas of research focus for NYU include the
design of electrochemical processes and systems, such as fuel cells, batteries,
and microreactors. The sites will work collaboratively to develop technology
foundations for scalable electrified chemical manufacturing systems that can
enable new chemical transformations and help to decarbonize the chemical
industry. Through this research, new knowledge and technologies will fill
critical scientific and industrial gaps in (1)the pharmaceuticals and specialty
chemicals sectors, whose primary need is the development of stable and flexible
electrochemical reactors that can be leveraged to produce high-value chemical
compounds commonly produced on medium-to-low scales and (2) the chemical
commodities sector whose primary need is the development of scalable reactor
concepts and prototypes to produce large-scale petrochemical products (e.g.,
light olefins and their derivatives) and their integration with on-site power
systems and the electricity grid. Based on these goals, DC-MUSE has proposed an
initial portfolio of pre-competitive projects to support these industry needs:
Thrust 1. (NYU-Lead) Electrocatalytic Materials; Thrust 2. (NYU-Lead)
Electrochemical Reactor Design and Reaction Optimization; Thrust 3. (CUBoulder-
Lead) Electrochemical Systems Modeling and Grid Integration. This grant will
support customer discovery and planning activities, including an industry
workshop, that will enable further refinement of the overall DC-MUSE research
agenda as well as the specific initial set of projects for a potential Phase I
IUCRC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.