* 2231406
* CI CoE: SGX3 - A Center of Excellence to Extend Access, Expand the Community, and Exemplify Good Practices for CI Through Science Gateways
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2027
* Linda Hayden, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 08/31/2027
* USD 7,515,975.00

The SGX3 project enhances the creation, use, and ongoing sustainability of
science gateways and the science gateway community. A science gateway is a web-
based platform that allows large audiences of researchers, educators, students,
and the public to access complex, expensive resources such as supercomputers,
scientific instruments, and large data sets, as well as to collaborate together
as a community. Often these resources are difficult to access natively and
require a high degree of computer programming skill. While researchers and
educators may have significant knowledge in their scientific areas, they mostly
lack such programming skills. Science gateways enable researchers to focus on
their science questions by making computational methods and complex research
infrastructure easier to use. With science gateways, the number of people who
can participate in making scientific advances and educating the future science
and technology workforce is vastly increased and diversified. Consequently,
science gateways are a key element in increasing the nationâ€™s competitiveness in
science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Science gateways are challenged to
sustain their operations for many reasons, including inadequate software
engineering practices, reinvention of existing technologies, inability to
transition from a research project to a production service, lack of partnering
with other gateways and community members who may add high-profile content to
the gateway, staff turnover, and poor usability. Further, science gateways must
also pivot to fulfill new scientific needs that continually arise through, for
example, newly funded large computing infrastructures, advances in artificial
intelligence, needs for resources to be findable and accessible by the
community, the physical separation of data from compute resources, regulated
data requirements, and the availability of novel or specialized computing
resources. SGX3 achieves its goals of increasing science gateway use and
sustainability by offering a suite of services to help the scientific community
with these issues. SGX3 is composed of expert practitioners, each of whom has
been working in the field of science gateways for many years. The services
include i) technology design and selection to help researchers building science
gateways to do so without reinventing existing technologies; ii) user experience
design to ensure that science gateways offer the lowest possible barrier to
their users; iii) educational services to train science gateway professionals on
sustainability and good practices for software engineering; iv) workforce
development to train faculty about science gateways and thus students to become
science gateway developers; v) outreach activities and a conference series to
catalyze the science gateway community; and vi) forward looking activities to
develop roadmaps that address the next generation of upcoming science gateway
technology advances necessary to support new areas of science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.