* 2231705
* Collaborative Proposal: Testing Collision Versus Frictional Stress-Drop Models of High-Frequency Earthquake Ground Motions
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Daniel Trugman, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 05/31/2025
* USD 208,103.00

Earthquakes are ubiquitous natural hazards that impact vulnerable populations
near active fault systems across the globe. Despite longstanding and intensive
research by the scientific community, several key aspects of the earthquake
rupture process remain poorly understood. This project focuses on understanding
the physical origin of the high-frequency seismic energy that is generated
during the rupture process as earthquake faults slip past one another. These
advances in scientific understanding have broad implications for earthquake
hazard mitigation, informing how future building design codes should be
constructed in order to prevent earthquake damage to vulnerable structures. The
project also supports early career scientists and provides research
opportunities to traditionally underrepresented groups in the geosciences.
Through targeted outreach efforts, the project will engage high school students
from a diverse range of socioeconomic backgrounds, with an aim toward
experiential learning that will guide them in their future
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The physical origins for high-frequency ground
motions have traditionally been explained in terms of a frictional model that
postulates that frictional processes during fault slip determine rupture
properties like stress drop, which in turn control shaking amplitudes. However,
these classical frictional models often struggle to explain many aspects of the
high-frequency ground motions observed in nature. This discrepancy has led to
the hypothesis that elastic impacts of fault-zone structures that occur to
accommodate the geometric complexity of fault systems may play an important role
in the generation of high-frequency ground motions. The project will explicitly
test this hypothesis using three sets of seismological observations – corner
frequencies, radiation patterns, and the ratio of S-wave to P-wave radiated
energy – for which the frictional and impact models make distinctly different
predictions. This work has a number of important implications for our
understanding of the physics of earthquake rupture, including determining the
degree to which detailed measurements of fault zone structure are needed to make
accurate ground motion predictions, revising the physical interpretation of
seismological stress drop estimates, and constraining the degree of wave
scattering in the Earth’s crust. These advances, taken holistically, will
provide crucial observational constraints for future earthquake hazard
mitigation efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.