* 2231146
* Collaborative Research: Determining climate related changes in water mass structure, paleoventilation, and paleocirculation in the Southeast Indian and Southern Oceans
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Elisabeth Sikes, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 01/31/2026
* USD 556,558.00

Today fifty times more CO2 resides in the ocean than the atmosphere.
Consequently, exchange of CO2 between the ocean and atmosphere is an important
control on atmospheric concentrations. During recent ice ages, atmospheric CO2
was naturally 30% lower than pre-industrial levels. Extensive evidence indicates
this reduction was caused by greater storage of CO2 in the ocean. During the
last glacial interval, changes in ocean circulation, and the resulting changes
in ocean chemistry, are widely believed to have played an important role in
storing more CO2 in the ocean. However, there is ongoing debate about the
specific state of glacial circulation in the Southern Ocean. Previous studies
have largely concentrated in the South Atlantic and Southwestern Pacific. There
are clearly changes in the chemistry and circulation of water masses between
these two regions, but there remains little information from the critical region
of the Southern Indian Ocean. This is where much of the CO2 exchange occurs
today. Work for this project will focus on cores collected during a recent
cruise to Southeast Indian Ocean waters. These cores provide new material from
key locations and ocean depths that are needed to fill this knowledge gap. The
samples will be analyzed for isotopes of carbon, oxygen, and neodymium to
determine water mass and ventilation histories. Initial analyses recently
completed by this research group form the foundation for this work that seeks to
determine changes in deep ocean circulation and CO2 sequestration.
Collaborations with Australian and British scientists is an integral part of
this work as these cores are expected to be an important resource for scientists
around the world. This work will also support undergraduate and graduate
students, and postdoctoral researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The circulation and
ventilation of water masses at intermediate depths (~500-1400 m) in the Southern
Indian Ocean are central to CO2 partitioning between the atmosphere and ocean.
During glaciations, changes in both thermohaline circulation and wind-driven
Southern Ocean ventilation are believed to have played important roles in
sequestering atmospheric CO2. A detailed understanding of the interaction
between the physical mechanisms of thermohaline overturning circulation and
wind-driven ventilation requires precise definition of changes in water mass
boundaries and properties across the deglaciation. The use of vertical and
horizontal transects of sediment core material has been fundamental in
identifying past variations in the structure of the ocean. Published transects
of paleo-proxies in the glacial South Atlantic differ substantially from the
Southwest Pacific, suggesting that processes in the Southeast Indian Ocean had a
significant influence on glacial CO2 exchange. Consequently, this proposed work
will focus on a selected suite of six cores obtained on the CROCCA-2S cruise in
2018 (Coring to Reconstruct Ocean Circulation and Carbon-dioxide Across 2 Seas).
These 6 cores have been selected to create depth and latitudinal transects
underlying both subantarctic and subtropical waters in the Southeast Indian
Ocean from a region west and south of Australia. Our 18O stratigraphies suggest
continuous sedimentation and coherent glacial-interglacial signals between these
core sites. Efforts will concentrate on constraining surface frontal locations
that shift in response to changes in atmospheric circulation, as well as deep
water mass boundaries and properties that vary with changes in meridional
overturning circulation patterns. The ultimate scientific objective is to
determine the temporal evolution of the horizontal and vertical distribution of
proxies that will be used to reconstruct water sources (e.g. 18O and Nd
isotopes) and the ventilation history (e.g.13C) in this critical region of the
Southern Ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.