* 2231523
* IUCRC Phase I Wayne State University: Center for Electric, Connected and Autonomous Technologies for Mobility (eCAT)
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2028
* Weisong Shi, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 02/29/2028
* USD 209,993.00

Autonomous vehicles in transportation systems have the potential to
revolutionize the mobility methods that people commute in urban and suburban
environments, achieving better safety, reliability, infotainment, and security
with less emission. A vital obstacle that impedes the development of the
electric, connected, and autonomous vehicle system is the shortage of synergy
research from interdisciplinary domains, such as electric vehicle design,
intelligent autonomous systems, and V2X communication technologies. In coping
with this challenge, this project will build the Center of Electric, Connected,
and Autonomous Technologies for Mobility (eCAT). eCAT will not only serve as an
apparatus of academic researchers collaborating with industry on problems of
high national and international importance but also provides industry partners
the opportunities to access the most advanced synergistic research produced by a
diverse group of researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The establishment of eCAT is
expected to initiate and accelerate the transformation of mobility methods from
conventional vehicles to eCAVs by creating innovative electric, connected, and
autonomous technologies. This requires the evolution of a new collaboration
paradigm for the transportation industry by developing long-term partnerships
among industry, academia, and government. The eCAT Wayne State University (eCAT-
WSU) Site will serve as the lead Site for eCAT and will lead the coordination
and management of the Center. Research at the eCAT-WSU Site will focus on
electrification, real-time edge/vehicle computing systems, safety, and smart
infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building this eCAT Center will constitute
a major technological breakthrough toward realizing fully autonomous electric
vehicles in our daily life. In particular, the center will advance the science
and technologies of eCAVs and accelerate knowledge and intellectual property
transfer between academia and industry through our collaborative partnerships.
The talent and expertise of center members (including both the PIs and the
industry partners) are fused together to enhance the center’s core competence.
The innovations and techniques developed via eCAT will effectively fulfill the
urgent demands of autonomous vehicles for hardware and software support.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data obtained from this project will include experimental,
computational, text-based, and/or curricular data. All data products will be
retained for a minimum of three years after the conclusion of the award or three
years after public release (publication), whichever is later. eCAT-WSU will have
password-protected shared network drives to facilitate data sharing within the
teams, with collaborators, and with anyone in the community interested in the
NSF-funded data. A landing page for navigation to archived data will be created
at http://ecat.center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.