* 2231864
* EAGER: Accelerating Synthetic Biology Discovery through Integrated Curation
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Chris Myers, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 07/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Synthetically designed systems have applications in areas such as sustainable
agriculture, manufacturing, sensor development, defense, and medicine. However,
the progress and usefulness of synthetic biology has been impeded by the time
required for literature studies and the replication of existing but poorly
documented work. Attempts have been made to use machine learning and other
methods to extract information from publications. While these post-hoc curation
methods have had some success, the annotations produced for these publications
are extremely error prone. This project proposes to move away from post-hoc and
towards integrated curation to create truly digital publications. This project
has the potential to update the scientific publishing process and as a result
reduce the effort required for literature searches. This would increase
knowledge reuse and reduce duplication of efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project builds upon the NSF-funded Synthetic Biology Knowledge System (SBKS)
project, which endeavored to address these challenges by integrating data from
parts repositories with information extracted from literature into a unified
knowledge system. However, this form of post-hoc curation requires the
extraction of knowledge from manuscript and supplemental text files after
publication by curators separate from the original authors. To handle large
amounts of data, machines are used to scour free text and attempt to recognize
key words and work out their meaning from context. This approach tests the
limits of natural language processing techniques. Additionally, it leaves
ambiguous entities that only the original authors might disambiguate. For
example, yeast may refer to many different strains of yeast. Furthermore, the
SBKS project also extracted sequences provided as supplemental information in
publications. However, these sequences, even when they are provided, are
typically poorly annotated, incomplete, and provided in non-machine-readable
formats. Taken together, the SBKS project demonstrated that reconstruction of
this important design information through post-hoc curation is extremely noisy
and error prone. This project has two main research aims: 1) the creation of an
integrated curation framework and 2) the development of a search framework that
takes advantage of the curated data provided by the interface. Upon completion
of these aims, this project will have made it easier for authors to submit
genetic design information in accordance with the FAIR (findable, accessible,
interoperable, and reusable) principles, and thus, enabling the ability of
researchers to search for sequences and related genetic designs. Finally, to
increase the impact of these aims, we will also develop educational materials
and participate in outreach events at key workshops and
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.