* 2231333
* Community Engagement by ACM/IEEE-CS/AAAI Task Force on Computer Science Curricular Revision
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Amruth Kumar, Ramapo College of New Jersey
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 08/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by providing travel funding to
support the community engagement activities of the CS202X Steering Committee.
The Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) and the Institute of Electrical
and Electronics Engineers-Computer Society (IEEE-CS) have a long history of
sponsoring efforts to establish international curricular guidelines for
undergraduate programs in computing. This has been done on a roughly ten-year
cycle starting with the publication of Curriculum 68. The curriculum guidelines
describe a “competency framework” that addresses knowledge areas representing a
body of material for computer science degree programs that capture high-level
competencies, skills, and dispositions. The ACM/IEEE-CS curricular guidelines
have become the standard for computing curricula across the country and
globally. The guidelines are updated regularly with the aim of keeping computing
curricula modern and relevant. The ACM/IEEE-CS/AAAI Curricular Revision Task
(CS202X) is a joint task force constituted by ACM, IEEE-CS and the Association
for Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), charged with the revision of
the ACM/IEEE-CS curricular guidelines last published in 2013.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Steering Committee of the CS2020X task force consists
of eight ACM members, eight IEEE-CS members, and two AAAI members. Steering
committee members work on a volunteer basis, and each supervises an entire
knowledge area. Steering Committee members will present the revisions to the
knowledge area they supervise, at professional events that are most relevant to
their knowledge area. This proposal will provide travel support to the members
of the steering committee to engage with the communities they represent. These
community outreach efforts will improve the quality of the curricular
recommendations, and increase the rate of adoption of the revised curricular
guidelines through focused publicity and community buy-in. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.