* 2231900
* NSF-BSF: Regulating iron homeostasis by controlling the fate of intracellular ferritin
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2026
* Fadi Bou-Abdallah, SUNY College at Potsdam
* Standard Grant
* Adrienne Cheng
* 01/31/2026
* USD 950,000.00

Iron is an essential micronutrient for virtually all living organisms and a
crucial component of many biological processes. However, too much or too little
iron can be problematic and a significant contributor to human diseases. Iron
not immediately utilized by cells is stored in ferritin, a ubiquitous
24-subunit-nanostructure that plays a critical role in cellular and systemic
iron homeostasis and serves as the principal reservoir of metabolic iron within
the cell. The goals of this project are to understand the mechanisms of ferritin
trafficking and regulation within and out of the cell and how these processes
are controlled. This project will provide a strong interdisciplinary training
experience for undergraduate and graduate students and for postdoctoral fellows
at four different institutions in the US and Israel and thus extend unique
opportunities for these trainees and their faculty mentors to work together and
innovate. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Iron homeostasis is a tightly regulated process
through the tuning of cellular iron import, export, and storage. Different
proteins and iron regulators including the peptide hormone hepcidin, the iron
regulatory proteins IRP1 and IRP2, the hypoxia inducible factor (HIF), the iron
chaperone protein PCBP1, the nuclear receptor coactivator NCOA4, and the iron
storage protein ferritin play important roles in the regulation of iron
homeostasis. Despite intense research over the past decades and the
physiological significance of iron homeostasis, there is a lack of full
understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying both cellular and systemic
iron homeostasis. Using a combination of structural and molecular biology,
spectroscopy, fluorescence microscopy, quantitative proteomics, and analytical
and biophysical tools, the team will address fundamental questions in iron
metabolism and will delineate the mechanisms that determine the fate of cellular
ferritin and its trafficking route, from the protein-protein molecular level to
the cellular level. For the first time, the investigators will explore
biochemical, biophysical, structural, and cellular elucidation of previously
uncharacterized NCOA4/PCBP1/ferritin interactions. The background and
interdisciplinary nature of the proposed research will create unique
opportunities to promote STEM research and education for undergraduate and
graduate students, particularly historically underrepresented and economically
disadvantaged students. Additionally, all trainees and senior research personnel
will be exposed to different technologies, scientific communities, and research
opportunities with the goal of enhancing innovation, scientific training, and
citizenship in an increasingly global society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative US/Israel project is supported by the US National Science
Foundation and the Israeli Binational Science
Foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.