* 2231905
* RUI: The Translocation Mechanism of Nanomaterials in Plants
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Azam Noori, Merrimack College
* Continuing Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 05/31/2026
* USD 137,800.00

Nanomaterials, materials made up of structures ranging from 1-100 nanometers,
are used worldwide in various sectors including medicine, agriculture, and
industry. These materials are highly reactive in the environment and interact
with elements available in soil and water, affecting their bioavailability for
plants and microorganisms. The small size of metal-based nanomaterials results
in a high rate of their uptake by living organisms including plants. The impact
of nanomaterials on living organisms and their toxicity level depends on various
factors including their size, concentration, and type, as well as the exposed
organism. Studies on the fate of nanomaterials in the environment have reported
the potential of plants to accumulate nanomaterials. However, the exact
mechanism of nanomaterials uptake and their fate in plants is not well
understood. Nanomaterials accumulated in plants can enter the human body through
direct consumption of plants or through the food chain. Therefore, it is
important to understand how they interact with plants to further protect public
health and improve sustainable agricultural practices. This research project
investigates the fate of the commonly used metal-based nanomaterial, silver
nanoparticles, in plants and their interaction with essential plant nutrients
such as potassium, magnesium, and zinc. This will involve a series of molecular,
physiological, and analytical studies to understand the form and the site of
accumulation of silver nanoparticles in plants, in addition to their impact on
membrane transporters. The PI will mentor undergraduate and master’s students
during the study and provide educational and research opportunities for
underrepresented minorities in STEM fields including women, first-generation
college students, and people of color. To improve public awareness about
nanomaterials and their fate in plants, a three-dimensional model will be
created based on the results of this study and will be displayed in a local
science museum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanomaterials are used worldwide in
various sectors including medicine, agriculture, and industry. Silver
nanoparticles are a common form of metal-based nanomaterials. These materials
can be oxidized in the environment and be transformed into the ionic form, which
is more interactive and toxic than the particulate form. Silver nanoparticles,
in either particulate or ionic form, impact plant physiology and metabolism at
various levels including the membrane transporters and electrical potential,
which subsequently affects plant water absorption and nutrient translocation.
Silver nanoparticles are not needed for plant growth and there is not a membrane
transporter specifically designated for silver nanoparticles to enter cells.
However, since plants can translocate and accumulate these nanoparticles in
their tissues, there must be a transporter that allows these materials to pass
across the membrane. Plasma membrane aquaporin and potassium channels are among
the possible transporters for silver nanoparticles. Once these nanoparticles are
taken up by plants, their presence in inter- and intra- cellular spaces changes
the electrochemical potential of cells. To provide equilibrium, the expression
of several membrane transporters including proton ATPase, and cation and anion
channels can be impacted. This in turn affects the movement of essential
nutrients and water across the membrane, turgor pressure, and cytosolic and
apoplastic pH level. These series of events can impact the structure of xylem
cells and subsequently bioaccumulation and translocation of essential nutrients
and water in plants. Due to the role of aquaporins in the translocation of
water, maintaining turgor pressure, and potentially transporting silver
nanoparticles across the membrane, in this study tomato (Lycopersicon
esculentum) and mutant for aquaporin PIP1 will be exposed to silver
nanoparticles in order to determine the mechanism of translocation of these
nanoparticles in plants and their interaction with plant essential nutrients.
This project will include a series of analytical, molecular, and morphological
analyses to achieve these aims, including the concentration, form, and site of
silver nanoparticles accumulation in plants, the effects of their exposure on
membrane transporters, and the impact of their exposure on vascular tissues.
Results will provide information in understanding the fate of nanomaterials in
plants and to efficiently use plants for phytoremediation
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.