* 2231468
* Planning: ANT LIA Planning an Antarctic Omics Initiative (AOI) to Advance Understanding of the Evolution and Adaptive Potential of Antarctic Organisms
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Arvind Varsani, Nevada System of Higher Education, Desert Research Institute
* Standard Grant
* William Ambrose
* 07/31/2024
* USD 143,549.00

Life in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean is exceptionally susceptible to
climate change. Understanding how Antarctic organisms and assemblages acclimate
and adapt to climatic shifts and cascading impacts is essential to conservation
efforts and forecasting critical changes. The blueprints of evolutionary history
and the potential to adapt to environmental change are encoded in (meta)genomes.
This project is a response to the National Academies of Science, Engineering and
Medicine’s (NASEM) 2015 Strategic Vision for Antarctic and Southern Ocean
Research vision of an Antarctic genomics initiative that would catalyze the
science needed to decode the genomic and functional bases of adaptation in
changing environments across the spectrum of Antarctic life. The project will
convene a workshop to build consensus across a diverse community of life
scientists to turn this vision into actionable proposals, and there is
significant potential for the community building and planning activities to
galvanize an Antarctic ‘Omics Initiative (AOI) that will have considerable
impacts on society’s understanding of Antarctic life by engendering predictions
of how it may evolve, resist, acclimate, or become susceptible to changes in
climate. Societal benefits include engaging the scientific community across
multiple disciplines, enhancing the diversity of Antarctic researchers,
developing new expertise in Antarctic sciences, and fostering an informed
public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary aim of this project is to realize the
potential for making fundamental advances in understanding polar life and its
inextricable links to survival and adaptation across Antarctica’s remarkably
diverse ecosystems. The project will facilitate a results-driven workshop to
create an implementation plan for making transformative advances in
understanding Antarctic biota and assemblages and address large-scale, broad,
ecosystem-based questions. They will foster an integrative understanding of
biological adaptation to environmental change and the extreme ecosystems found
in Antarctica and the Southern Ocean by utilizing cross-ecosystem,
interdisciplinary comparative genomic approaches. The open-design workshop will
engage researchers with expertise in executing large scale, integrated genomics
programs, developing models for training, and engaging the next generation of
polar scientists. By addressing these large-scale, broad, ecosystem-based
questions, this project aims to build a sustainable, networked, international
scientific community and engender ideas to serve as the foundation for an
initiative that will accelerate knowledge gain and community building. The
project aims to build a sustainable community of scientists by recruiting a
diverse, inclusive cohort of participants. The participants will create a
summary of contributions to date of ‘omics-inspired studies that have
contributed to our understanding of Antarctic evolution and adaptation and
synthesize the outcomes of the workshop in a report that will be available to
NSF and the scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.