* 2231622
* IUCRC Phase I Clarkson University: Center for Electric, Connected and Autonomous Technologies for Mobility (eCAT)
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2028
* Chen Liu, Clarkson University
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 02/29/2028
* USD 120,000.00

The eCAT center concentrates on interdisciplinary research centered around
electric, connected and autonomous vehicles (eCAVs). The center not only serves
as an apparatus of academic researchers collaborating with industry on problems
of high national and international importance, but also provides opportunities
industry partners to access the advanced synergic research produced by a diverse
group of researchers. The eCAT Center will accelerate the transformation of
mobility methods from conventional vehicles to eCAVs and facilitate a new
collaboration paradigm for the transportation industry by developing long-term
partnerships among industry, academe, and government. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our
trans-disciplinary research team located at multiple sites will focus on
innovative research and development towards the integration of electrification
and autonomous technologies in various domains, including advanced electric
vehicles (EVs) and Internet of Things (IoT) sensors, reliable Vehicle to
Everything (V2X) communication devices, high performance edge computing
platforms, efficient algorithms for sensor data processing, and the creation of
connected autonomous driving systems. The Clarkson University Site will focus on
hardware support and computing backbone, especially employing edge computing,
edge server, cloud computing in a holistic and integrated fashion to address the
computing need for connected and autonomous driving workloads.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The eCAT Center will strive to advance the science and
technologies towards realizing eCAVs in our daily life. The center will
accelerate both knowledge and intellectual property (IP) transfer between
academia and industry through collaborative partnerships. This will allow for
the rapid transformation of the state-of-the-art mobility technologies from
research labs to industry and market. Educational efforts will be devoted to (i)
curriculum design at undergraduate and graduate levels, (ii) summer camp
development for K-12 students, (iii) broadening participation in computing and
engineering, at Clarkson University and the other eCAT Sites as well.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data obtained from this project will include experimental,
computational, text-based, and/or curricular data. All data products will be
retained for a minimum of three years after conclusion of the award or three
years after public release (publication), whichever is later. The Sites of the
Center will have password-protected shared network drives to facilitate data
sharing within the teams, with collaborators, and indeed anyone in the community
with an interest in the NSF-funded data. A landing page for navigation to
archived data will be created at http://ecat.center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.