* 2231387
* ExpandQISE:Track 1: Photonic Lattices for Robust All-Optical Quantum Devices
* MPS,OMA
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Hamidreza Ramezani, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Wu He
* 08/31/2025
* USD 800,000.00

Non-Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;Quantum information science and its related
technologies have the potential to generate breakthrough technologies for
communication, sensing, and computing. Recent discoveries by the principal
investigators of this project demonstrate that quantum interactions in
multiphoton systems offer the potential to process large amounts of information
with unprecedented speeds. However, successful demonstration of realistic
quantum photonic technologies significantly depends on the possibility of
developing platforms that are robust against dissipative environments. This
research introduces and experimentally characterizes a new paradigm of robust
quantum devices based on multiphoton interactions in photonic lattices with
engineered dissipative mechanisms. The project develops a highly trained
workforce in quantum information science that originates in the Rio Grande
Valley in South Texas. This is accomplished by numerous, interdisciplinary
education and outreach activities, including a Scholar Academy between the
University of Texas Rio Grande Valley (UTRGV), the Louisiana State University
(LSU), and the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The multiple scattering
and interference interactions that can take place in multiphoton systems offer
the potential for breakthrough technologies in Quantum Information Science and
Engineering (QISE). However, a major obstacle in developing realistic quantum
technologies is the decoherence of any quantum system when exposed to
dissipative environments. In this project, a pioneering team in QISE research at
UTRGV, LSU, and UCLA introduces and experimentally characterizes a new paradigm
of robust quantum photonic devices. This approach exploits the distinctive
features of the parity and time-reversal symmetry breaking at exceptional points
of non-Hermitian Hamiltonians in multiphoton systems, and provides exquisite
control of decoherence through novel multiphoton interactions that have not been
accounted for in conventional quantum optics. The innovative idea is to engineer
losses to increase the channel capacity of a quantum photonic device. This
research takes the dynamics of multiphoton scattering from its fundamental
physics to the development of complex quantum devices for information
processing. It demonstrates for the first time the potential of non-Hermitian
systems for the design of quantum photonic lattices in which nonclassical
multiparticle dynamics is preserved. This paradigm is realized by introducing
new theoretical and computational tools, the experimental implementation of
multiparticle state transport protocols, and their verification through quantum
state tomography in photonic lattices. The experimental milestones of this
project exploit unique experimental capabilities in the United States, such as
sources of entangled multiphoton states and novel detection schemes for the
characterization of multiparticle systems. The educational activities of this
project create an academic pipeline between UTRGV, LSU, and UCLA in terms of a
Scholar Academy for all students participating in the project. Existing
undergraduate and graduate-level outreach activities at UTRGV are transformed to
create new opportunities for the education of underrepresented minority groups
in QISE. This project serves as a nucleus to establish sustainable QISE research
and education at UTRGV to contribute to a cultural change in graduate education
in the Rio Grande Valley region in South Texas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.