* 2231740
* MsRI-Planning Workshop: Workshop to Define NSF-MSRI for Experimental and Computational Needs for Multi-technique Ambient-Pressure Photoelectron Spectroscopy Beamline
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Gregory Herman, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 07/31/2024
* USD 49,999.00

With support from the Division of Chemistry (CHE), Professors Gregory Herman,
Liney Arnadottir, and Kelsey Stoerzinger of Oregon State University; Professor
Tod Pascal of University of California-San Diego; and Dr. Ethan Crumlin of
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory are organizing a workshop to identify new
frontiers in the use of ambient pressure x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy
(APXPS) to study chemistry at surfaces and interfaces. APXPS methods would be
combined with other x-ray-based methods and computational techniques to
characterize the elemental, chemical, and electrical properties of the gas,
liquid, and solid interfaces. The envisioned National Interface Science facility
could advance our understanding of a broad array of physical and chemical
phenomena taking place at surfaces and interfaces, many of which are central to
problems facing society, including water purification, clean energy storage and
generation, and waste remediation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop will
engage thought-leaders from academic, industrial, and governmental sectors with
expertise in multiple interdisciplinary areas, including electrochemistry,
environmental and atmospheric chemistries, catalysis, biomaterials, and advanced
manufacturing, laying the foundation for future experimentation in x-ray based
interfacial methods. Participants will establish the instrumental and
computational capabilities, as well as the multi-modal configurations needed to
address an evolving set of scientific problems and enable transformational
science. The integration of computation and experiment, as well as new advances
in instrumentation, including the use of automation and artificial intelligence,
will also be assessed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.