* 2231251
* AI Institutes Leadership Summit and Development of a Virtual Organization
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Stephen Brown, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* James Donlon
* 06/30/2024
* USD 905,224.00

In this project, UC Davis and Duke University organizing a series of annual
leadership summits and constructing a virtual organization. These mutually
supporting activities support the National Artificial Intelligence (AI) Research
Institutes Program and its funding agencies by facilitating coordination,
collaboration, and community-building across academia, government, and industry.
The meetings and supporting organization aim to broaden the AI research
community into a richly connected network of institutes and collaborators. These
efforts serve the community of researchers funded by the AI Institutes program
by establishing a collection point and collaboration platform enabling sharing
of resources, programs, expertise, and best practices. The project also seeks to
enhance coordination and dissemination between AI Institutes and the broader
public by making the AI Institutes programs and personnel more accessible,
disseminating institute outcomes, and promotion of AI Institute activities of
interest to the broader community. The combined effect of leadership summits and
a public-facing virtual organization will connect many researchers across a
large and far reaching multisector national strategic AI initiative. These
activities are central to achieving and transitioning AI innovations and
creating a future AI-ready workforce beyond the confines of individual institute
efforts and contribute significantly to U.S. leadership in
AI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leadership summits are in the style of a PI meeting,
but more aptly named to include institute key personnel more broadly. These
meetings and the longer term coordination and collaboration among AI Institutes
and the broader community are to be enabled by the establishment of a
collaborative content management system for the sharing and dissemination of
content and a public-facing web portal for access and broader engagement. All AI
Institutes share the overarching goals to advance research in AI, nurture the
next generation of talent, and serve as nexus points for collaborative efforts.
The annual meetings of key personnel and the enduring virtual organization are
aimed at creating effective and lasting collaborative connections. Initial
development of the virtual organization and its supporting portal focuses on
content that informs the public and directs interested collaborators to the
right institute personnel, promotes institute activities, outcomes, and events,
and disseminates resources and opportunities arising from the institutes. Annual
leadership summits provide the ideal opportunity for continuous evaluation and
enhancement of these community building efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.