* 2231716
* I-Corps:  Ultra-compact, scalable, and steerable electrically-pumped, surface-emitting lasers
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Boubacar Kante, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of ultra-compact, scalable and steerable, electrically-pumped
surface-emitting lasers for mobility, sensing, and communication. If successful,
the proposed laser technology will be able to be scaled into many commercial
applications including LiDAR, smartphones (and other consumer electronics), 5G
and IoT technologies, medical devices, and other applications that require novel
light sources. In addition, the proposed technology also may promote the
discovery of applications of novel light sources, and thus promote the progress
of photonics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of optical cavities that confine light in unconventional ways. This
research focuses on novel lasers based on topology and bound state in continuum.
This confinement method for light was inspired by early theoretical works in
quantum mechanics. The proposed method may be used to “plug leaky light
cavities.” Instead of limiting cavity losses the usual way, by reducing the size
and number of passages through which light can escape, the cavity’s design
produces destructive interferences. When light is allowed to escape, the
multiple waves that do so through different passages end up canceling each
other. This mechanism of trapping light in the cavity is based on destructive
interference of multiple decay channels intrinsically enabled by functionalities
such as tunability, beam steering, and power scaling. The proposed technology
may enable applications in mobility, sensing, and
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.