* 2231858
* CHAI: Improving the Resiliency and Security of the Cyber-Infrastructure at SWC
* EDU,EES
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2023
* Scott Morgan, Sisseton Wahpeton Community College
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Guinn
* 07/31/2023
* USD 208,258.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to increase the
science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's indigenous students. Expanding the instructional, research, and
development capacity at these institutions expands the opportunities for
students to pursue challenging, rewarding careers in STEM fields, provides for
research studies in areas that may be locally relevant, and encourages a faculty
community to look beyond the traditional classroom for intellectual and
professional growth. This project aligns directly with that goal by
strengthening the STEM cyberinfrastructure at Sisseton Wahpeton College (SWC)
for instructional and research activities. The project aims to enhance
cyberinfrastructure and cybersecurity necessary to facilitate development of the
institution in STEM fields and for the protection of sensitive data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to upgrade specific STEM IT resources at
the institution to improve the resiliency and security of STEM operations, data
management, teaching, and research enterprises. Improvements to SWC’s network
and cybersecurity seeks to advance the college’s ability to implement future
data management plans and expand remote access for virtual synchronous
instruction. The activities for developing STEM cyberinfrastructure will
directly support current and future projects. Students will benefit from
increased access to online resources and virtual courses. STEM research
activities in language, culture, and natural resources will be aided and enabled
by advances in cyberinfrastructure at the institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.