* 2231718
* Conference: Diversifying Student Participation by Mentoring the Next Generation of Researchers in Operations Research and Management Sciences
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Ruben Proano, University of Missouri-Saint Louis
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 09/30/2025
* USD 68,228.00

This project will implement an innovative program to provide a comprehensive
student experience that includes research, career development, and mentoring.
Every year a selected group of undergraduate minority students interested in
STEM will be invited to participate in a workshop at the beginning of the
INFORMS Annual Meeting. The workshop is complemented by individualized mentoring
with leaders in the field by participating in structured sessions that will
guide students on topics including career choices, networking strategies, and
tools to make the most of their participation at the conference. This project
will play an essential role in increasing the pipeline of underrepresented
minority students in Operations Research and Management Sciences by exposing
undergraduate students to the cutting-edge research presented at the meeting.
From their attendance at the conference and mentoring sessions, students will
learn the current state of the art in the field, and form professional
connections. As stated by NSF's mission, this project grant contributes to the
prosperity and welfare of the nation and contributes toward a more productive
workforce development by investing in the next generation of researchers in
Operations Research and Management Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
has three concrete goals: Organize a comprehensive training workshop that will
provide participants with the tools to navigate the conference successfully,
support student participation at the INFORMS Annual Meeting, and promote the
adoption of student mentoring programs in the Operations Research and Management
Science community. The project will implement a mentoring program to help
students navigate several critical stages in their development as scientists.
Moreover, the project will also develop guidance to foster similar mentoring
programs in other operation research and management science
venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.