* 2231012
* ASCENT: Reconfigurable Metal-Free Microsystems with Alternative Power Sources
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Alper Bozkurt, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,499,908.00

This Addressing Systems Challenges through Engineering Teams (ASCENT) project
will enable a suite of technologies for sustainable micro- and nano-electronics
development. The emerging Internet-of-Things and efforts to realize a fully
“connected” society and infrastructure requires the mass distribution of
electronics, and to do this in a sustainable manner requires the development of
eco-friendly electronic materials, circuits, and power sources. The research
team will investigate the materials, low-power circuits, and alternative power
sources (i.e., non-battery to engineer reconfigurable-metal-free microsystems
that can operate with alternative power sources). These systems will (i) be
completely composed of carbon-based materials, (ii) be operated from a bio-
derived power source, (iii) provide sustained recording of a local environmental
metric and (iv) achieve complete biodegradation or recycling upon the end of
their operational lifetime. The combination of novel materials science, circuit
design, and biofuel cells will enable the next-generation green electronics that
can be mass produced at lower cost, at larger scales, distributed throughout our
environment, and have minimal ecological impact, while achieving comparable
performance when compared to silicon-based microsystems. The project’s
multidisciplinary team is strategically set for integrating research with a plan
for adding to the engineering curriculum, engaging with the local
microelectronics industries, and supporting the national infrastructure and
efforts for hybrid manufacturing of electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Devices
and micros and microsystems for the Internet-of-Things are supposed to be
deployed everywhere and to be accessed anytime from anywhere. These simple
prerequisites imply significant challenges for the sustainability of the
production, distribution, and operation of Internet-of-Things electronics.
Notably, the necessary quantity of a microsystem requires the mass use of non-
sustainable materials and expensive manufacturing processes. Moreover, the mass
distribution of microsystems is tantamount to large scale pollution via
electronics waster, if means for recapture, environmental integration, or
recycling are not realized. In response to these challenges, this project will
engineer sensing-communications nodes composed of metal-free, biodegradable
materials, carbon-biological-organic-polymer devices and circuits, and enzymatic
fuel cells. Citric acid-based elastomers and cellulosic nanocomposites will be
developed for biodegradable elastomeric circuit boards and packaging. Low-power
sensors and circuits will be developed from carbon, biological, organic, and
polymer-based devices. The sensing-communications node will include an array of
organic electrochemical transistors distributed across the biodegradable circuit
boards to perform continuous monitoring of humidity, temperature, pH, and
volatile organic compounds. The sensing-communications node will be powered by a
modular biochemical fuel cell, which employs custom engineered direct electron
transfer-type enzymes that convert eco-friendly fuel sources, e.g., glucose and
lactate, to suitable electrical power. This completely metal-free sensing-
communications node will be integrated, benchmarked against conventional
commercial-off-the-shelf systems, and demonstrated in different simulated food
storage and supply chain application scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.