* 2231195
* TEA Centers: Kiai Loko Center for Limu (algae) Research
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Ardis Eschenberg, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Regina Sievert
* 03/31/2028
* USD 2,000,000.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to promote the
advancement of intellectual leadership within TCUP institutions that will
support them in addressing the scientific or engineering priorities of their
tribes, communities, or broadly of the United States. Linked with this goal is
the TCU Enterprise Advancement Centers (TEA Centers) funding strand which
provides support for TCUP institutions in establishing thematically based
centers whose work applies the college’s STEM instruction and research capacity
to realize benefits for their identified community. The Kiai Loko Center for
Limu Research, conceived and managed by personnel from the University of Hawaii
- Windward Community College, directly aligns with the TEA Center concept in the
significant positive impacts it will have on the local Native Hawaiian (NH)
community and Native Hawaiian culture generally. The Center partners WCC with
non-profit STEM organizations and local knowledge keepers in two major goals: 1)
advancing cross disciplinary knowledge of aquaculture and limu (algae) ecology
in support of community needs; and 2) training the next generation of Native
Hawaiian STEM professionals knowledgeable in these realms. A slate of
comprehensive activities will be undertaken that includes the support of
student-led research addressing a community-determined agenda around limu and
the completion of STEM certificates that will prepare NH students for entry into
the STEM workforce or the pursuit of higher STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Kiai Loko Center for Limu Research focuses
on the application of traditional Native Hawaiian knowledge alongside Western
scientific methods in the study of questions important to Native Hawaiians
related to limu and the traditional Hawaiian fishpond. Aquacultural practices
employed in the maintenance of healthy fishponds and the production of limu are
important aspects of traditional Native Hawaiian lifestyles that contribute to
critical contemporary issues such as food security, biodiversity, and cultural
perpetuation. The Center’s five-year objectives partner community members,
Native Hawaiian cultural experts, and STEM professionals in engaging 120 Native
Hawaiian high school students in culturally relevant STEM courses, student
internships, and the completion of STEM certificates that prepare students for
positions as aquaculture technicians. Student-led research will address limu-
related issues of importance to NH people, advancing the knowledge base
surrounding limu ecology and production. The development of academic pathways
will support students in transitioning to and completing STEM college degrees
and entry into additional STEM professions. Research findings will be
disseminated widely at community and professional meetings and through
scientific publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.