* 2231257
* CPS: SMALL: Formal Methods for Safe, Efficient, and Transferable Learning-enabled Autonomy
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Ioannis Kantaros, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 03/31/2026
* USD 413,694.00

Deep Reinforcement Learning (RL) has emerged as prominent tool to control cyber-
physical systems (CPS) with highly non-linear, stochastic, and unknown dynamics.
Nevertheless, our current lack of understanding of when, how, and why RL works
necessitates the need for new synthesis and analysis tools for safety-critical
CPS driven by RL controllers; this is the main scope of this project. The
primary focus of this research is on mobile robot systems. Such CPS are often
driven by RL controllers due to their inherent complex - and possibly
uncertain/unknown - dynamics, unknown exogenous disturbances, or the need for
real-time decision making. Typically, RL-based control design methods are data
inefficient, they cannot be safely transferred to new mission &amp; safety
requirements or new environments, while they often lack performance guarantees.
This research aims to address these limitations resulting in a novel paradigm in
safe autonomy for CPS with RL controllers. Wide availability of the developed
autonomy methods can enable safety-critical applications for CPS with
significant societal impact on, e.g., environmental monitoring, infrastructure
inspection, autonomous driving, and healthcare. The broader impacts of this
research include its educational agenda involving K-12, undergraduate and
graduate level education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the research goal of
safe, efficient, and transferable RL, three tightly coupled research thrusts are
pursued: (i) accelerated &amp; safe reinforcement learning for temporal logic
control objectives; (ii) safe transfer learning for temporal logic control
objectives; (iii) compositional verification of temporal logic properties for
CPS with NN controllers. The technical approach in these thrusts relies on tools
drawn from formal methods, machine learning, and control theory and requires
overcoming intellectual challenges related to integration of computation,
control, and sensing. The developed autonomy methods will be validated and
demonstrated on mobile aerial and ground robots in autonomous surveillance,
delivery, and mobile manipulation tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.