* 2231883
* I-Corps: Detection of Strep Throat on a Telehealth Visit using Artificial Intelligence (AI) and Smartphone Images
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Therese Canares, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of telehealth technology that shifts the care delivery model from
in-person to virtual. Despite the wealth of recent medical artificial
intelligence (AI) literature, few forms of AI translate from a theoretical
context into clinical practice. The proposed technology enhances AI performance
with novel, deep learning techniques, evaluates the usability and
interpretability of an AI medical test in clinical practice, and measures
whether use of the AI test alters antibiotic prescribing practices. This
research may expand the knowledge around AI-based clinical decision support
software used in clinical practice. Improved access to virtual healthcare can
impact those who are most vulnerable, such as the underserved, those who lack
transportation, those who have disabilities, or tjpse who have chronic illness.
For example, if each of the 40 million strep throat visits were performed on
telehealth instead of emergency rooms or urgent cares, health insurers could
save $4-12 billion/year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on
the development of a novel, deep learning algorithm that predicts strep throat
using a smartphone video of the throat. It is currently feasible to detect strep
throat from a smartphone photo by using pattern recognition of the tonsils and
basic machine learning. However, the current technologies use high quality,
single frame images that are impractical to acquire in a moving patient, or they
use hardware not easily accessible to patients at home. A new approach is to use
smartphone video for machine learning. Furthermore, there are visual changes
unique to strep throat, such as redness or pus on the tonsils, that doctors can
only identify with 55% accuracy. This technology applies pattern recognition of
these visual changes to differentiate smartphone images of streptococcal
pharyngitis (strep throat) from viral pharyngitis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.