* 2231414
* RTG: Research Training Group in Logic and its Application
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Patrick Morandi, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2028
* USD 805,507.00

The Research Training Group in Logic and Its Applications will integrate a
cohort of undergraduate students, graduate students, a postdoctoral fellow, and
faculty through a series of yearly thematic problems. These are topic areas
where meaningful versions of problems exist at the undergraduate, graduate, and
research level. Each level of the group addresses their research problems,
supported by the other levels of the group. The aim is to make undergraduate and
graduate students part of a culture of research in mathematics and to provide
support and mentorship at many levels. The broader goals include strengthening
research in algebraic logic in the U.S. and providing a pipeline to move
students at a majority minority R2 HSI into research-level mathematics. It is
hoped that this can be a model for other
institutions&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditional educational models have not
provided an effective means of creating a pipeline of highly-qualified STEM
personnel from mathematics departments at MSIs. The Department of Mathematical
Sciences at New Mexico State University proposes a novel approach to this
problem. The Research Training Group in Logic and Its Applications will
integrate a cohort of undergraduate students, graduate students, a postdoctoral
fellow, and faculty through a series of yearly thematic problems. These are
topic areas where meaningful versions of problems exist at the undergraduate,
graduate, and research level. Each level of the group addresses their research
problems, supported by the other levels of the group. The aim is to make
undergraduate and graduate students part of a culture of research in mathematics
and to provide support and mentorship at many levels.&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the DMS Workforce program, the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR) and the Foundations
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.