* 2231026
* ASCENT: Enabling efficient high power grid applications by high voltage rating ultrawidebandgap transistors
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2026
* Xiu Yao, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Mahesh Krishnamurthy
* 09/30/2026
* USD 1,500,000.00

This project aims to both understand the science and develop engineering of an
emerging ultra-widebandgap semiconductor, gallium oxide, for the next generation
high voltage, high current power electronics. Power electronics plays an
essential role in several innovative technologies including integration of
renewables to grid, electric cars, planes, and ships to name a few. The
multidisciplinary team addresses several challenges spanning from the synthesis
of low defect density materials to applications and benchmarking of device
prototypes in high power converters. An important challenge in high power
applications is the ability to manage heat dissipation during the device
operation. This project addresses this challenge by integrating gallium oxide
with a high thermal conductivity material which can efficiently dissipate heat.
Additionally, innovative device designs and circuit topologies will be developed
for high voltage, high power and low loss operation. Success in the program
would enable power device and circuit technologies beyond the state-of-the-art
technologies. The new technology would foster innovation in power electronics
market. The fundamental study aspects of the project would increase the
understanding of the electronic properties of ultra-widebandgap semiconductors
which have applications beyond power electronics. The education and training of
the diverse students working on the project would enhance their technical skills
in semiconductor manufacturing. Domestic semiconductor manufacturing is
currently a national priority for US economic leadership and national security.
Educational outreach activities will be integrated with research tasks. The goal
of the outreach efforts is to inculcate interest of middle and high school
students to science and engineering fields, specifically targeting students from
underrepresented minorities (URM). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beta-gallium oxide
(Ga2O3) has achieved robust maturity with low background doping densities,
excellent doping control and electron mobilities reaching theoretically
predicted values. The large predicted and experimentally demonstrated electric
field strengths and good electron mobility makes it an attractive semiconductor
for high voltage (&gt; 10 kV) rating power devices. Such high voltage ratings
can be achieved in thin drift layers that can be grown with low defect densities
and high uniformity by metal organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD). The
project leverages the experimental demonstration of in-situ Mg doped current
blocking layers grown by MOCVD. The team has also demonstrated integration of
gallium oxide onto high thermal conductivity substrates. The scientific
objectives of this project are (i) developing and optimizing in-situ Mg doped
current blocking and thick Ga2O3 drift layers with low controllable doping for
high voltage and high power operation; (ii) design, fabrication, and measurement
of high power MOSFETs with high breakdown blocking capability; (iii)
heterogeneous integration of the power devices onto high thermal conductivity
substrates for thermal management and (iv) investigation of switching losses and
paralleling techniques, as well as benchmarking of practical circuits using the
developed power devices. If successful, the proposed innovative device will
enable efficient high-power switches with beyond 10 kV voltage ratings thus
drastically reducing the cost and increasing the efficiency of high-power
circuits. These technologies can accelerate the integration of renewables to the
grid and lead to truly smart grid operation. The integrated education plan aims
to educate and motivate young students, especially female students, and those
from the URM groups, to pursue STEM studies and careers by direct participation
in the proposed research activities. The research opportunity given to
undergraduate and graduate students will help build the skills of the future
semiconductor workforce for domestic manufacturing and maintain the economic
competitiveness of the US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.