* 2231583
* PurSUiT: Untangling a clade of inter-dependent apicomplexans and their bacterial endosymbionts.
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2027
* Christopher Lane, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 02/28/2027
* USD 981,911.00

Symbiosis has repeatedly given rise to evolutionary innovation across the tree
of life. Apicomplexans, including the causative agent of malaria, are the
deadliest protozoan parasites on the planet. However, one lineage of
apicomplexans (the genus Nephromyces), have evolved a symbiotic relationship
with bacterial endosymbionts that has not only enabled an escape from a
parasitic lifestyle, but caused a large radiation of species. This project aims
to both characterize the diversity of these species and understand the
interactions between host and symbiont that turned a parasite into a harmless
inhabitant. This work will benefit society by advancing understanding of the
diversity and contribution of eukaryotic microorganisms to the biosphere, with
results that will be disseminated through peer-reviewed literature and
presentations for scientific and lay audiences. The research will also be
communicated to a broader audience through a workshop for professional
scientific journalists. In addition, research opportunities for undergraduate
and graduate students will train the next generation of integrative systematic
biologists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This PurSUiT project will untangle the various
biological entities that make up the Nephromyces community, across six species
of tunicate hosts. Next-generation DNA sequencing will be used to determine the
diversity of the community, then employ single cell isolation techniques to
capture, image and describe individual Nephromyces species and their bacterial
endosymbionts. Using fluorescent in situ hybridization labels, the different
life stages of each species will be collected and photo-documented for the full
life history. At least ten Nephromyces species from each of the six tunicate
species will be formally named, as well as their bacterial endosymbionts to the
extent possible under the evolving prokaryotic Code of Nomenclature. From
existing genomic data, cutting edge techniques will be employed to determine
whether genes have been laterally transferred from endosymbiont to
host.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.