* 2231637
* Biological Clocks and Social Organization Symposium   Meeting Dates: July 3 through 8, 2022 in San Diego, CA.
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Jose Agosto-Rivera, University of Puerto Rico-Rio Piedras
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 06/30/2024
* USD 64,607.00

This symposium focuses on biological clocks and social behavior in social
insects and takes place at the 2022 International Union for the Study of Social
Insects (IUSSI), in San Diego, California. Invited presenters will bring
together information on distinct technologies and insights as related to
biological clocks and how they interact with social behavior. This symposium,
and IUSSI, presents a unique opportunity to bring researchers together to
facilitate synergy, professional development, future research collaborations,
and a better understanding of the economically important social insects.
Presenters represent a broad range of career stages and fields and there is
strong participation of individuals from groups traditionally underrepresented
in STEM fields. Undergraduate students will also attend the IUSSI providing a
valuable early career experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological clocks
organize aspects of life at different levels of biological organization.
Participants in this symposium and the focused meetings around this symposium
will help form a deeper understanding of social insects, social behavior, and
biological clocks potentially leading to new frontiers of research and
understanding. Also, of interest and focus here is seasonal timing of behavior
and how the adaptive nature of seasonal behaviors could be impacted by climate
changes. Planned publications will share the synergistic outcomes of the
symposium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.