* 2232117
* CAREER: Low-energy Nuclear Physics and Fundamental Symmetries with Neutrons and Cryogenic Technologies
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Kent Leung, Montclair State University
* Continuing Grant
* Allena K. Opper
* 03/31/2028
* USD 137,649.00

The neutron is one of the simplest building blocks of matter and also one of the
most useful in understanding and testing some of the most fundamental concepts
of physics. This award will support the PI in leadership roles in two high-
profile experiments that will use novel technologies to advance those
experiments. One experiment will determine with high sensitivity whether the
neutron has a permanent distribution of charge, which would have profound
impacts on how time and energy symmetries are related. The PI plans to optimize
an ultracold storage cell for neutrons and a new type of magnetometer for this
experiment. The PI will use a similar ultracold system in a second experiment to
test the stiffness of neutrons when exposed to external electromagnetic fields.
The award will also support the PI’s plan for recruiting students from the
awardee’s home institution and a nearby community college into the research
activities. By gaining skills in highly technical cryogenic and computational
techniques, the students will be well prepared for careers in STEM fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will support the PI’s leadership roles in two
high-profile experiments (nEDM@SNS and Compton scattering at the High Intensity
gamma-ray Source (HIgs) at the Triangle Universities Nuclear Laboratory (TUNL).
The nEDM experiment is a search for time reversal symmetry breaking (i.e. a non-
zero EDM of the neutron) and Compton scattering can be used to measure the
polarizability of the nucleon and thus test the latest models of QCD. For the
nEDM experiment, the PI will optimize the cryogenic measurement cell and develop
low-field magnetometry using nitrogen-vacancy diamond to improve the systematics
of the EDM measurement. The same cryogenic system would be used to study
thermally and dynamically polarized protons and deuterons at
HIgS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.