* 2232862
* CC* Data Storage: KoaStore: A High Performance and Flexible Research Storage Resource
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Istvan Szapudi, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 516,000.00

The University of Hawai‘i’s ‘CC* Data Storage: KoaStore - A High Performance and
Flexible Research Storage Resource supports data and computationally intensive
research, education and practice across the University of Hawai’i (UH) ten-
campus system. KoaStore provides UH faculty, researchers and students state-of-
the-art data infrastructure focused towards machine learning, artificial
intelligence and large scale simulation. KoaStore enables a larger scope and
scale of analysis by providing 4.4PB of high speed Lustre storage platform
accessible from all local, regional and national compute resources. KoaStores’s
200Gb HDR infiniband network enables KoaStore to achieve I/O speeds up to 96Gb/s
and leading to increased computational throughput for I/O heavy workflows on
local Mana and Koa high performance computing resources. KoaStore’s external
network connections increase data transfer speeds to national, commercial cloud
and academic resources via the combination of 100Gb/s data transfer node
connection and high speed parallel file system, enhancing end-to-end big data
workflows. The strategic partnership with the Open Science Data Federation
allows for KoaStore to serve the national research community as well as provide
a gateway to a compute platform UH researchers can access their data on with
national computing resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Integration of KoaStore’s
high speed file system with the regional Jestream2 NSF Cloud infrastructure
hosted at the University of Hawaii allows researchers to easily span computing
environments and modalities between the cloud and local computing resources to
support new deep learning and artificial intelligence workflows, visualizations
and applications. Further, the KoaStore platform aids hands-on training in data
science and computational science for the next generation of researchers and
data scientists through partnership with the Hawaii Data science institute and
local community for workshops and classroom access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.