* 2232869
* HCC: Small: Investigating the temporal dynamics of resilience during human-computer interaction: an EEG-fNIRS study
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Joseph Nuamah, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2025
* USD 230,090.00

Many people spend part of the day in stressful conditions, which are known in
general to be a major contributor to burnout, diminished productivity, and
numerous other health risks, whereas some people (including for example air
traffic controllers, soldiers, and first responders) work in high stress
environments seemingly with no ill effects. Why certain individuals perform
better under high stress than others with similar training remains unexplored.
Resilience, the ability to maintain performance during stressful events, is a
crucial attribute of healthy individuals who work in such environments. Because
resilience has important implications for human well-being and task performance,
there is a need to identify healthy individuals who are vulnerable to stress-
related performance decline, preferably prior to actual performance under
stress, to facilitate delivery of focused intervention that might help prevent
the development of clinical stress disorders that pose a tremendous burden both
for the individual and for society in general. This project will fundamentally
advance our understanding of stress resilience by addressing the limitations of
existing stress resilience measures and identifying potential biomarkers of
stress resilience. Project outcomes will contribute to the assessment of the
capabilities of healthy individuals who must maintain performance in the face of
escalating cognitive demands such as emergency room personnel and first
responders, prediction of their expected variation over time, and applicant
suitability of recruitment for occupations within challenging operating
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to identify
neural signatures, and to develop predictive models of task performance using
neurophysiological features of dynamic resilience. This work will utilize hybrid
EEG-fNIRS and community detection techniques to track brain organization during
human-computer interaction under stress. Combining both EEG and fNIRS has great
potential to provide deeper insight into stress resilience than either modality
could alone. The dynamic functional connectivity approach employed in this study
will likely provide insight into neural processes underlying resilience, while
the dynamic network measures identified may serve as potential biomarkers for
stress resilience. This project will not only enhance scientific knowledge on
the relationship between temporal dynamics of resilience and neural adaptations
but will also provide novel dynamic resilience biomarkers that may be used to
determine the limits of human performance in high-stakes occupational
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.