* 2232664
* Conference: Text As Data Conference 2022
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2022,06/30/2023
* David Mimno, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 06/30/2023
* USD 20,000.00

There is an increasing need for connections between natural language processing
(NLP) and social science. Recent advances in NLP have the potential to
revolutionize how we study human society, and NLP research needs input from
social science to use new developments effectively, reliably, and equitably. But
bringing together these two fields is hard due to differences in priorities,
vocabulary, and communication styles. Opportunities to meet and work across
these boundaries are rare, and even rarer for PhD students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The New Directions in Analyzing Text as Data (TADA)
meeting has developed into a leading forum that brings these communities
together, attracting top researchers from both sides. Holding a doctoral
consortium at TADA 2022 initiates a new outreach effort to broaden participation
at the meeting. By attending this doctoral consortium, computer and information
science students benefit from the practical applications and theoretical
perspectives offered by social scientists, and social science students benefit
by learning about new computational methods to support their research involving
text data. The doctoral consortium that this award supports will bring together
doctoral students working in computer and information science and those working
in various areas of social science. Participating doctoral students are paired
with faculty mentors in the complementary discipline, thus providing for each
student a novel perspective that is likely to be both challenging and
inspirational. Funding is used primarily to support students to attend and fully
participate in the meeting, where they are given an opportunity to present their
current work and receive individual mentoring. Mentors are selected from more
senior researchers who have attended previous TADA meetings. These mentorship
pairings are expected to significantly impact the direction of ongoing doctoral
research, bringing natural language processing and social science closer
together and creating a community with diverse young leaders who can fluently
communicate across disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.