* 2232609
* I-Corps: Smart Bandage for Wound Care Management
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Vivek Kamat, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a wound monitoring technology that provides early and predictive
wound condition data to accelerate treatment decisions. The technology seeks to
allow monitoring of the physiological state of injuries remotely and in real-
time. The technology may improve human well-being by providing a low-cost and
user-friendly, wearable, wound monitoring device. Not limited to wounds, the
technology-based direct-read detection platform may also help the healthcare
industry develop fast, sensitive, reproducible, and fully automated technologies
for real-time monitoring capable of detecting biomarkers in life-threatening
diseases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of a novel device for real-time and remote monitoring of biochemical wound
markers, providing personalized health care solutions for patients. The
electronic sensor will be built into a small device that is integrated in a
specialized bandage. The bandage consists of a uric acid sensor (a biomarker of
wound healing), as well as pH and humidity sensors to monitor secondary
infections and early signs of bacterial colonization. The setup incorporates a
microcontroller and module for real-time data transfer and monitoring. The
system will use machine learning models to understand the severity of the wound,
providing information related to the healing rate of that specific patient. The
data will also be used to assess the severity of the injury, best treatment
methodology, and estimated time&lt;br/&gt;of recovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.