* 2232741
* Collaborative Research: NSF Workshop on Models for Uncovering Rules and Unexpected Phenomena in Biological Systems (MODULUS)
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Jeffrey Cameron, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2023
* USD 10,000.00

This award supports participation in the NSF workshop on Models for Uncovering
Rules and Unexpected Phenomena in Biological Systems (MODULUS), held August
11-12, 2022, at the George Mason University. The NSF MODULUS program aims to
catalyze progress in developing new research tools to understand biological
systems at the molecular scale, in measuring multiscale response to changing
environments, in discovering emergent phenomena and novel biological principles,
and in integrating across mathematical, theoretical, and computational
disciplines. This in-person workshop will focus on topics showcasing the
progress and achievements of the current MODULUS funded projects, identifying
challenging biological questions that require new mathematical and computational
methods or new synergies between current approaches, exploring emerging
mathematical, theoretical, and computational approaches needed to connect
molecular and cellular scales for complex biological systems, and exploring
opportunities for collaborations among biologists, mathematicians, and computer
scientists. The conference will bring together 60 faculty experts including
senior faculty members, junior faculty members, and post-doctoral students as
well as experts from government labs, funding agencies, and industry who work in
areas that bridge mathematics, computer science, physics, and biology. This
meeting will be jointly organized by George Mason University, the Rochester
Institute of Technology, the University of California, Irvine, and the
University of Colorado, Boulder. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A major challenge in
advancing biological understanding is integrating theory with experiment in an
iterative process that leads to the discovery of emergent phenomena, novel
biological principles, and the governing equations and rules of living systems.
This manner of integration is required for a predictive understanding of
biological systems. Furthermore, addressing important biological problems at a
systems level and across spatial and temporal scales will require including and
integrating knowledge from diverse fields, including applied mathematics,
artificial intelligence, biotechnology, computer science, physics, and biology.
This in-person workshop will bring together researchers from various disciplines
to collaboratively brainstorm and develop novel ideas at the interface of
mathematics and molecular and cellular biology, emphasizing systems-scale
integration. It will identify opportunities and grand challenges, focusing on
advances that have been and can be made through NSF MODULUS projects. By
interspersing panels from experts from government labs, agencies, and industry
with academic talks, it will facilitate a highly interactive environment and
exchange of cross-cutting ideas. The workshop will broaden participation by
including researchers from groups underrepresented in STEM as well as from wide-
ranging types of institutions and help to create a diverse interdisciplinary
workforce to address challenging questions in biological systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More details about the conference can be found at: https:/
/sites.google.com/view/nsfmodulusconference2022/home&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.