* 2232198
* Conference: Genetic Recombination and Genome Rearrangments FASEB Summer Research Conference
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Neil Hunter, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 07/31/2023
* USD 14,400.00

This award is for support of the conference Genetic Recombination and Genome
Rearrangements, to be held August 14-19, 2022 in Steamboat Springs, Colorado.
This is a well-established conference that has occurred biennially since 1985.
The meeting will include 8 plenary sessions, each of which will have 6 to 8 20
minute presentations. Two thirds of the speakers are by invitation, and the
remainder will be from contributed abstracts, with an emphasis on early career
scientists. This meeting will have over 200 participants representing all career
stages, from trainees to established PI’s. The committee will make a special
effort to provide plenary speaking opportunities and short poster talks to
diverse junior scientists as well. Notably, all NSF funds will be used to
support participation by trainees and young investigators, with an emphasis on
those from under-represented groups as well as those with financial need.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will focus on the topic of recombination
and its implications for chromosome segregation, DNA repair, genome
rearrangement, and mutation. These topics will be explored from multiple
perspectives,including structural and biophysical analyses of the proteins
involved in recombination, and genomic analyses of the consequences of
recombination for genome structure. The meeting will emphasize breakthroughs
spurred by cutting-edge approaches from structural biology, molecular genetics,
and biochemistry as applied to DNA damage responses, chromatin remodeling, and
the general processes of replication and
recombination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.