* 2232959
* STTR Phase I:  Swine Automatic Lameness Sensor (SALS)
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Yuzhen Lu, MOTION GRAZER AI, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 04/30/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase 1 project is to provide an in-farm sensing system that
will notify sow (adult female swine) farmers of early signs of animal lameness,
and thereby reduce early sow mortality and enhance farm productivity. The
technology uses artificial intelligence to analyze pig locomotion in order to
spot subtle patterns indicative of lameness. Early detection of lameness will
enable farmers to take corrective actions rather than waiting for lameness to
deteriorate to sow death or culling. Early culling or sow death is a major
economic cost to farmers and a large fraction of death and culls is due to
animal lameness. Successful application of the technology being developed in
this project promises to reduce early sow mortality and culling, leading to
additional litters per sow and so provide a significant economic boost to
farmers. With patent applications for key components of the sensing system,
farmers will install sensors in hallways and obtain health measures for each sow
when she moves between rooms. The projected annual revenue is $3.0
million.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
Phase I project proposes combining an imaging sensor with artificial
intelligence to create a unique sensing system to unobtrusively and remotely
diagnose lameness in sows (adult female swine) as they traverse hallways. This
project seeks to validate two key technical contributions. First, precise 3D
animal posture and locomotion are estimated for sows moving beneath a ceiling-
mounted sensor. High accuracy is achieved through a novel annotation technique
that overcomes difficulties in inaccurate manual location of skeletal landmarks.
Second, a data-driven approach is used to train a deep neural network to learn
the most discriminating combinations of posture and gait for determining
lameness in walking sows. A self-supervised neural network sidesteps the need
for extensive manual annotation and expert annotation is only required for
lameness assessment. Together, these two contributions will enable a
transformative technical capability of a remote sensor that can automatically
diagnose early-stage lameness in sows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.