* 2232948
* RESEARCH-PGR: Controlling recombination in maize
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2027
* Changbin Chen, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 02/28/2027
* USD 3,200,000.00

Meiotic recombination is a process in which two parental chromosomes, one from
the father and the other one from the mother, exchange parts to give rise to the
next generation. This process creates new genetic variation in the progeny,
which facilitates adaptation to new environments and purges detrimental
mutations from genomes. Meiotic recombination is one of the main mechanisms of
evolution and is also an unparalleled instrument of plant and animal breeding.
However, despite their importance, recombination events are not evenly
distributed throughout the genome. Instead, they predominantly take place at
distinct sites called recombination hotspots. Compared to other groups of
eukaryotes, little is understood about the mechanisms controlling recombination
in plants, and particularly little is known about recombination in crops, which
tend to have large and complex genomes. The goal of this project is to determine
how specific sites in the genome become recombination hotspots in maize, a model
species as well as a major crop, how recombination hotspots evolve, and how they
can be modified to improve plant breeding methods. A large fraction of maize
genes are located in regions that show very limited recombination. Developing
ways to increase recombination in these regions will allow more efficient
breeding. To further spread the knowledge about meiotic recombination, the
laboratories participating in this project will jointly operate a Science
Undergraduate Minority Mentoring Internship and Training (SUMMIT) program, which
each year will sponsor three 10-week internships for minority undergraduate
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to elucidate the
meiotic recombination landscape in maize and gain the ability to modify it.
Meiotic recombination starts with a programmed formation of double-strand breaks
(DSBs) in chromosomal DNA. Repair of the DSBs leads to reciprocal exchanges of
chromosome arms called crossovers (COs). In most species, including maize, large
numbers of meiotic DSBs are generated but very few of them become COs.
Furthermore, although DSBs are ubiquitously present throughout the entire maize
genome, most COs are near chromosome ends. This project will examine how
chromatin as well as DNA sequence affect CO landscape and how the knowledge of
recombination mechanisms can be used to alter CO landscape. To understand the
role of chromatin and chromosome characteristics in shaping CO distribution, the
impact of chromatin state, and the dynamics of homologous chromosome
interactions on the progression of CO formation will be investigated. The
relationship between genome sequence and CO patterns will also be studied to
understand how genetic diversity affects CO landscapes. To test the knowledge on
recombination genomics gained from this project, and to apply it for a practical
purpose, effectiveness of artificial CO hotspots will be examined. This research
will provide a more complete picture of how recombination is controlled in
plants and facilitate development of efficient tools to harness it for plant
breeding. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by the Plant Genome
Research Program in the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems and the
Genetic Mechanisms Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.