* 2232641
* Collaborative Research: Near-Trench Community Geodetic Experiment
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* David Mencin, Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 12/31/2027
* USD 200,927.00

Collaborative Research: Near-Trench Community Geodetic
Experiment&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The largest earthquakes (and the resulting
tsunamis) occur offshore, but the instruments traditionally used to study the
ground deformation associated with these events can only be used on land.
Therefore, traditional surveying cannot quantify the offshore seismic hazards.
Studying these hazards requires tools designed to collect data offshore. One
such tool is the GNSS-Acoustic method, an offshore GPS (Global Positioning
System) method with sets of instruments set up on the seafloor in circular
groupings. These instruments are positioned relative to a remote-controlled sea
surface robot using sound pulses. This ‘Wave Glider’ can use GPS to determine
its position, allowing the seafloor instruments to be located with cm-level
accuracy. Tracking these positions over time allows researchers to learn how the
deforming seafloor builds up stress that ultimately results in earthquakes. This
project follows recommendations by a large group of scientists who are
interested in knowing how seafloor deforms in subduction zones as the seafloor
crust gradually slides beneath the continental crust. The project aims to detect
the motions of the seafloor at six stations in the offshore Cascadia region and
six in the offshore Alaska region. This will aid the scientific community in
assessing the seismic and tsunami hazards in these regions. The data will all be
open access and the project will contribute to training the next generation of
geodetic scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2011 Tohoku earthquake
demonstrated that coseismic rupture can extend to shallow depths along a
subduction megathrust, where large vertical displacements of the seafloor can
generate damaging tsunamis. This project will clarify whether a similar event
can happen in the offshore Cascadia and Alaska regions by using seafloor
geodetic observations to infer the level of elastic strain stored in the
accretionary prisms of Cascadia and Alaska subduction zones. The researchers
will deploy GNSS-Acoustic instruments from the seafloor geodesy community pool,
which consists of 51 GNSS-Acoustic transponders (enough for 17 new GNSS-Acoustic
sites) and 3 Wave Gliders, following recommendations from 165 scientists and
students who attended a seafloor geodesy community workshop on how best to make
use of the instrument pool. Twelve new GNSS-Acoustic sites will be established
during this experiment, with six along each of the Cascadia and Alaska
subduction zone trenches, which were identified by workshop attendees as high-
value science targets. The researchers will survey these new sites as well as
the seven sites already established in these regions annually throughout the
five years of the project. These positions will be used to infer interseismic
velocities from which the rate of elastic strain buildup in the accretionary
prisms can be determined, with implications for the earthquake and tsunami
hazard in Alaska and the Pacific Northwest. The data will all be open access and
the project will contribute to training the next generation of geodetic
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.