* 2232680
* Digitizing the Collection of the Orma J. Smith Natural History Museum at the College of Idaho
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* James McIver, The College of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 07/31/2026
* USD 155,890.00

The goals of this project are to improve curation of and provide online
accessibility to the natural history collection at the Orma J Smith Museum
(OJSM), The College of Idaho, for the purposes of science, education, and
conservation. The OJSM collection contains specimens of freshwater fish from
Idaho and Montana, aquatic insects of Idaho and Washington, spiders and insects
from the intermountain west and Baja California, and fossil plant specimens from
the Succor Creek formation of southeastern Oregon. The collection is valuable to
society as an indication of regional biodiversity and how it has changed through
time, relative especially to climate change and human land use activities. Many
specimens were collected more than 150 years ago, and this material can be used
to examine populations from an era with much lower human populations and much
different land use activities. Comparing material from the present with the past
can lead to important insights on how humans influence key species, and can lead
to more informed conservation decisions. The collection is also valuable as a
resource for K-12 students, by offering opportunity to engage in real-world
science, improving science awareness, fostering science identity in under-
represented populations, and improving thinking skills. The digitization process
will secure digital data about the collection and enhance the visibility and
attractiveness of the OJSM to visitors, including teachers, students, and the
public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The OJSM collection has over three million
specimens collected over the past 150 years, primarily from localities in the
U.S. intermountain west and Baja California. Like other arid and semi-arid
systems worldwide, these two regions have experienced substantial change in the
past century due to climate change, rapid development, mining, logging, grazing,
and invasion of non-native species. Documenting the biodiversity of these
regions and assessing changes through time are important for research and for
conservation planning. The current project will digitize material from six key
collections of the OJS Museum: 1) freshwater fish from Idaho and Montana; 2)
aquatic macro-invertebrates from Idaho and Washington state; 3) insects and
spiders from the U.S. Great Basin; 4) beetles from Baja California; and 6)
paleo-botanical specimens from the Succor Creek formation in Oregon. All digital
data will maintained in the NSF-supported collection management system Specify
7, and published through on-line resources including iDigBio, SCAN-bugs,
NatureServe, and the North American Aquatic Macroinvertebrate Digital Reference
Collection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.