* 2232056
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Human Adaptation to a Variable Environment
* SBE,BCS
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2024
* Scott Fitzpatrick, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2024
* USD 14,303.00

The goal of this doctoral dissertation project is to understand human-
environmental interactions more fully in the Northern Great Basin since the late
Pleistocene era. Paleoethnobotany is a rapidly developing field within
archaeology that examines the relationship between people and plants in the
past, and this project uses paleoethnobotanical remains from ancient basketry to
explore the relationship between plants and societies. Archaeological excavation
of caves and rock shelters in the Great Basin have collectively produced one of
the largest textile artifact collections in the world. The research team will
identify plant materials used in textiles, spanning the late Pleistocene through
late Holocene eras to examine how people utilized plant communities over time
and to study how plant selection relates to known environmental conditions and
changing settlement-subsistence models for this region. In this region
traditional ecological knowledge (TEK) about native plants used in basketry is
constantly evolving. This research provides important long-term data on
culturally significant indigenous plants and supports continuity of traditional
weaving evident in nineteenth century and contemporary Klamath, Modoc, and
Northern Paiute basketry. To achieve this, the project funds tribal member
collaboration for exhibit content for the University of Oregon Museum of Natural
and Cultural History (MNCH), undergraduate student laboratory assistance and
training in fiber identification, radiocarbon dating, and archaeobotanical
analysis, with project results made available on-line through the MNCH
archaeological textile database. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The archaeological site
of Paisley Caves in eastern Oregon has been occupied at various periods in time
over a span of more than 14,000 years and is one of the oldest sites in North
America. Among some of the most significant finds is a textile artifact
assemblage numbering 500 specimens that includes fine cordage and thread,
netting, rope, basketry, matting, and sandals. For millennia, small groups
living in the Northern Great Basin relied on lakeshore marsh ecosystems,
seasonal springs, and dry upland steppe shrub zones for subsistence and fiber
materials during different seasons. Archaeological and paleoenvironmental data
suggest transitions between cave and rock shelters to open-air locales close to
permanent lakes and ponds relate to wetter or more arid climatic shifts, in
which pluvial lakeshore levels either rose or fell at different times throughout
the Holocene. Researchers use identified plant taxa to augment what is known
about changing subsistence regimes and settlement organization which have been
posited as responses to these climatic changes. Plant selection for textile
construction also contributes to what is known about seasonal use of wetland and
upland habitats. Fiber identification procedures developed for this project,
including polarized light and scanning electron microscopy with elemental
analysis, advance archaeobotanical methods more
generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.