* 2232215
* Collaborative Research: GP-GO: Climate Leaders Academy: a professional development opportunity in the geosciences
* GEO,RISE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Leah Dundon, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,353,133.00

Climate change is the most pressing societal challenge of our time, and students
within higher education need new training and skills to prepare them to lead on
climate solutions—both in their professional careers and as global citizens. The
geosciences are central to climate leadership, but for the geosciences to
contribute meaningfully to policy solutions, understanding of and engagement
across a range of disciplines is increasingly necessary. To meet this need, the
Climate Leaders Academy (CLA) will formalize interdisciplinary climate-training
and professional development through a cohort model that brings together
undergraduates and graduate students from a diverse set of institutions and
backgrounds. The PIs will directly engage participants in national and
international climate change frameworks, and provide financial support,
formalized mentoring, an established network of ongoing support, and
transferable undergraduate and graduate-level course credits.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate change is one of the most difficult societal
challenges of our time, and expertise and leadership from nearly all fields of
study are needed. Graduates from our nation’s colleges and universities need new
training and skills to prepare them to lead on climate change issues, which
includes an understanding of the national and international frameworks of which
the U.S. is a part. In addition, certain populations in the U.S. are still
disproportionately under-represented in U.S. climate studies, meaning there is a
substantial un-tapped talent-pool of potential leaders. This program establishes
a Climate Leaders Academy to (i) foster optimism regarding the nation’s and the
world’s capacity to address climate change; (ii) train students in the
interactions across many fields that are necessary to develop climate change
solutions, including law, policy, science, and engineering; (iii) advance
societal understanding of climate change, its impacts, and potential solutions;
and (iv) using the international climate change negotiations as a learning
platform, train U.S. students to engage across cultures, countries, and
different fields of study. The project will prepare participants to compete in a
global work force that is increasingly demanding and providing better
opportunities for climate-educated graduates. The project is uniquely aligned
with Program, Agency and Administration priorities. Most importantly,
providing real-time training opportunities for participants in international
negotiation techniques which the Program sees as an innovative skillset that
will allow grad students to be prepared for the necessities of international
collaboration around the critical subject of climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.