* 2232473
* Collaborative Research: SII-NRDZ: ASPIRE: Advanced SPectrum Initiative for Research and Experimentation
* MPS,AST
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2024
* Alefiya Hussain, University of Southern California
* Cooperative Agreement
* John Chapin
* 11/30/2024
* USD 400,000.00

Many activities of modern society and government depend on use of the
electromagnetic (radio-frequency) spectrum. Future growth in these activities
requires increased use of dynamic spectrum sharing – ways to enable diverse
spectrum users to safely operate closer together in space or frequency or to
trade spectrum access more rapidly than is possible with traditional spectrum
management approaches. The National Science Foundation National Radio Dynamic
Zones (SII-NRDZ) program seeks to advance the use of dynamic spectrum sharing
through conducting extended field trials of new sharing approaches. The SII-NRDZ
program intends to make a future award called the Engineering and Execution Lead
(SII-NRDZ-EEL). The SII-NRDZ-EEL will provide the professional engineering and
management required for success of SII-NRDZ program field trials. In this
project, the University of Southern California Information Sciences Institute,
the University of Utah, and the Idaho National Laboratory collaborate on the
initial planning, technical study, regulatory study, and program and outreach
interactions needed to prepare a high-quality proposal to serve as the SII-NRDZ-
EEL. The project includes a 12-week summer internship program in each of its two
years, with students spending 4 weeks in the laboratory of each of the team
members.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;If selected as the SII-NRDZ-EEL, the USCISI-led
team envisions drawing on its experience building and operating wired and
wireless test facilities to lay the foundation for future wider use of radio
dynamic zone spectrum sharing. The team focuses on a collaborative and
scientifically based process for spectrum field trials; systematic and objective
assessment of proposed spectrum sharing technologies and methodologies; and
providing technical and management support that enables coordinated access to
multiple radio dynamic zone sites. The team envisions a comprehensive toolkit
supporting all stages of the lifecycle of a field trial, including requirements
specification, feasibility analysis, spectrum sharing planning, experiment
modeling, test design, test execution and analysis. The team will help build a
strong dynamic spectrum sharing community by establishing a web based “ASPIRE
hub.” The ASPIRE hub will be an entry point for researchers, a site for sharing
tools and data that handles compliance issues, and a platform for community
engagement. This project initiates progress towards the planned SII-NRDZ-EEL
activities by designing a comprehensive process for NRDZ program field trials;
curating an initial set of tools for the NRDZ toolkit; leveraging existing
research infrastructure and hub-hosting software tools to bootstrap the ASPIRE
hub; and fostering active collaboration with other NRDZ program participants and
the broader community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.