* 2232895
* CC* Regional Computing: Launch: Advancing Cyberinfrastructure at Minority Serving Institutions
* CSE,OAC
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Yossef Elabd, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

Launch is a regional computational resource that supports researchers
incorporating computational and data-enabled approaches in their scientific
workflows at eleven under-resourced institutions in The Texas A&amp;M University
System. Employing established best-practices in cyberinfrastructure
facilitation, Launch appeals to researchers engaged in multi-disciplinary
projects at these under-resourced, albeit research-driven minority serving
institutions. Launch fosters a holistic cyberinfrastructure environment by
developing pathways that connect researchers at these sites to computational
resources and the necessary expertise to manage these resources by offering (i)
easy access to computing resources, (ii) a seamless pathway to large-scale
national computing resources, (iii) a managed interdisciplinary software
environment, (iv) available expertise in domain-specific computational avenues
of research, (v) a training program that teaches researchers how to effectively
use computing approaches, and (vi) tools that alleviate the complexity of using
computing resources. Launch develops regional expertise in cyberinfrastructure
management by employing a collaborative model that bootstraps existing
computational expertise with burgeoning campus-level efforts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Launch accelerates research workflows utilizing numerical
simulation, interactive computing, and artificial intelligence/machine learning
frameworks, while simultaneously bolstering nascent Data Science programs across
these institutions. Launch plans to host the latest generation of Intel
processors, multi-precision NVIDIA multi-precision GPUs, and large memory nodes.
These technologies are coupled with state-of-the-art open-source software, to
offer a rich computing environment that offers interactive computing
environments, web-accessible portals, and intuitive containerization and
workflow management support. Leveraging Partnerships with several large National
Science Foundation-funded cyberinfrastructure programs, Launch ensures that
researchers will have multiple avenues to “launch” onto larger, more complex
regional and national platforms. Institutions included in this project include
Texas A&amp;M University in College Station, Prairie View A&amp;M University,
Texas A&amp;M Corpus Christi, West Texas A&amp;M University, Texas A&amp;M
International, Texas A&amp;M San Antonio, Texas A&amp;M Kingsville, Texas
A&amp;M Texarkana, Tarleton State University, Texas A&amp;M University Commerce,
and Texas A&amp;M Central Texas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.