* 2232252
* I-Corps:  Software tools to model the progressive failure of polymer matrix composite structures
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2023
* Moderage Waas, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of software tools to model the progressive failure of composite
structures used in aerospace applications. Failure modeling of composites is a
highly complex multiscale problem, and the result of the analysis implies a
trade between fidelity and speed depending on the scale at which damage is
simulated and the size of the structure. The proposed technology provides a
general framework to analyze combinations of layups and loading scenarios using
a common experimental material characterization plan. The technology
incorporates the effect of manufacturing on the performance of the structure. By
advancing simulation tools, composite structures may be designed with more
confidence and safety as well as in a much shorter time frame compared to
current procedures. The availability of reliable and fast predictive tools may
enable and accelerate the use of lightweight composite materials, which in turn
may lead to better fuel efficiency of commercial and military
aircraft.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of a finite element algorithm that models explicitly the dominating damage modes
observable at the subcomponent level of a composite structure such as
delamination, macroscopic matrix cracking, and splitting. This analysis level is
the most time consuming and expensive in the certification process of a
structure. The proposed technology may be used to accelerate the certification
process without compromising accuracy by identifying a set of fundamental model
features, characterizable from basic coupon tests, that must be incorporated to
predict the progressive failure of composite structures in a wide range of
layups and loading scenarios. In tests of the proposed technology, errors within
5% of experimental data in blind predictions are typically achieved in
computational times of one order of magnitude faster than current methods. In
addition, the analysis also considers the effects of the curing process, which
affects the residual stresses and deformations in the composite. These factors
influence mechanical properties such as stiffness and strength. The proposed
technology integrates curing and failure modeling within the same finite element
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.