* 2232737
* Future Directions for Southern Ocean and Antarctic Nearshore and Coastal Research
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2022,01/31/2024
* Deborah Glickson, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* David Porter
* 01/31/2024
* USD 762,459.00

The National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine will conduct a
consensus study to provide guidance on future science research and technology
directions needed to ensure continued U.S. science abilities and leadership in
the Southern Ocean and Antarctic nearshore and coastal zone. The study will
identify the highest-priority science directions for Southern Ocean and
Antarctic nearshore and coastal research, determine research vessel capabilities
needed to support these science directions, assess technologies and tools that
can extend ship capabilities and/or directly support new science directions, and
note gaps between the science directions, ship capabilities, and tools. The
study will gather input from a broad and diverse group of oceanographers and
coastal scientists, which will enhance community engagement and optimize the
future use of Antarctic research vessels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National
Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine will conduct a consensus study
that identifies high-priority science research directions for Southern Ocean and
Antarctic nearshore and coastal research, as well as the tools, technologies,
and ship capabilities needed to ensure continued U.S. science abilities and
leadership in the region. An ad hoc committee of carefully selected volunteers
will provide disciplinary expertise and will gather information from a base of
published literature, public meetings, and a workshop with invited scientific
community members. This workshop is envisioned as a main information-gathering
aspect to identify science directions and the ship and technological
capabilities needed to support them. The committee members will deliberate on
information provided throughout the information-gathering process and will
produce a written report, which undergoes a rigorous peer review. The report is
publicly released after approval from the National Academies and is available as
a free pdf. This consensus study approach has previously been successfully used
by federal agencies to obtain strategic guidance on research priorities and
future needs, thereby enabling limited resources to be used most
effectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.