* 2232612
* EAGER: FINDFabs: Searching The Universe of Manufactured Parts Through Proxy Geometric Representations
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Horea Ilies, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 07/31/2024
* USD 299,761.00

The eventual realization of a networked, national-scale infrastructure for the
identification of manufacturing capabilities by customers and provision of
manufacturing services to producers depends on the availability of cost-
efficient tools for categorizing manufacturing jobs. Such tools have potential
to find manufacturers who are already producing similar parts to those that are
needed and to identify production data from individual manufacturers that can be
aggregated to train AI-based process controllers that are more powerful than
individual manufacturers can develop on their own. One potential approach to
characterizing jobs is to match the desired part to the 3D geometric models of
parts that have already been manufactured, which could, in turn, point to the
specific "owners" of the respective geometric models. 3D models are available
for the vast majority of mechanical parts, but the models are defined in a wide
variety of incompatible formats. This EArly-Concept Grant for Exploratory
Research (EAGER) project will research a categorization method that is suitable
for search and compatible with all existing geometric modeling
formats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to explore a
universal theoretical and computational framework that can make the universe of
parts that have already been successfully produced searchable and, by extension,
categorizable. It relies on the fact that all valid geometric models must be
based on a valid notion of distance defined in appropriate metric spaces and
must therefore fully support distance computations and queries. The framework is
based on a novel and unique Maximal Disjoint Ball Decomposition (MDBD) of a 3D
shape that will serve as a proxy geometric representation. Importantly, MDBD:
(1) provides a universal and hierarchical description of geometry whose level of
detail can be adjusted on demand, (2) induces a hierarchical parametrization of
the geometry that is unique, rotation-invariant, and representation agnostic,
(3) fully supports encryptable shape signatures that can be computed for any
valid geometric representation, and (4) interfaces with any valid geometric
representation without requiring representation conversions. By providing a
relatively small number of intrinsic parameters of a shape, the same
parametrization can reframe the topology and shape optimization problem in a way
that is suitable for modern data-driven machine learning approaches to
predicting optimal design solutions. The capabilities of the method will be
evaluated on databases of heterogeneous geometric models using a commercial
NURBS-based boundary representation, meshes and point
clouds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.