* 2232769
* SBIR Phase I:  Engineering the Plant Microbiome to Reduce Disease in Crops
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Andrea Wallace, ROBIGO, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 04/30/2024
* USD 274,999.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is the development of a platform technology that enables a novel mode of
action for protecting crops from disease. Facing increasing disease pressure and
a changing climate, growers around the world spend $80 billion on nearly six
billion pounds of pesticides each year, and yet still experience yield losses of
20-40% due to pests and disease. Broad-acting, chemical pesticides - currently
the industry standard - are losing both efficacy and public support as
resistance to pesticides spreads and the negative environmental impacts become
clear. There is a pressing need to fundamentally redesign crop treatments to
create a more sustainable and efficient food system. Leveraging synthetic
biology, CRISPR, and data science, this SBIR Phase I project addresses this need
by developing a new class of microbial biopesticides that precisely target and
kill crop pathogens without adversely affecting beneficial microbes, insect
pollinators, or humans. With an initial focus on treating tomatoes (320,000
acres in the US, $32 million addressable market), this project sets the stage
for providing solutions for major global markets like citrus ($600 million),
olives ($1.8 billion), and rice ($2.7 billion). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project provides targeted solutions for bacterial diseases in agriculture.
Historically overlooked and underserved by the agricultural community, bacterial
diseases have become increasingly devastating over the past 10 years due to a
lack of effective treatment options, growing antimicrobial resistance, and
climate change driving higher disease pressures. Building from a prototype
system, this SBIR Phase I project aims to engineer improvements that will
increase the efficacy and tractability of the microbial biopesticide in outdoor
agricultural environments. This includes applying molecular biology techniques
to increase microbial colonization within complex microflora to increase product
efficacy, extend microbial persistence in plants to provide longer protection,
and reduce the rate of resistance to extend product lifetimes. Furthermore, this
project will develop a bioinformatics algorithm to better program the microbes
to specifically target only the disease-causing pathogens. Finally, the team
will demonstrate product efficacy in lab-grown tomato plants with the goal of
surpassing the industry standard of 70% efficacy and will compare performance to
two industry standard chemical pesticides. Successful completion of this project
will result in a novel method to introduce protective traits to crops without
genetically modifying the plant itself.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.