* 2232453
* The Chemistry and Mathematics Introductory Large-Enrollment Courses Forum
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Oluwatobi Odeleye, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 08/31/2023
* USD 99,273.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by equipping chemistry and
mathematics large-enrollment course (with 100+ students) instructors with the
tools needed to carry out quality research involving the scholarship of teaching
and learning. A series of three workshops will help instructors develop research
questions and use appropriate tools to assess the effectiveness of engagement
strategies employed in the classroom. Results could improve student retention in
chemistry and mathematics large-enrollment courses. By bringing together
mathematics and chemistry faculty, the project intends to stimulate cross-
disciplinary ideas and future collaborations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
aims to bring together mathematics and chemistry educators who teach large-
enrollment courses to increase these individuals' capacity to produce sound,
high-quality research. Groups of two researchers from eight institutions (16
total participants) will be recruited to attend a pre-conference workshop, a
main conference, and a post-conference workshop. Each gathering will be centered
on preparing a research plan, including research questions, methodology, and
data analysis. This project will provide opportunities for participants to
discuss obstacles to engagement faced in large-enrollment courses across
different institutions. Participants will also receive resources and connections
to continue their professional development and challenge their teaching and
creative activity and research ideas. This project hopes to enhance
collaborations with faculty from not only different disciplines at different
institutions but also from various backgrounds. In addition to promoting
diversity in different fields and backgrounds, this project will also help
increase the participantsâ€™ capacity to produce high-quality research, which
will, in turn, help increase participation and retention of students in STEM
fields, especially in early-college mathematics and chemistry large-enrollment
courses. Participants' research projects, as well as conference evaluation, will
generate knowledge about engagement in STEM large-enrollment courses and will
inform future conferences and workshops. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.