* 2232663
* I-Corps:  Conductive hydrogel that can be applied to accelerate wound healing for diabetic patients with foot ulcers
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Stephanie Seidlits, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a wound care treatment for diabetic patients with foot ulcers.
There is a current need for treatments that will reduce the number of people in
the U.S. suffering from chronic non-healing wounds, such as higher stage
diabetic foot ulcers and pressure ulcers, as these are a significant economic
burden on the healthcare system. The proposed technology is expected to
accelerate wound healing by 25% and reduce infection rates by 10%. In addition,
the proposed treatment may improve the well-being of the diabetic community by
reducing the number of patients that suffer complications such as lower limb
amputation and death due to foot ulcers. The proposed technology also may
improve the quality of life for people living with limited mobility such as
spinal cord injury patients and those in elder care facilities by reducing the
healing time of pressure ulcers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is
based on the development of a conductive hydrogel treatment to improve wound
healing. Specifically, the proposed technology is a conductive Hyaluronic Acid
(HA)-based hydrogel that may be topically applied directly to wounds to initiate
and accelerate the healing process while reducing the incidence of infection. To
date, the research has focused on material development where the viscoelastic,
swelling, degradation and conductive properties of the hydrogel were
characterized. In addition, in vitro testing to assess the viability and
proliferation of stem cells encapsulated within the hydrogel was conducted. A
topical conductive hydrogel treatment may advance knowledge of the effectiveness
of conductive biomaterials for treatment of dermal wounds. Further, adjunctive
application of the proposed treatment with transdermal electrical stimulation
may potentially guide the direction of future wound care
treatments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.