* 2232578
* Building Infrastructure for Development of a Diverse Workforce: Advancing Underrepresented Minority Internships in STEM Program
* MPS,CHE
* 10/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Marcus Huggans, The National GEM Consortium
* Standard Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 01/31/2024
* USD 255,224.00

With support of the Divisions of Chemistry, Physics, and Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems, the GEM Consortium aims to
improve diversity in the STEM workforce through a two-pronged approach. First,
GEM encourages selected underrepresented minority (URM) students to pursue
graduate degrees in STEM fields by ensuring that the students receive a living
stipend and tuition while enrolled in a GEM member-university program. Next, GEM
provides access to paid internships for the selected students, providing the
students with work experience and networking opportunities. GEM also provides
mentoring of students via mentors at the internship institutions. Ultimately
this project works to illustrate and provide pathways for advanced STEM
education and careers for URM students. Promoting progress in science and
building a globally competitive workforce, a core part of the National Science
Foundation's mission, requires increasing diversity in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project provides
training pathways for both Ph.D. and Master's level students in the STEM fields
of Chemistry, Physics, and Chemical and Environmental Engineering. GEM
consortium-selected URM students apply to the university-member programs, and
upon acceptance, GEM provides a stipend towards living expenses and tuition. The
universities cover the remainder of the tuition, and in the case of Ph.D. level
students, a living stipend (through teaching or research assistantships or other
methods) for the duration of the degree. This encourages member universities to
accept URM students, while assuring students of the economic feasibility of an
advanced degree. A total of 12 students will be supported through this effort.
These students also participate in a paid internship that GEM helps to arrange,
which enables students to build a career network and provides them with work
experience. These students and others supported through GEM will be part of a
long term evaluation on the effectiveness of this
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.