* 2232563
* Planning Proposal: Saint Augustine's University STEM Ecosystem Analysis
* EDU,EES
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Lawrence Flowers, Saint Augustine's College
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 04/30/2025
* USD 147,216.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP) provides support to strengthen STEM undergraduate education and research at
HBCUs. Using a mixed methods research design, this project plans to conduct an
institutional analysis of factors that affect the mentoring, recruitment,
persistence, interdisciplinary research and develop practical approaches to
enhancing the success of undergraduate STEM majors. Saint Augustineâ€™s University
seeks to collect appropriate data, engage constituents and conduct collaborative
activities with institutional stakeholders that will inform and guide the
development of research activities and curriculum improvements. This planning
project aligns with the goals of the HBCU-UP program in its efforts to bolster
institutional capacity building for the purpose of enhancing STEM Undergraduate
education and research endeavors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Poor retention and
student preparation are important underlying elements contributing to reduced
minority participation in the STEM pathway. The objective of this planning
project is to conduct an ecosystem analysis to understand and develop practical
approaches to impact mentoring, recruitment, infrastructure, retention, capacity
building, undergraduate research, and curricular modifications aligned with the
university's strategic goals and mission. Data from pedagogical efficacy studies
and an institutional landscape analysis will establish metrics to enhance STEM
departments. Expansion of external partnerships with STEM companies, government
laboratories, and research-intensive institutions will broaden participation in
STEM education and careers. The extraction and synthesis of effective strategies
will produce transformative solutions to improve underrepresented STEM students'
academic and professional experiences. Codifying empirical data from the
planning project will also stimulate future grant proposal development to
enhance the success and sustainability of cost-effective mitigation activities
at Saint Augustine's University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.