* 2232585
* Conference: Building an HSI Grantee Community of Inclusive Excellence
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Agnes Flores, Saint Edward's University
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 08/31/2023
* USD 220,453.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program) the Principal Investigators’(PI) conference will
bring together current and potential Principal Investigator teams to engage in
activities and conversations to promote effective strategies to improve
undergraduate STEM education at Hispanic Serving Institutions and to build and
maintain a PI community. Presently there are over 100 institutions throughout
the United States involved in National Science Foundation HSI grant awards and
this conference will provide the opportunity for PI teams to meet and to share
grants’ goals, objectives, best practices, successes as well as challenges. The
conference will provide a venue within an established welcoming format for 2.5
days of engagement in Texas in 2023. There will be 3-5 plenary sessions from
experts in the field to increase knowledge on successful strategies. Formal and
informal networking sessions will be scheduled to increase cooperation and to
build a community of researchers. Possible formats for these will involve group
sessions and poster presentations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In collaboration with
the TX HSI Consortium, St. Edwards University proposes to support a Principal
Investigator (PIs) meeting to provide current NSF PIs the opportunity to
convene, learn, share and enhance their work. The conference will benefit from
the established momentum of the Texas Hispanic Serving Institutions Consortium
conference format to create a community of PIs motivated to make a positive
impact on Hispanic STEM education. The evaluation plan will include pre and
post-surveys to gauge the effectiveness of each of the sessions. A major output
of the conference will be the final report which will be shared with all
participants and with agency program directors in order to improve future
meetings. This report will include successes as well as challenges gathered from
surveys and sessions. A major outcome will be the continued collaboration of
Texas HSIs with HSIs across the United States. Over 100 NSF PI teams from public
and private, two- and four-year institutions from the US as well as other
potential grantees will attend the conference. The conference will expand
knowledge on minorities and STEM in the U.S. through the lens of Texas the
second most populous state and has the second-highest enrollments of Hispanic
students in post-secondary education in the country. Together both groups of
STEM educators have the potential to improve STEM pedagogy success with NSF-
funded efforts and new knowledge for millions of Hispanic students. The HSI
Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs.
Projects supported by the HSI program will also generate new knowledge on how to
increase the recruitment, retention, and graduation rates of students pursuing
associate’s or baccalaureate degrees in STEM at HSIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.