* 2232731
* RAPID: Immediate Social Media Data Collection in Key Election Contexts
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Brigitte Seim, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 200,000.00

Elections pose a critical challenge to the security and trustworthiness of
cyberspace. Coordinated information operations and online organization of
political violence during elections threaten the integrity of a wide range of
democratic countries. We lack comparable cross-national data that can help us to
understand how these threats operate across countries, and how political
institutions, cyber-infrastructure, and socio-economic context shape such
threats. We also lack comprehensive data about candidate social media behavior.
This project will dramatically increase scholars' access to data on electoral
candidates' social media behavior and how voters respond to this behavior. This
work will allow currently impossible investigations of how false information
travels online during electoral campaigns and how such information affects
beliefs of average voters across a range of polities facing different stages of
democratic expansion. These data can also inform governments interested in
securing their elections and can assist social media firms in understanding how
their platforms are used during campaigns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
focused on building a data resource for scholars from social media data
collection surrounding upcoming elections in polarized, democratizing, and
otherwise relatively unstable contexts. The research team is purposively
sampling election contexts of candidate social media data collection that meet
objective criteria based on their level of democracy, polarization, stability,
and cyber infrastructure. Across all of these contexts, the research team is
compiling social media candidate data, including candidate (public) social media
accounts, publicly available candidate background characteristics, and other
variables capturing the national, election, and seat(s) context. In three of
these contexts, the research team is executing a survey among voters, collecting
data on voters' ability to access candidates' online messages, voters' attitudes
towards candidates' social media activity, the extent to which candidates
mobilize offline political activity (including election violence) through
digital networks, how commonly and effectively politicians spread disinformation
using online platforms, and voters' perceptions of the security and stability of
political cyberspace in their context. The research team is developing training
in the form of webinar series for graduate students in political science, public
policy, and cybersecurity to encourage multi-disciplinary research using the
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.