* 2232269
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Non-Lethal Tools to Estimate the Ages and Lifespans of Chondrichthyan Fishes
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Gavin Naylor, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 08/31/2024
* USD 117,196.00

This project develop new methods for aging chondrichthyans (e.g., sharks,
skates, and rays) using DNA sequencing technology. In doing so, it will advance
both the conservation of these species, many of which are critically endangered,
and our evolutionary understanding of the aging process across species in
taxonomic groups with highly variable lifespans and life histories. Biological
aging is a fundamental component of organismal life. Recent advances in our
understanding of changes in DNA during aging are yielding novel tools to probe
the linkages between genomic variability, ecological dynamics, and organismal
lifespans. These changes over the lifespan of all vertebrates, when calibrated
against animals of known age, can be used to create highly accurate “clocks.”
Such clocks have the potential to provide non-lethal approaches for determining
aging populations of species of conservation concern, and comparative studies of
aging across related species with diverse lifespans are likely to provide
insight into the mechanisms contributing to life history evolution. In addition,
the project will provide training for both undergraduates and a postdoctoral
scholar and engage the general and local public through association with the
Georgia Aquarium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Living systems cycle through life-history
stages characterized by initiation, growth and development, reproduction,
senescence, and death. Most hypotheses of the evolutionary drivers of life-
history patterns center around the idea that periodic resetting in conjunction
with the slow, but constant, introduction of new mutations augmented by
reshuffling (e.g., sexual reproduction), provides the phenotypic variability
necessary to ensure survival in changing environments. If this is correct,
cycling times should be shorter in rapidly changing environments than they are
in more constant environments. This project will develop an epigenetic DNA
methylation “clock” using novel molecular and computational approaches to
measure life spans in chondrichthyan fishes that vary widely in their lifespans
and life histories and that inhabit environments that range from the relative
constancy of the deep sea to highly dynamic environments at the sea surface in
temperate and tropical regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.