* 2232789
* EAGER: Environmental nitrite is a nitric oxide donor that modulates fish olfactory function.
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2024
* Mar Huertas, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 12/31/2024
* USD 298,134.00

This project explores a novel hypothesis about the sense of smell (olfaction) in
bony fishes. In mammals, detection of smells and brain integration of olfactory
information can be mediated by nitric oxide that is produced in the brain mainly
by oxygen-dependent (aerobic) processes. Fishes often live in oxygen-poor
environments in which aerobic production of nitric oxide is inhibited. Thus, it
is unknown how nitric oxide-dependent smell sensation occurs in fishes when in
low-oxygen environments, conditions that are becoming more common in a warming
climate. The project will investigate how goldfish uptake aquatic nitrogenous
compounds within the nose, and how nitric oxide is generated to control neuronal
function, even under low-oxygen conditions. The results of this research will be
applicable to other fishes, including aquacultured species such as trout, and
thus could have direct applications in fish farming and may help to inform
conservation efforts. The goals of the project’s integrated education components
are to enhance the success of Hispanic and other underrepresented graduate
students at Texas State University (a Hispanic Serving Institution), focusing
especially on building science communication writing skills, which can
ultimately be used to inform the local community about the relevance of the
sense of smell in natural populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The role of nitric
oxide in olfactory processes is complex and poorly understood. Moreover, little
is known about how this signaling molecule modulates olfaction in aquatic
vertebrates. This research will use goldfish as a model to test whether
environmental nitrite is actively taken up from the water via a chloride-
carbonate anion-exchange transporter protein in the nasal epithelium of teleost
fishes, accumulated there, and then transported into the central nervous system
to be used as a nitric oxide donor to control neuronal function. The project
will also test whether nitric oxide can be produced by non-oxidative pathways
(via heme proteins and molybdenum enzymes), thus ensuring olfactory function
even in hypoxic or anoxic conditions. The project is considered to be
potentially transformative because, if the hypotheses are supported, the project
will establish a new mechanism to detect and transfer olfactory sensory
information to the brain, and lead to new directions in the field of fish
sensory biology. A post-doctoral fellow and a graduate student trainee,
recruited from groups underrepresented in science, will be involved in the
research, and an annual writing workshop will meet an identified need for
development of graduate students’ scientific communication skills. The award
will also add to the research resources at the
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.