* 2232159
* SII NRDZ: Dynamic Protection and Spectrum Monitoring for Radio Observatories
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Anthony Beasley, Associated Universities, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* John Chapin
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,250,000.00

This project, conducted by the National Radio Astronomy Observatory,
investigates an approach for dynamically sharing the electromagnetic (radio-
frequency) spectrum. The project goal is to help radio astronomy facilities
observe successfully in the presence of transmissions by low-earth-orbit
satellites, and to help satellite operators by potentially enabling them to
transmit in all channels of the satellite transmission band. (Currently some
satellite transmission bands are left unused to protect radio telescope
observation in adjacent bands.) The project includes design and modeling of the
spectrum sharing mechanism and prototyping of a data portal for information
sharing between astronomy facilities and satellite operators. Supporting project
activities include measurement and analysis of spectrum use near the Jansky Very
Large Array in New Mexico. Field tests include collaboration with Space
Exploration Technologies Corp. Collaboration is also being explored with OneWeb,
another leading satellite network provider. By enhancing spectrum access for
radio astronomy, the project supports better scientific return from observatory
investments. By enhancing spectrum access for satellite transmissions, the
project enhances the social and economic benefits that come from increasing the
amount of wireless communications supported by the limited available spectrum,
particularly in rural locations. The project will support the development of a
low RFI museum display prototype, involve undergraduates in summer projects
related to this work, develop a Citizen Science RFI project with affiliated
academic institutions, and devise a graduate certificate curriculum in spectrum-
related work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The spectrum sharing concept relies on
cooperation between the astronomy facility and satellite operators. Groups of
channels in the satellite transmission band are agreed upon in advance. The
observatory provides a data portal for satellite operators to access the current
operating status of observatory instruments. Satellites pointing transmission
beams towards or near the astronomy facility at times when observatory
instruments are using the band transmit in only one of the channel groups. The
channel group in use changes over time, enabling the radio astronomy instruments
to observe in all channels of the satellite transmission band over time. The
supporting project activities include full analysis and characterization of
historical and current RFI in the 10.7-12.7 GHz band at the Very Large Array in
New Mexico and the Green Bank Telescope in West Virginia; enhancing the current
spectrum monitoring device with multi-sensor networking, improved direction
finding, and new capabilities developed through machine learning techniques; and
planning for future spectrum monitoring device improvements and cost reductions.
The investigation of machine learning techniques for spectrum monitoring will be
carried out in collaboration with the National Research Council of Canada
Herzberg Astronomy &amp; Astrophysics Research Centre.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.