* 2232103
* Conference: Weeding In Not Weeding Out in Engineering Education
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Jenna Carpenter, American Society For Engineering Education
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 08/31/2023
* USD 99,414.00

This project will support institutions in recruiting, attracting, and graduating
engineering students with a wider array of pre-college backgrounds and
experiences. As the U.S. goes through a cycle of declining national birthrates,
it must find ways to engage more of its population in advancing scientific and
technological work. This project will support development of a framework of
evidence-based programs that support success of engineering majors from diverse
communities and help them feel welcome and excited about a career in
engineering. The framework be developed by a group of national experts through a
series of knowledge building sessions, to include students, a conference, and
follow-on activities. The framework and its implementation guides can be used by
institutions to change their recruiting, admitting, and onboarding practices and
approaches. This project will support the NSF BPE program by building the
capacity of the US engineering workforce through fostering professional
development of diverse communities of engineering
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will work to help institutions
attract and retain more diverse cohorts of students into engineering majors by
advancing knowledge in student onboarding, first year experience, and student
success. As the U.S. goes through a cycle of declining national birthrates, it
must find ways to engage all of its population in advancing scientific and
technological work. The goal of this project will be to identify and address the
obstacles and promising practices to recruitment, retention, and graduation of
diverse cohorts of underrepresented students with a variety of pre-college
opportunities and preparation. It will build upon the development of an
overview, rationale, objectives, and vision developed in four national
brainstorming sessions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will consider: 1)
institutional cultural resistance to widening admissions and creating multiple
educational pathways for engineering majors, 2) other barriers (funding, staff,
time) to adaptation and implementation of existing research-based strategies, 3)
differing challenges across institution types, and 4) potential use of
technologies (AI, etc.) to support implementation of specific research-based
strategies. The program will comprise 1) asynchronous pre-conference knowledge
building exercises to inform the conference, to include a listening session
hosted by the Engineering Research Visioning Alliance (ERVA) that engages
students, 2) a two-day in-person conference hosted at National Academy of
Engineering (NAE), and 3) post conference virtual working group meetings to
include additional subject matter experts to address issues that surfaced during
the conference. Across these efforts, a framework will be developed to organize
best practices for various student audiences, taking into account
intersectionalities across multiple student identities, that could be
reconfigured by different institutions to fit their mission, existing programs,
student audiences. This guiding framework will foster the development of
collective research-based practices and execution strategies to address the most
pressing challenges in engineering student success, onboarding, and first year
experience programming specifically contextualized for engineering,
institutional types, and underrepresented demographic groups. In addition, the
outcomes from the proposed meeting will have the potential to result in the
development of new strategies and technologies. The proposed framework, new
strategies and technologies collectively will provide tools to institutions to
increase their capacity to support diverse communities of engineering students
to achieve growth and completion. The outcomes of this project will be
summarized and posted on the NAE and ASEE websites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.