* 2232286
* Advancing &amp; Increasing Methods of HBCU NSF Proposal Competitiveness (QEM-AIMS)
* O/D,OIA
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Erin Lynch, QUALITY EDUCATION FOR MINORITIES NETWORK
* Standard Grant
* Dina Stroud
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,094,438.00

This project will develop a community of practice among Historically Black
Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) to facilitate proposal submissions to NSF. It
will also prepare faculty at HBCUs to be more active in the proposal review
process. If successful, this activity will serve as a model that can be expanded
to other types of emerging research institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project seeks to increase the submission of successful research proposals
originating at HBCUs. It develops and implements a replicable model for
technical assistance support for HBCU researchers and sponsored programs
personnel at HBCUs that will strengthen research development and reviewing
skills. The project will recruit two groups of people at each one of the HBCUs
involved: one group focused on the development and submission of proposals and a
second group that receives immersive training in proposal review. Amongst other
training activities, participants in the project will be mentored in the process
of proposal development and proposal submission and participate in mock review
panels. An external assessment component will examine the impacts of the
training. This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue
Plan Act of 2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.