* 2232649
* EAGER: CRYO: Sub-Kelvin Refrigerator using a Superfluid Helium Vortex Cooling Principle
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Hong Tang, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) supports the
development of a new type of refrigerators that reaches 1K based on the design
of new two-stage cooling approaches. This temperature range is needed for
physicalists to demonstrate novel quantum phenomena, for materials scientists to
discover new form of materials, and for astronomers to develop extremely
sensitive detectors. The need for sub-1K temperatures has been increased with
the advent of new quantum computers, currently operating in these temperature
ranges. Current technology for such cooling relies on a rare isotope of helium
(Helium-3) as a necessary component of the refrigeration fluid to reach this
temperature. The stockpile of helium is depleting worldwide, and new
technologies are needed to meet the new demand for cooling and refrigeration
below 1K without the use of diminishing He-3 gases. This grant also trains
students in this important area increasing the
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The combination of a superfluid vortex cooler
(SVC) and a Joule-Thompson precooler is researched to achieve high-capacity sub-
kelvin cooling without the use of He-3 in the system. The complete system is
closed cycle with zero helium boiloff. Benefiting from the fountain-pump effect
of superfluid helium-4, the superfluid vortex cooler does not require any moving
parts or an external pump, is compact, and can be conveniently attached to
various types of precooling stages that reach a temperature below 2K for heat
rejection. The complete system would be compact and provide significant cooling
capacity (&gt; 1mW) at 0.9K, with a theoretical cooling limit of 0.65K. This
research program will analyze and design the system based on a thermal analysis
of the energy transfer. The program will build a prototype cooler and benchmark
the performance against estimates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.