* 2232489
* EAGER: CRYO: Continuous Adiabatic Demagnetization Refrigeration Below 1K without Helium-3
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Jian Huang, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,715.00

This Early-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) supports research
establishing new technologies related to low-temperature refrigeration needed
for the development of quantum-based systems, such as computers, thus promoting
both the progress of science and advancing national prosperity and security.
Important scientific advancements in areas such as quantum information
technology rely on operation at temperatures below one Kelvin temperatures.
Magnetically based cooling could be an alternative approach to the present
technology. Present approaches to magnetic cooling do not support a continuous
operation which is a major hindrance toward commercialization. This project
researches a continuous refrigeration method by constructing a magnet in the
form of a fluid and achieving continuous cooling by circulating the magnetic
refrigerant within closed-loop cycles. The key concept combines low-temperature
physics and nanomaterial science, potentially opening new interdisciplinary
capabilities and collaboration venues for diverse cutting-edge exploration in
physics, chemistry, material science, and medical science and bridging the gap
to industry. Therefore, it is strategically important for maintaining U.S.
leadership. The new materials to be developed are clean and environment-
friendly, meeting the green standard to improve the social and economic
qualities of lives. This project will train participants, especially students of
diverse backgrounds, to achieve research and educational goals, and to be
prepared for future innovations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adiabatic demagnetization
refrigeration is a viable approach to reaching temperatures below one Kelvin
without using helium-3. However, the current method with solid paramagnetic
materials not only restricts the operation to a single shot cooling but also
limits the base temperature to the level of the magnetic exchange interaction.
This project aims to achieve continuous adiabatic demagnetization cooling
capable of reaching lower temperatures by adopting a noninteracting paramagnetic
fluid refrigerant. The research work seeks to realize a fluid paramagnet through
studying mixtures of hollow paramagnetic nanoparticles of various surface-to-
volume ratios with a helium-4 superfluid and achieve a floating condition.
Experiments will be carried out to characterize the magnetization and
demagnetization effects for various nanoparticle densities in circulation by
detecting the local magnetic flux as a function of the circulation rates. The
goal is to correlate the magnetization/demagnetization efficiency in real-time
with the cooling power, thus optimizing the cooling effect and achieving precise
temperature control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.