* 2232551
* Collaborative Research: CCRI: New: A Research News Recommender Infrastructure with Live Users for Algorithm and Interface Experimentation
* CSE,IIS
* 04/15/2023,09/30/2025
* Daniel Kluver, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Raj Acharya
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,400,000.00

Machine learning recommender systems personalize users’ experiences online by
ranking and selecting items to present based on users’ past behavior. For
example, when a user visits an online retailer, the products shown are selected
by a recommender system designed to help one find things to buy and to increase
the vendors sales. Recommender systems are also behind most online news sources,
and they can shape which news people see. Given the importance of recommender
systems to individual choice, it is critical for researchers to be able to carry
out studies to evaluate different designs and their impact on the users of the
system. But conducting such studies is beyond the resources of most researchers.
To get meaningful results requires building and sustaining a community of
willing users who have given their permission to be studied. As a result, the
amount of experimental research – and specifically experimental research on
long-term users of a system – has plummeted. Almost all such studies are
conducted by commercial recommendation platforms and their results are rarely
made known to the public. This project is designed to develop a shared news
recommender system specifically to enable researchers nationwide to be able to
carry out experiments and learn just how different algorithms and interfaces
affect users. This should create the knowledge that will allow the community to
fully understand the impact of these systems and design new recommender systems
that can enhance fairness and equity. When complete, this research
infrastructure will support researchers in answering critical questions about
how complex and often opaque recommender systems affect user behavior and to
test new systems that can improve these systems and their
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This community-centered project will design and
build an experimental news recommender community infrastructure to support
research in personalization and recommender systems, AI and machine learning,
natural language processing, human-computer interaction, social computing, and
other fields that would benefit from the ability to carry out online field
experiments with long-term users of a system. The cloud-based software
infrastructure includes a pluggable recommendation architecture in which
researchers can deploy custom algorithms and interfaces, a feed of news articles
starting with those obtained through a partnership with the Associated Press,
experiment-support modules including consent, payment, and surveying of
subjects, and support for two news interfaces—first a news digest and then a
progressive web news browser. The infrastructure will maintain a set of long-
term consented users, provide extensive support to researchers including
overarching IRB protocols, training, sample experiments, datasets and metrics,
and live support through a researcher support team. It will be governed by a
community advisory board drawn from the researcher community with
representatives of the content providers and end-users and charged with
allocating experiment slots and steering the development and management of the
infrastructure. By developing and deploying this research infrastructure, the
investigators seek to empower individuals and small groups to study important
questions in recommender systems, including questions about how different
algorithms and interfaces can alter the diversity of sources and viewpoints
represented and provide users with greater understanding and control over the
content they explore. The investigators come from five institutions spread
across the country and will in turn assemble and train a diverse team to take on
this technically challenging and important work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.