* 2232935
* Conference: Mid-scale RI-EW: Workshop on Building a Nanofabrication Facility for Quantum Science and Engineering
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,02/28/2023
* Daniel Dessau, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 02/28/2023
* USD 44,586.00

Advances in quantum science and engineering promise to fundamentally
revolutionize broad aspects of our society, including computing, communications,
sensing and measurement science. The technologies and systems that underpin
future quantum discovery, as well as device engineering and translation of these
technologies to industry, will require new materials, devices, fabrication, and
integration techniques. Critical to meeting these challenges will be a
dedicated, accessible, and specialized nanofabrication facility. This award will
support a workshop to bring together a broad range of experts from academia,
industry, national labs, and government to discuss and develop the requirements,
construction, and operation of a fabrication and metrology facility uniquely
dedicated to quantum science and engineering. Topics to be covered and discussed
will include: (1) the underlying scientific motivation and basic research need
for quantum nanofabrication; (2) the role and needs of the growing quantum
industry with emphasis on fabrication that enables integration, packaging, and
manufacturability; and (3) the development of a project execution plan, which
would provide guidance for implementation and operation of such a
nanofabrication facility. A significant outcome of the workshop will be clear
description and consensus on the national needs for a nanofabrication facility
to ensure United States leadership in quantum science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significant, focused investment has led to
many breakthroughs in quantum science and engineering, but beyond laboratory
experiments there is a pressing need for new fabrication techniques and
facilities to address the many unknowns related to building quantum hardware.
This hardware is expected to involve the heterogenous integration of a wide
range of material platforms (photonics, semiconductors, superconducting
electronics, nano-mechanical systems, and cold atoms) in new and challenging
environments (≤1K, ≤10-9 Torr). To create future quantum devices and hardware at
scale (e.g. ultimately millions of qubits in a quantum processor) will require
new approaches, tools and techniques for nanofabrication that will move beyond
the re-tooling of existing infrastructure. The proposed workshop will seek to
identify the need and requirements for such a quantum nanofabrication facility
and address the capabilities, the implementation, and operation of such a
facility. Critical to the success of this workshop will be the involvement of
the nascent quantum industry in this process of integrating and translating new
technology into systems that are just now being discovered. Equally critical
will be the involvement of individuals with experience in project management and
execution as well as those with facility management to guide the execution of a
future project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.