* 2232911
* CICI: UCSS: ScienceAccess: Enabling Zero-Trust Resource Access Management for Scientific Collaborations
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Gail-Joon Ahn, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 09/30/2025
* USD 591,664.00

Scientific collaborations tremendously contribute to advancing science by
allowing to share diverse resources including real data, high-performance
computing, network channel, and so on. Since multiple stakeholders are involved
in accessing those resources, it is critical to regulate resource sharing
activities based on a series of access mediation security policies (AM-Policies)
that fulfill requirements and constraints from various institutions,
collaborative teams, and researchers. Such policy-driven approach would help
achieve important challenges in scientific collaborations: fairness in resource
sharing and risk management in dealing with digital assets. However, such AM-
Policies have been specified, evaluated and enforced in an ad-hoc, semi-formal,
and incomplete way: (i) scientists still need to write their own AM-Policies
without having expressiveness power in policy specification, making it difficult
for them to correctly articulate their specific needs. (ii) the evaluation and
enforcement of AM-Policies across multiple local institutions and administrators
are limited. (iii) there is also limited support for systematically collecting
security-relevant data that needs to evaluate policies at run-time.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;To address these challenges, this project develops ScienceAccess, a
federated framework supporting the storage, retrieval, evaluation, and
enforcement of AM-Policies that allows for scientists and administrators to
manage their resource sharing needs with a high degree of autonomy. Ultimately,
ScienceAccess attempts to produce the following outcomes: (i) new insights to
articulate AM-Policies for effectively sharing resources and real-world
experiments with existing cyberinfrastructures including the Arizona Federated
Open Research Computing Enclave (AFORCE) and Science DMZ; (ii) new innovative
techniques to efficiently specify, evaluate, and manage AM-Policies with the
notion of a Zero-Trust security, including the automated collection and
distribution of security-relevant information in the form of attributes between
independently-run scientific institutions; and (iii) assessments, guidelines,
and best practices for future deployments of ScienceAccess
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.