* 2232891
* ANT LIA: The Role of Sex Determination in the Radiation of Antarctic Notothenioid Fish
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2027
* John Postlethwait, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* William Ambrose
* 07/31/2027
* USD 1,915,645.00

Antarctic animals face tremendous threats as Antarctic ice sheets melt and
temperatures rise. About 34 million years ago, when Antarctica began to cool,
most species of fish became locally extinct. A group called the notothenioids,
however, survived due to the evolution of antifreeze. The group eventually split
into over 120 species. Why did this group of Antarctic fishes evolve into so
many species? One possible reason why a single population splits into two
species relates to sex genes and sex chromosomes. Diverging species often have
either different sex determining genes (genes that specify whether an
individual’s gonads become ovaries or testes) or have different sex chromosomes
(chromosomes that differ between males and females within a species, like the
human X and Y chromosomes). We know the sex chromosomes of only a few
notothenioid species and know the genetic basis for sex determination in none of
them. The aims of this research are to: 1) identify sex chromosomes in species
representing every major group of Antarctic notothenioid fish; 2) discover
possible sex determining genes in every major group of Antarctic notothenioid
fish; and 3) find sex chromosomes and possible sex determining genes in two
groups of temperate, warmer water, notothenioid fish. These warmer water fish
include groups that never experienced the frigid Southern Ocean and groups that
had ancestors inhabiting Antarctic oceans that later adjusted to warmer waters.
This project will help explain the mechanisms that led to the division of a
group of species threatened by climate change. This information is critical to
conserve declining populations of Antarctic notothenioids, which are major food
sources for other Antarctic species such as bird and seals. The project will
offer a diverse group of undergraduates the opportunity to develop a permanent
exhibit at the Eugene Science Center Museum. The exhibit will describe the
Antarctic environment and explain its rapid climate change. It will also
introduce the continent’s bizarre fishes that live below the freezing point of
water. The project will collaborate with the university’s Science and Comics
Initiative and students in the English Department’s Comics Studies Minor to
prepare short graphic novels explaining Antarctic biogeography, icefish
specialties, and the science of this project as it develops.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As Antarctica cooled, most species disappeared
from the continent’s waters, but cryonotothenioid fish radiated into a species
flock. What facilitated this radiation? Coyne’s “two rules of speciation” offer
explanations for why species diverge: 1) the dysgenic sex in an interspecies
hybrid is the one with two different sex chromosomes (i.e., in humans, it would
be XY males and not XX females); and 2) “sex chromosomes play an outsized role
in speciation”. These ideas propel the project’s main hypothesis: new sex
chromosomes and new sex determination genes associate with cryonotothenioid
speciation events. The main objective of the research is to identify
notothenioid sex chromosomes and candidate sex-determination genes in many
notothenioid species.&lt;br/&gt;The project’s first aim is to identify Antarctic
fish sex chromosomes, asking the question: Did new sex chromosomes accompany
speciation events? Knowledge gaps include: which species have cryptic sex
chromosomes; which have newly evolved sex chromosomes; and which are
chromosomally XX/XY or ZZ/ZW. Methods involve population genomics (RAD-seq and
Pool-seq) for more than 20 Antarctic cryonotothenioids. The prediction is
frequent turnover of sex chromosomes. The project’s second aim is to Identify
candidate Antarctic cryonotothenioid sex-determination genes, asking the
question: Did new sex-determination genes accompany Antarctic cryonotothenioid
speciation events? A knowledge gap is the identity of sex determination genes in
any notothenioid. Preliminary data show that three sex-linked loci are in or
adjacent to three different candidate sex determination genes: 1) a duplicate of
bmpr1ba in blackfin icefish; 2) a tandem duplicate of gsdf in South Georgia
icefish; and 3) a transposed duplicate of gsdf in striped notothen. Methods
involve annotating the genomic neighborhoods of cryonotothenioid sex linked loci
for anomalies in candidate sex genes, sequencing sex chromosomes, and testing
sex gene variants by CRISPR mutagenesis in zebrafish. The prediction is frequent
turnover of sex determination genes. The project’s third aim is to identify sex
chromosomes and sex-determination genes in temperate notothenioids. Basally
diverging temperate notothenioids (‘basals’) lack identifiable sex chromosomes,
consistent with temperature-cued sex determination, and one ‘basal’ species is a
hermaphrodite. The constantly cold Southern Ocean rules out temperature, a
common sex determination cue in many temperate fish, favoring genetic sex
determination. Some cryonotothenioids re-invaded temperate waters (‘returnees’).
Knowledge gaps include whether basals and returnees have strong sex
determination genes. Methods employ pool-seq. The prediction is that genetic sex
determination is weak in basals and that returnees have the same, but weaker,
sex-linked loci as their Antarctic sister clade. &lt;br/&gt;A permanent exhibit
will be established at the Eugene Science Center Museum tentatively entitled:
The Antarctic: its fishes and climate change. Thousands of visitors, especially
school children will be exposed, to the science of Antarctic ecosystems and the
impacts of climate change. The research team will collaborate with the
university’s Science and Comics Initiative to produce short graphic novels
explaining Antarctic biogeography, icefish specialties, and this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.