* 2232817
* CC* Data Storage: Distributed, Fast, Scalable Infrastructure for Emerging Media Research Data
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Qi Sun, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 499,907.00

The project develops a fast, scalable, distributed cyberinfrastructure (CI)
across New York Universityâ€™s New York City buildings to meet the specialized
demands of laboratory and classroom media researchers, including: 1) large-scale
storage; 2) fast, low latency, two-way edge-server communications; and 3)
scalable system design to rapidly adapt to emerging research frameworks, such as
virtual/augmented reality (VR/AR), machine learning, and data science. The
project architecture is based on research with colleagues operating the large
Flatiron Institute Ceph clusters. The CI fosters and supports data-driven, high
concurrency, and collaborative research and educational activities. With VR/AR
as an example use case, the CI generates a new service to provide an immediate
enabling impact on real-time cloud-edge data transmission and storage, relaxing
the computational load on low-power untethered headsets. The high concurrency
data volume support enables remote virtual environment co-development by
synchronously sharing data and models. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The strategic CI
design supports other broad emerging research disciplines, including robotics,
educational technologies, biomedical experimentation, and wireless networks. To
broaden participation, the CI is accessible via the New York State Education and
Research Network, as well as to other NYU collaborating K-12 educational
institutions and government agencies. The technology helps to support the
training and education of students from low-income households and backgrounds
underrepresented in STEM. Through the integration of ultra-large and
instantaneous public and citizen data analysis, it also supports just-in-time
data-driven urban policy-making and public emergency
response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.