* 2232877
* BRC-BIO: Diverse Undergraduate Research Students in Ecology (DURSiE)
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Julie Zinnert, Moravian University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 01/31/2026
* USD 502,950.00

Barrier islands are vulnerable to storm erosion, sediment loss, and sea level
rise, which have all increased during the past decades. Sand naturally moves on
islands from wind, waves, and tides, while plants hold sand in place. Typically,
grasses have higher tolerance to salt and sand burial whereas many trees and
shrubs are more likely to die with exposure. Recently, however, salt sensitive
shrubs have expanded into coastal grasslands and may be benefiting from a
relationship with a fungus that minimizes salt uptake in some conditions.
Islands become more vulnerable when shrubs replace grasses because shrubs resist
erosion and thus impede the natural migration of islands leading to island
fragmentation. Without barrier islands, the mainland would be at the forefront
of coastal storms potentially leading to greater loss of life and property. In
this study, storm events will be simulated through exposing shrubs to salty
conditions and burial. Shrub roots will be analyzed for the presence and extent
of fungus infection and root and shoot growth will be measured. Determining the
constraints on shrub expansion into grasslands is necessary to predict and
manage the future of barrier islands. Broader impacts of the research include
training a diverse cadre of students via field research experiences and through
course-based research in a Botany course. Research students will also serve as
role models while engaging younger students at local middle schools in
Pennsylvania to learn about the impacts of climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Woody plant encroachment into grasslands has
rapidly increased worldwide; however, this is particularly detrimental on
barrier islands, where vegetation type contributes to the structure and function
of the ecosystem. On Virginia barrier islands, the native shrub, Morella
cerifera is encroaching into grasslands due in part to changes in the abiotic
environment. A knowledge gap remains about how plant composition, functional
traits of grasses and shrubs, and mycorrhizal relationships change with
disturbance. This project will combine field surveys, field experiments, and
greenhouse experiments to investigate 1) the distribution of M. cerifera and
grasses change along a transitional gradient, 2) the impact of accelerated
disturbance on the functional traits of grasses and M. cerifera, and 3) the
impact of accelerated disturbance on mycorrhizal colonization of grasses and M.
cerifera. By better understanding how ecological communities will respond to and
drive environmental change, this project can help coastal land managers better
predict and manage the future of barrier islands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.