* 2232491
* A Summit for Improvement of Undergraduate Geoscience Teacher using the Micro Spiral Methodology Transgenerational, Transcultural, and Transformational Solutions
* GEO,RISE
* 05/15/2023,10/31/2024
* Edith Davis, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 10/31/2024
* USD 128,660.00

Evidence shows the exponential increase in student performance by using the
Micro-Spiral Method (MSM) of instruction is effective in overcoming absenteeism
and loss of instructional time which has helped increase state science test
scores for well over a decade (e.g., Developmental Research School in
Tallahassee, Florida). MSM uses a recursive repetition model that causes a
deeper understanding of concepts, knowledge, and skills with each successive
encounter building on the previous encounters (Davis, 2015). With the
application of MSM, FL state science scores have increased overall with notable
increases among students from historically excluded communities, and even
significant gains among these groups in geoscience scores (Florida Department of
Education (DOE), Statewide Science Assessment 2009-2020). Targeted application
of MSM to the geosciences could provide transgenerational, transcultural, and
transformational solutions for geoscience educators and students. The current
project seeks to establish an MSM geosciences "train the trainer program" which
will help interest more students from historically excluded communities into
pursuing geosciences as a possible career pathway.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed Summit is to gather key stakeholders in the planning of the Micro-
Spiral Method Community of Practice with an additional focus on scaling the
successful MSM train the trainer workshops that occurred in 2019 and 2021.
Stakeholder groups will mainly be comprised of geoscientists and STEM educators.
This phased program will engage geoscientists and STEM educators from Minority
Serving Institutions (MSIs) in the following activities: 1) Phase One, provision
of advanced MSM train the trainer workshops for MSI participant cohorts,
primarily in the southeastern U.S. Diverse cohorts of geoscientists and STEM
educators will be trained by MSM experts with an emphasis on geosciences,
including careers beyond the traditional geoscience academic trajectories with
focused instruction on future science educators; 2) Phase Two, trained
individuals from the Phase One cohorts will be deployed to their respective
local districts to initiate the expansion of the MSM train-the-trainer process
in each respective district with a continued emphasis on using MSM for teaching
geoscience content.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.