* 2232616
* U.S. Open-Source Software Security Initiative Workshop
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2022,12/31/2022
* Angelos Keromytis, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 12/31/2022
* USD 73,444.00

This project is supporting a virtual workshop to examine ways to improve the
security of the open-source software ecosystem. This is an invitation-only
workshop focusing on four core topic areas: (1) Developers' Perception of Trust
&amp; Safety; (2) Memory-Safe Programming Languages; (3) Software Dependency
Management; and (4) Behavioral and Economic Incentives to Secure Open-Source
Software. The workshop consists of a combination of invited talks, panels, and
technical breakaway sessions. The project's novelty is in bringing together
stakeholders from the U.S. Government, academia, private sector, and the open-
source software community, and examining both the technical and incentive
aspects in tandem. To our knowledge, such an initiative has not been undertaken,
at least in the last 20 years. The broader significance and important of the
project are to benefit the United States by investing in the shared open-source
software infrastructure that the public and private sectors both rely on and
addressing challenges spanning the global software community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop is in direct support of the U.S. Open-Source
Security Initiative “Enhance and Invest in Secure and Transparent OSS
Development”, led by the White House Office of Management and Budget, which
addresses the White House Executive Order 14028 on improving the nation cyber
security. The workshop is designed to generate ideas and broad discussion around
possible approaches to invest in the security of open-source software. One
concrete output of the project is a report summarizing findings and
recommendations on making progress on these four topic areas. These
recommendations may cover USG Research and Development (R&amp;D) investment
(including potentially a grand challenge prize), acquisition practices, policy
and legal issues, and other mechanisms through which open-source software
security may be improved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.