* 2232462
* Collaborative Research: SII-NRDZ: ARA-NRDZ: From Site and Application Investigation to Prototyping and Field Testing
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Himanshu Gupta, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* John Chapin
* 09/30/2025
* USD 14,916.00

This research team will conduct preliminary studies leading to field trials of
electromagnetic (radio-frequency) spectrum sharing at the ARA wireless living
lab for rural broadband, which is sponsored by the NSF Platforms for Advanced
Wireless Research (PAWR) program. Located in Central Iowa, ARA enables
experimentation with novel spectrum sharing methods appropriate for rural areas.
Rural areas have unique spectrum usage patterns, propagation characteristics,
critical applications, and community needs, so spectrum sharing solutions for
rural areas may differ from those appropriate for urban or suburban areas. The
field trials enabled by this project will provide lessons learned that help
improve real-world spectrum use efficiency, reduce spectrum access cost, and
empower rural communities to participate in addressing the rural broadband
challenge. This project will also create research opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students, as well as K-12 outreach.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The initial application considered for potential field
trials is spectrum sharing to enhance the Control and Non-Payload Communications
(CNPC) and sensing functions of unmanned aircraft systems (UAS). UAS operations,
especially beyond visual line of sight operations that depend on reliable
spectrum access, are envisioned as a high-payoff capability supporting economic
growth and public safety in rural areas. UAS CNPC is limited to a small,
reserved band today because of the high reliability requirements for the
service, while UAS sensing faces the same spectrum access challenges as all
other sensing systems. Two sharing opportunities are initially of interest:
achieving high reliability UAS CNPC in non-CNPC-reserved bands where other users
also employ controlled, high-reliability communications, such as connected
agricultural robots; and adding UAS sensing activities into the reserved UAS
CNPC band in ways that preserve CNPC capacity and reliability. Success in these
types of spectrum sharing will reduce the cost of delivering important UAS
capabilities. Technical studies on ways to extended current ARA capabilities to
support future spectrum sharing field trials include: adoption of software-
defined radios; use of programmable commercial-off-the-shelf wireless systems;
and support for bring-your-own-device experiments, enabling operation at
frequency bands not accessible with the installed ARA hardware. Propagation
measurements in the project will generate real-world measurements of wireless
channels in rural regions. These data are essential for development of effective
spectrum sharing methods. The project team will openly share results and
actively collaborate with the broader SII-NRDZ community, to help define and
realize the National Radio Dynamic Zones vision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.