* 2232829
* NSF Student Travel Support for 2022 ACM International Conference on  Information and Management (CIKM)
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Li Xiong, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2023
* USD 25,000.00

This travel grant will enable students in US universities to participate in the
ACM Conference on Information and Knowledge Management, CIKM 2022, which will be
hybrid with an in-person meeting in Atlanta, GA, USA, October 17-22, 2022. This
proposal will enable US-based students to travel to Atlanta to participate in
the conference and its associated workshops. CIKM will feature selected high-
quality technical papers with broad international participation and will include
multiple keynotes, an industry day with technical talks from industry,tutorials,
workshops, and a PhD symposium. The funding will be used primarily to defray the
costs of registration, travel, and lodging for the students. It will enable a
life-enriching first-time experience for many students, giving them a taste for
the research environment in both academic and industrial circles around the
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CIKM provides a unique interdisciplinary forum for
presentation and discussion of research on information and knowledge management,
as well as recent advances on data and knowledge bases. The purpose of the
conference is to identify challenging problems facing the development of future
knowledge and information systems, and to shape future directions of research by
soliciting and reviewing high quality, applied and theoretical research
findings. An important part of the conference is the Workshops program which
focuses on timely research challenges and initiatives. Efforts will be made to
engage students with a view towards broadening the participation of researchers
from women and other underrepresented groups. The conference will contribute
directly to training the next generation of scientists who are both consumers
and developers of technology in information and knowledge management. The grant
will have a direct impact in creating a highly-qualified workforce who can take
on the emerging data science challenges of the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.