* 2232197
* Conference: Accelerating Drug Product Development and Approval: A Critical Need in Response to National Emergencies
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2024
* Gintaras Reklaitis, National Institute for Pharmaceutical Technology and Education
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 01/31/2024
* USD 84,996.00

The drug discovery, development, and regulatory evaluation process, from the
point where a molecule is identified as a potential therapeutic agent to when it
is approved for commercialization as a drug product, can take up to 15 years.
This lengthy process involves many stages, including the determination of
efficacy, safety, toxicity, and therapeutic regime, identification of target
populations, side effects, and interactions, selection of a feasible synthetic
pathway, and development of a product formulation and a reliable manufacturing
process. This lengthy time frame makes it hard to respond to emergencies
requiring new therapies, deprives patients of faster access to life-saving
medicines, decreases the profitability period of pharmaceutical companies, and
contributes to the high cost of new medicines. Moreover, the COVID-19 pandemic
has made clear the need for faster drug development and regulatory evaluation
process. To address these issues, a workshop is proposed to bring together a
focused group of thought leaders from academia, industry, and regulatory
agencies to discuss the critical elements needed to accelerate drug discovery,
development, and regulatory evaluation based on recent scientific and technical
advances in medicine, biology, materials science, biostatistics, and advanced
manufacturing technologies. Acceleration mechanisms will be examined from
multiple perspectives, including the strength of the underlying science,
technical feasibility, and regulatory acceptability. The systemic brainstorming
and analysis with the participation of experts across the relevant disciplines
will enable significant outcomes, including the production of a strategic plan
to implement the workshop findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project leadership
team propose to organize and conduct a structured workshop that will bring
together a focused group of thought leaders from academia, industry, and
regulatory agencies, to discuss the critical elements needed to accelerate drug
discovery, development, and regulatory evaluation based on recent scientific and
technical advances in medicine, biology, materials science, biostatistics, and
advanced manufacturing technologies. These discussions will be led by pre-
selected panelists with established track records in their respective fields.
Acceleration mechanisms will be examined from multiple perspectives, including
the strength of the underlying science, technical feasibility, and regulatory
acceptability. The systemic brainstorming and analysis with the participation of
experts across the relevant disciplines will generate significant outcomes,
which would not be achieved in any existing scientific communication forum or
conferences. Acceleration mechanisms deemed to be potentially effective will be
selected for further analysis by a focused multidisciplinary team of workshop
participants, which will be tasked to integrate these mechanisms into a
strategic plan and an implementation pathway. These documents, which will be the
main output of the workshop, will serve as a blueprint for the Federal
Government, industry, and academia to direct efforts in this field. The workshop
will be held in the Washington, DC area 24-26 January 2023 and will be attended
by leaders from industry, academia, and government organizations such as NSF,
NIH, NIST, and FDA. The proposed workshop will achieve two goals, to: 1)
identify Scientific, Technological, and Regulatory mechanisms capable of
significantly reducing the drug discovery, development, and commercializing time
frame with improved efficiency and reduced risks to patients; and 2) integrate
these mechanisms into a coherent strategy and integrated implementation
plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.