* 2232873
* Research Infrastructure: CC* Regional Computing: A Regional Computing Hub for Alabama Universities
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Vladimir Florinski, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 972,261.00

This award is funded in whole under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern research relies heavily on computer
modeling of natural phenomena and engineering designs. The proposed regional
computing hub would provide the much needed computing power and technical
expertise to a consortium of Alabama universities in order to achieve the
following objectives. First, adoption of modern computational technologies by
educational entities in Alabama, especially targeting minority serving
institutions (MSIs). Second, creation of new knowledge by enabling research
across multiple disciplines, including aerospace, agricultural, chemicals,
forestry, advanced materials and biosciences. Third, providing a platform for
education, workforce training, and sharing of expertise among researchers at
participating institutions and the broader jurisdictional community. These
objectives directly address the NSF 2022-2026 strategic
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High performance computing (HPC) is a cornerstone of
modern day scientific and engineering research. For the computing needs, Alabama
universities rely on a heterogeneous collection of institutional clusters,
resulting in resource under-utilization and low availability for massively
parallel computations. The regional computing hub serving the state of Alabama
features a flagship HPC system with a Graphic Processor (GPU) component,
enabling performance an order of magnitude higher than any individual system in
the jurisdiction. The system was designed to fit the needs of users from
multiple diverse STEM fields across Alabama research institutions. The new
system contains 3000 CPU cores, 24 GPU enabled nodes and 2 Pbytes of storage,
linked together with a 200 Gbit/s Infiniband interconnect. The hub provides
technical and educational resources to the members of the consortium to
transition their computational projects to the new platform. Participating
institutions in this regional multi-campus computing cluster include: University
of Alabama in Huntsville (UAH, lead institution), Alabama Agricultural and
Mechanical University (AAMU, MSI), Alabama State University (ASU, MSI), Auburn
University (AU), Oakwood University (OU, MSI), Tuskegee University (TU, MSI),
University of Alabama (UA), University of Alabama in Birmingham (UAB), and
University of Southern Alabama (USA).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.