* 2232863
* CICI: USCC: Supporting Scientists as End-Users in Managing Security and Privacy
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Adam Aviv, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 05/31/2026
* USD 600,000.00

Scientific users are experts in their chosen fields, but may not be experts in
computing in general or in security and privacy specifically.This research
investigates scientific end-users, defined broadly, as a specialized user group
in need of specific, targeted support for managing security and privacy of
computing systems during their scientific endeavors. The goal of this work is to
evaluate and improve end-user tools and processes for scientists managing
security and privacy for their labs, by answering the following research
questions: How do scientists think about security and privacy for their
computing and data resources? What tools do scientists regularly use, and how do
they enable or inhibit good security and privacy practices? And, how can the
current situation be improved through better guidance and new standards, tools,
or processes? This project enables improvements in security and privacy tools
and processes for scientific workflows and develops workshops and guidance
documents specifically targeted at scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
uses surveys, interviews, document review, cognitive walkthroughs, and
ethnographic embedding to investigate how scientists currently learn about and
execute security- and privacy-relevant behaviors for their equipment and data.
These studies are designed to gain insight into current tools and practices, as
well as organizational incentives and barriers that affect security and privacy
outcomes, in order to provide actionable improvements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.