* 2232967
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: ADAPT:Charting the Space of Material Microstructures with Artificial Intelligence
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Tyrus Berry, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 08/31/2024
* USD 192,372.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the fundamental principles of
materials science is that material properties are determined by structure. The
microstructure, or the internal structure at the micron scale (one millionth of
a meter), is specifically identified as being essential to physical properties
including the mechanical strength, ductility, and fracture toughness of ceramic
and metal components used in construction, manufacturing, and other industrial
applications. Since it is possible and even likely that microstructures of
exceptional materials of the future will not resemble those of conventional
materials, a key challenge in material development is the determination of the
all feasible microstructures. This award will support research and education
activities that will adapt leading methods in data science and machine learning
to address this challenge. Specifically, the research will integrate expert
knowledge about physically-meaningful comparisons of microstructures into
machine learning models to provide a systematic method for exploring possible
microstructures, both previously realized and unrealized ones. This approach is
also expected to improve the accuracy and efficiency of models to predict
material properties on the basis of microstructure alone.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will create opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students in mathematics and materials science to be cross-trained
between disciplines and institutions. The mathematics students will benefit from
interactions with materials scientists and vice versa. In addition, the PIs will
create user-friendly software to make the proposed algorithms widely accessible,
both to researchers and industrial practitioners and to individuals in other
disciplines studying structures with similar
geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports the development of a new representation of microstructure state space
that balances the need to retain enough information to predict physical
properties of materials with the requirement that it be sufficiently low-
dimensional and general to serve as the basis for a flexible materials database.
The concept of computational materials design relies on the underlying ideas
that (i) a microstructure can be represented as a point in an appropriate state
space, (ii) this state space specifies enough information to accurately predict
material properties, and (iii) optimization routines could be used to search the
state space for microstructures with desirable properties. In this research
program, the PIs will adapt leading methods in data science and machine learning
to discover a practicable representation of this microstructure space applicable
to a variety of material classes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Formally, the feature
extraction, classification, and interpretability of experimental microstructure
data will be improved by achieving three aims. Aim I: Define and implement
physically-motivated metrics to evaluate the similarity of microstructures on
both local and global scales. Aim II: Leverage the local metric with manifold
learning to construct a coordinate representation for the space of windows, and
apply these coordinates in conjunction with new machine learning techniques to
to predict material properties. Aim III: Learn a coordinate representation for
the space of window distributions and use it to construct a proof-of-concept
microstructure database.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will create
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students in mathematics and
materials science to be cross-trained between disciplines and institutions. The
mathematics students will benefit from interactions with materials scientists
and vice versa. In addition, the PIs will create user-friendly software to make
the proposed algorithms widely accessible, both to researchers and industrial
practitioners and to individuals in other disciplines studying structures with
similar geometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.