* 2232690
* CICI: UCSS: Maximizing Data Utility and Participant Privacy through Usable, Secure Data Workflows for Human-Centered AI Research
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Susan McGregor, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 12/31/2025
* USD 616,000.00

A good way to improve privacy is to collect less data. However, all systems
using artificial intelligence (AI), many of which people rely upon everyday
(e.g., search engines, navigation apps, fraud detection, etc.), need data to
work. This project balances the competing needs of obtaining data to improve AI
technologies and maximizing the privacy of people contributing their personal
information to research studies. Working in conjunction with the AI research
community, this project develops a prototype system to help AI researchers
secure data collected about people while at the same time improving their
ability to make new scientific discoveries. Specifically, the prototype system
will generate privacy-enhanced demographic questions and suggest data collection
plans that ensure data collected about people balances needs for statistical
rigor and community representativeness. In doing so, this system improves the
quality, security, and efficiency of human-centered AI research by reducing the
amount of data collected about people and helping to create AI systems that are
usable, fair, accurate, and trustworthy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Designing human
subjects studies that preserve research participants' privacy and security while
still generating robust results is tricky. This project leverages cybersecurity
techniques such as data-minimization to help human-centered AI researchers
better protect research participants' privacy while ensuring their studies'
statistical power and generalizability. In collaboration with the human-centered
AI research community, this project builds a usable toolchain for generating
data-minimizing demographic survey questions and determining statistically well-
powered study sample size and demographically diverse composition to ensure the
integrity of research results.The system maximizes the privacy of human subjects
and recommends a sample size and composition which balances statistical power
and representativeness. This approach promotes the quality of scientific
discoveries at the point of study design. Through a process of need-finding,
iterative toolchain refinement, and usability testing with AI researchers, this
project builds a system for more secure, efficient, and robust human-centered AI
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.