* 2232146
* EAGER: SaTC: Quantifying the Fair Value of Data and Privacy in Distributed Learning
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Kannan Ramchandran, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,998.00

Data-driven decision-making drives the engine of our modern economy. As data
becomes an increasingly important resource, understanding its value becomes
critical. This project marries the economic study of data with the growing field
of data privacy to present a framework for quantifying the value of data and
privacy. The relationship between users who generate data and platforms that
collect and benefit from this data will be explored, progressing our
understanding of what constitutes a fair and open data market. Emphasis is
placed on the concept of fair payment for data by considering well-known
concepts from economics and extending them to include the critical component of
user privacy. A better understanding of the value of data and privacy can
empower individuals and regulators, leading to a stronger and more productive
economy. In addition, the project addresses the important topic of fairness.
This research has the potential to transform the way data is viewed, treated,
and monetized by studying a fundamental framework where platforms and
individuals can both fairly benefit from the value of
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project systematically approaches the
fundamental question of how to quantify the value of data in a privacy-centric
game-theoretic framework in order to explore the relationship between platforms
and users with data, leading to the concept of a fair and open data market. The
concept of fair payment for data is considered using the foundational game-
theoretic concept of the Shapley value, and extending this concept to include
the critical component of heterogeneous user privacy. Specifically, the proposed
project investigates the technical questions of how to quantify the cost of
providing privacy, how to monetize the value of data at various heterogeneous
levels of privacy, and how to enable platforms to design fair incentive
structures. The proposed investigation is highly interdisciplinary, including
elements of optimization, machine learning, probability theory, and statistics,
as well as critically, from relevant aspects of economics and game theory such
as Nash equilibria and Shapley value to treat concepts like fairness and value.
The project aims to bridge the recent advancements in rigorous privacy
guarantees for statistical inference and machine learning settings with the
economics of quantifying the value of data under heterogeneous privacy
requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.