* 2232368
* SII-NRDZ: Radio Astronomy Dynamic Satellite Inteference-Mitigation and Spectrum Sharing (RADYSISS)
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* David DeBoer, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* John Chapin
* 09/30/2025
* USD 1,499,985.00

The RADYSIS project prototypes an automated system for dynamically sharing the
electromagnetic (radio-frequency) spectrum in defined geographic zones. The
system seeks to improve spectrum access for ground-based radio astronomy
facilities and for low-earth-orbit-observing passive-sensing satellites. Within
a defined zone, the RADYSIS spectrum sharing system dynamically grants spectrum
access requests based on the current state of other users, such as their
location and operating frequency, in ways that prevent and mitigate
interference. Goals of the spectrum sharing system include enabling radio
astronomers to make observations outside the bands reserved for passive sensing
and protecting earth-observing satellites from increasing interference by
terrestrial wireless communications systems. By helping protect passive users,
the project supports better scientific return from observatory investments. By
advancing the goal of secure, dynamic spectrum sharing between passive and
active systems, the project supports the social and economic benefits that come
from continued growth in wireless usage. By serving as a pathfinder for the
National Radio Dynamic Zone concept, the project delivers lessons learned that
can be used to enhance spectrum sharing for other sites and applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RADYSIS spectrum sharing system is an enhancement to
the Google Citizens Broadband Radio Service (CBRS) Spectrum Access System (SAS).
The Google CBRS SAS is an operational system currently supporting nationwide
spectrum sharing in the 3550 to 3700 MHz band. This team of investigators will
enhance the Google CBRS SAS to add protection for earth observation satellites
by incorporating a satellite database and a real-time geospatial spectrum
sharing capability. The project adds protection for radio astronomy by enhancing
the SAS with mechanisms to: interface to the Hat Creek Radio Observatory (HCRO)
daily operational planning system; publish radio astronomy observation plans to
other users employing a new standard based on the Defense Information Services
Agency TARDyS3 specification; rapidly identify interference incidents based on
reports from spectrum users and sensor networks; and rapidly mitigate
interference using a new automated negotiation service that interacts with
federal and non-federal systems. Field tests at HCRO will explore behavior and
benefits of the prototype spectrum sharing system for radio astronomy through
tests involving the Allen Telescope Array. The field tests will explore behavior
and benefits for earth-observing satellites through one of the following
methods: collaboration with proposed LEO polar-orbiting cubesats designed to
detect 5G/6G transmissions; collaboration with microwave satellites operated by
the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration; or by deploying microwave
sounders on high-altitude aircraft or weather
balloons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.