* 2232601
* CC* Data Storage: Supporting Big-Data Edge Computing using Hybrid and Cloud-Native Storage Infrastructure
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Xiaosong Li, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

The University of Washington (UW) Information Technology (UW-IT) and the Office
of Vice Provost for Research are supported by a Campus Cyberinfrastructure (CC*)
award to create a novel central data storage, curation, and sharing platform.
The core tenant of this research ecosystem is the development of a scalable,
elastic, low-latency data storage framework supporting a wide range of
interdisciplinary research, bolstered by advanced high-throughput data science
tools, an open-source high-performance data management system, and the expertise
of professional storage cyberinfrastructure engineers. The new
cyberinfrastructure empowers researchers to perform scalable, data-intensive
analysis across disciplinary and institutional boundaries to inform new
discoveries, including materials, particle physics, environmental, medical, and
health sciences. The project develops a broad range of data science training
programs to provide interdisciplinary research experiences to the trainees and
supports data science education and research at partner minority-serving
institutions, preparing them for diverse education leadership roles, and
simultaneously inspiring enthusiasm for big-data sciences in the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project identifies and removes data storage
bottlenecks that are common across scientific domains and develops a modern data
storage cyberinfrastructure that scales scientific analyses to thousands of
processors and petabytes of data locally as well as on top of existing national
NSF cyberinfrastructure, while maintaining seamless synchronization with
commercial cloud-based storage. The deployment of the 9.6 PB usable new storage
infrastructure advances all big data research disciplines by providing scalable
low-latency data access and egress across all three local UW campuses (Seattle,
Bothell, Tacoma). The new data storage ecosystem facilitates a research paradigm
shift by (1) advancing the development of high-throughput data analytics; (2)
encouraging collaborative big-data research through a common data landing path;
(3) providing a highly secure yet permissive data management plan, to allow
compliant use with regulated research data; and (4) supporting convergent
science by bringing together substantially different science and engineering
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.