* 2232066
* EAGER: Building a Foundation for Hands-on STEM Learning at a Distance: Pedagogical Agents for Embodied Education in Virtual Reality
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Joshua McCoy, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 07/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Maker education holds significant promise to revitalize and diversify education
in mathematics, science and engineering, with its combination of low barriers to
entry for sophisticated technical practices, a rich community infrastructure of
resources and support, and a playful learning mindset. However, maker education
is best done in person, where the learner and facilitator can discuss the
artifacts being built, each can manipulate those objects, they can use gesture
to explain concepts and they can freely adjust their viewpoint on the workspace.
This makes it challenging to scale maker education, because it is difficult to
provide effective remote instruction and difficult to create instructional
resources. This proposal will develop embodied pedagogical agents -- animated
characters in a virtual environment -- that can provide facilitation on maker
tasks, focusing on electronic circuit design. Research will begin by building a
corpus of interactions in embodied virtual reality, where expert facilitators
and learners appear as animated avatars with live tracking to drive their
movements and interact to build electronic circuits. Phase two will build a
prototype pedagogical agent based on the corpus analysis and data. In the near
term, the project will provide direct educational benefit to youth from groups
underrepresented in STEM and will strengthen university-community partnerships.
Over longer time scales, the development of an empirically grounded catalog of
facilitation moves has potential to inform teacher education and pedagogical
agents can better support remote learning. The approach is scalable to a range
of tasks that rely on embodied interaction, such as skills training or physical
therapy.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposal will make significant contributions
to both learning and computer science. As maker facilitation often relies on
intuitive decisions by the teacher, it is not a well understood process. The
corpus will provide important data on the verbal and nonverbal strategies
employed to facilitate Maker education. Analysis of the corpus and later agent-
learner interactions will improve our understanding of facilitation, the role of
nonverbal communication, and how learning is guided in these settings. The
technical work to build the agent will establish the utility of pedagogical
agents in this domain. The corpus will also provide a unique and rich dataset on
which to develop future machine learning algorithms for behavior synthesis. The
dataset will include verbal and nonverbal behavior, along with a full coding of
the environment and interaction objects and teaching moves applied by the
facilitator, exceeding anything currently available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.