* 2232628
* CC* Regional Computing: Helping Our Researchers Upgrade their Science (HORUS)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Robert Stovall, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

The HORUS project combines existing large-scale scientific data storage from the
previously funded NSF OSiRIS project with a broad range of computational
resources to enable accelerated scientific discovery for universities, colleges
and community colleges in Michigan and the surrounding regions. The project
focuses on providing easy access to diverse computing and storage resources,
both of which are required for scientific research and analysis. This will be
especially beneficial for researchers at smaller institutions, enabling them to
more effectively contribute to society by expediting their research. In
addition, through its connection to OSG and the PATh project, it will serve as
an on-ramp to even larger scale resources across the nation when that is
needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project establishes a set of compute servers to
complement the existing OSIRIS storage system attached to the MERIT statewide
research and education network in Michigan. The system consists of 4 GPU nodes
(each with two A100 GPUs), 10 Large Memory compute nodes (each with two AMD Epyc
7F72 3.2 GHz 24 core processors) and 10 compute nodes (each with 2 AMD Epyc 7H12
2.6GHz 64 core processors). This resource and associated services provide
computational services to a suite of universities including University of
Michigan, Wayne State University, Oakland University, Eastern Michigan
University, and Oakland Community College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.