* 2232367
* Planning: IUPUI Plan for Center for Equity in Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Mohamed Nalim, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 08/31/2024
* USD 99,999.00

The Center for Equity in Engineering (CEE) planning project at Indiana
University-Purdue University Indianapolis (IUPUI) will develop a plan to
establish an NSF-supported CEE to broaden participation of students, faculty,
and staff of diverse backgrounds in the Purdue School of Engineering &amp;
Technology (PSET). The CEE will be planned with the input of internal and
external stakeholders to innovatively transform PSET by growing the enrollment
of underrepresented (UR) students, including women, ethnic minorities, veterans,
and students with disabilities, as well as by promoting their retention, timely
graduation, and future success. The proposed CEE will strongly magnify the
enrollment, graduation and career success of UR students in Indiana, the
Midwest, and nationwide, particularly by expanding PSET’s ongoing sharing of
best practices with other urban-serving engineering schools. CEE planning will
strengthen engagement with local high-schools and organizations that serve UR
populations. A successful CEE will have enormous impact on UR participation in
STEM-based careers and may provide Midwest industries in particular with a much
more diversified and broader talent base. Improved learning pedagogies and the
organizational, cultural, and structural changes driven by the CEE will benefit
students of all backgrounds in their engineering careers. The CEE will widely
share knowledge about best practices in broadening participation in engineering
through PSET’s existing and new partnerships with other engineering schools
nationally, as well as through other dissemination
outlets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PSET is on an innovative urban campus in a city
that has rapidly diversified its population, supporting a highly industrialized
State economy increasingly in need of a trained engineering workforce. IUPUI has
been nationally recognized for assessment and learning innovations, first-year
experiences and learning communities, and commitment to the UN Sustainable
Development Goals (SDGs). IUPUI has vigorous Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion
(DEI)-focused efforts that are yielding positive outcomes. PSET at IUPUI offers
numerous accredited programs as pathways to engineering-related careers and has
notable DEI accomplishments in recent years, including strongly increasing its
enrollment of women and students of color. CEE planning activities will leverage
PSET’s newly published 2021 DEI Plan, which is aligned around four diversity
indicators: I) Viability and Vitality; II) Education and Scholarship; III)
Climate and Intergroup Relations; and IV) Access and Success. PSET has strived
to adopt and subsequently apply these four diversity indicators, as defined by
Dr. Daryl Smith’s book: Diversity’s Promise for Higher Education: Making it
Work, as an organizational framework for PSET’s DEI strategic plan and a
substrate for CEE planning activities. PSET will utilize four existing task
forces aligned with each of these diversity indicators, which include students,
faculty, staff, alumni, corporate partners, and additional community
representatives and friends. Moreover, IUPUI’s framework to support the UN SDGs,
as well as other institutional structures and programs and external
relationships, will be incorporated into the CEE planning process. An improved
first-year curriculum could feature the SDGs as a motivating force for diverse
students to study and succeed in engineering. The CEE ultimately aims to
strengthen students’ engineering identity, self-efficacy, and social capital,
while building community to dispel explicit or implicit
biases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.