* 2232282
* Boundary-Layers of the Cold and Dark Atmospheres
* GEO,AGS
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2025
* Gilberto Fochesatto, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 11/30/2025
* USD 745,652.00

This award is to investigate atmospheric boundary layers in the cold and dark
atmospheres of the extreme Alaskan winters. The stringent radiation and
atmospheric flow conditions in which the Alaskan boundary layer develops
challenge our research in both experimental and modeling approaches. In such
harsh winter conditions, the project will conduct a field intensive experiment
to document radiation, turbulence, composition and dynamics using surface,
remote sensing and in-situ unmanned aircraft systems. The research will advance
our understanding of physical processes taking place in radiative-driven
boundary layers combining the set of observations with mesoscale/microscale
modeling. Research impacts are geared towards improving understanding of air
pollution, meteorological forecasting and regional climate products in polar
regions during winters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In specific, the project focuses on
understanding how outstanding surface radiative cooling, surface inhomogeneity,
atmospheric composition and thermodynamics result in specific boundary-layer
turbulent and dynamic states and how they are represented in mesoscale models.
This project will focus on the following physical processes: 1) the buildup and
breakup of shallow-stratified surface-based temperature inversion layers during
stagnant anticyclone synoptic conditions, 2) the boundary-layer behavior
including surface-based temperature inversion layer and elevated synoptic
temperature inversion layers during anticyclone and transitions to cyclone
conditions, their radiative coupling and their feedback effects on the surface
turbulence, and 3) the boundary-layer dynamic and turbulent regimes (vertical
and horizontal) in the presence of shallow cold flows controlling mixing and
transport resulting on transient boundary-layer states. The experimental
datasets are unique in the sense that current surface parameterizations in
models do not fully account for the indicated mechanisms and interactions in the
meteorological framework and conditions. The importance of this research is
highlighted by the need to advance understanding of the chemistry and
microphysics of particulate matter and gases in the stringent conditions of the
polar atmospheres. Inherent to the physical and chemical transformations of air
pollution products is our ability to connect sources to receptors based on
ground based or airborne observational platforms (IGAC-ALPACA field experiment).
This project fills this specific gap providing critical observations, mesoscale
modeling assessment and model validation to improve model representation of
physical processes leading to extreme boundary-layer states. Similarly,
improving forecasting of surface winds and air temperatures and advancing high
resolution climate products in polar atmospheres requires a better
representation of radiative boundary-layers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.