* 2232720
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Small: Technical Debt Management in Dynamic and Distributed Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Yuanfang Cai, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2026
* USD 310,807.00

The vast and ever-evolving software industry is rapidly adopting distributed
computing paradigms. These paradigms are supported by robust cloud-based
infrastructures and by newer programming languages and frameworks. While this
brings many benefits, it also brings new problems. The most pressing issue is
that—as with traditional monolithic systems—the structure of this modern
software also decays from an accumulation of implementation shortcuts, a form of
technical debt. This situation is pervasive throughout the software industry.
Such debt grows, largely unnoticed, until it impacts software stability,
maintenance costs, and, ultimately, the financial performance of a company. But
few projects pay down the debt, because they have no way to pinpoint it, monitor
it, visualize it, or quantify it, especially for modern distributed (e.g.,
microservice-based) systems, or systems built using dynamic languages where
dependencies are implicit and diverse. The critical issue facing the software
industry is: how to effectively measure the complexity and risk of these
contemporary software systems and how to pinpoint the sources of their design
debt? Given the implicit and distributed nature of these modern systems,
existing complexity measures and anti-patterns defined for traditional
monolithic systems no longer fit. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will
address this challenge through the following thrusts. The first thrust creates a
unified model to capture heterogeneous and distributed entities and relations,
using various techniques such as type inference. The second thrust empirically
explores and defines a set of anti-patterns that capture architecture/design
debts for dynamically typed and distributed systems, building on the unified
model created in the first thrust. The third thrust explores and formally
defines complexity metrics suitable for these contemporary systems. These new
anti-patterns and metrics will be defined based on fundamental principles of
software design, and empirically validated using a large number of open source
and industrial projects. This project addresses pressing and widespread issues
in the enormous and rapidly changing software industry, and will enable
designers and managers to visualize their design debt, to quantify the impact of
such debt, and to make informed decisions to improve the value of their
products. This project has the potential to deliver significant industrial
impact: improving the software products and development processes that drive US
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.