* 2232550
* SBIR Phase II:  Endoluminal Fixation of a Distraction Enterogenesis Device
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Andre Bessette, ECLIPSE ENTEROGENESIS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 04/30/2025
* USD 970,484.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is the advancement of an innovative therapy for
Short Bowel Syndrome. Compared to current non-curative treatments that are
chronic and associated with dangerous complications, rehospitalization, and high
mortality, the proposed solution has the potential to substantially improve
outcomes and quality-of-life for patients and their families. The potential
commercial impact of this project is likewise substantial. Treating short bowel
syndrome currently costs hundreds of thousands of dollars per patient per year.
adds more than $5 billion to US healthcare expenditures annually. Thus, the
proposed curative solution can lead to enormous savings in dollars and in
specialistsâ€™ time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase II project will create a curative therapy for patients with Short
Bowel Syndrome, which is currently managed with intravenous nutrition and lacks
effective treatments. The proposed solution will lengthen the intestine,
increasing the absorptive surface area and restoring the natural function of the
gut, enabling patients to get sufficient nutrition from the food they eat. The
proposed system comprises nondestructive tissue anchors and a spring that pushes
against them to stretch the intestine and force it to grow. Having previously
developed the tissue anchors, this project develops a delivery method that will
allow the system to be implanted in the intestine through a minimally invasive
procedure. Feedback will be gathered from pediatric gastroenterologists and
surgeons about the delivery method, and device performance will be measured in
pre-clinical large-animal studies. Successful completion of the proposed project
will demonstrate intestinal lengthening in vivo, achieved via a minimally
invasive procedure, and establish a foundation for planning subsequent
preclinical testing that will be required for regulatory approval to
commercialize the product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.