* 2232149
* I-Corps: Enhancing Sensory Processing via Noninvasive Neuromodulation
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Qi Wang, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of technology that accurately perceives details of tactile,
auditory, and visual stimuli required for completing the tasks necessary for
daily life and independent living. Impaired sensory processing may cause
misperceptions and miscommunication that can be frustrating, debilitating, and
dangerous. This technology rapidly modulates sensory processing and could
provide an immediate benefit across many potential use cases. By restoring clear
sensory processing, this technology seeks to facilitate a return to socializing,
exercise, hobbies, and employment for many individuals who have withdrawn from
those activities due to chronic sensory issues. An enhancement of sensory
processing may improve the ability to communicate easily, ambulate safely, and
handle objects with dexterity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is
based on the development of a method of rapidly enhancing the accuracy and
detail of sensory information processed in the brain via a noninvasive
neuromodulation technique. In both animal and human studies, enhanced sensory
processing translated to increased sensory acuity as evidenced by improved
performance on sensory tasks. This technology includes wearable neural
stimulation patches that could treat a variety of clinical causes of impaired
sensory processing. This patches cause tonic activation of the locus coeruleus-
norepinephrine (LC-NE) system in the brain and have resulted in a rapid
enhancement of thalamic sensory processing. This NE-enhanced sensory processing
state increased the perceptual sensitivity of awake animals performing sensory
tasks. The vagus nerve can be stimulated noninvasively in humans by delivering
electric current transcutaneously, providing an effective and safe method of
neuromodulation. This novel bioelectronic method of using continuous tonic VNS
provides sensory enhancement on-demand.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.