* 2232206
* RAPID: Data Fusion for Structural Assessment of the Fern Hollow Bridge Replacement During Construction
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* John Brigham, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 07/31/2023
* USD 141,479.00

The recent collapse of the Fern Hollow bridge in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania,
highlighted how proactive assessment and maintenance strategies are required to
operate the large, interconnected infrastructure of the country. This Grant for
Rapid Response Research (RAPID) award will focus on obtaining high-fidelity
three-dimensional models of the bridge replacement throughout every major
construction phase. Each sequential scan will be collected in the same reference
system, to allow for consecutive reconstructions to be compared quantitatively.
Since the landscape will evolve rapidly, this unique data will allow for
analyses to assess the fast-paced dynamic changes in structural response. The
obtained data and the related analyses bring the potential to significantly aid
further technology development towards design for rapid construction as well as
efficient bridge monitoring and non-destructive assessment of structural
systems. This project will benefit society by creating novel science and
technology for (i) the acquisition of high-resolution data from a bridge by
means of different sensing techniques, (ii) data fusion approaches to interpret
such information, and (iii) the translation of such information to structural
assessment of the resisting elements over time. There is clear potential for
this research to serve as a benchmark to improve the maintenance of aging
infrastructure in a timely fashion, while also providing valuable information on
the reconstruction of a collapsed bridge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal
of the research is to characterize the time-dependent evolution of the
structural response in pre-stressed reinforced concrete bridges during
construction. The data will be acquired by the use of both laser-based and
camera sensors mounted on unmanned aerial systems. Simultaneous Localization and
Mapping algorithms will be employed for the fusion of the two datasets and
subsequent reconstruction of the three-dimensional models. The research
hypothesis is that the richer datasets obtained by means of the data fusion
algorithms will enable more accurate semantic segmentation of the reconstructed
scenes, by leveraging the high spatial resolution of the laser-based measurement
and the color information obtained from the camera sensors. This project
provides the opportunity to advance both the use and application of measurement
technology and the combination of such technology with inverse analysis methods.
The data will be directly usable to create novel “scan-to-analysis” digital
tools and enable remarkable advancements in structural health monitoring and
prognosis of pre-stressed reinforced concrete bridges, with specific attention
devoted to incorporating construction information in the system
assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.