* 2232796
* A Global Distributed Observing Program for Shear, Energy Flux, and Mixing by Internal Waves
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Ren-Chieh Lien, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Baris Uz
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,376,422.00

Mixing rates in the ocean of the future will be determined to a large extent by
the distribution of internal waves. Changes in the forcing of these waves by
winds and tides, and modifications of the currents and density stratification
that modulate internal wave propagation, evolution, and eventual dissipation
into turbulence, are likely to be simulated with some skill by numerical coupled
climate models. But the waves themselves and their impacts on the climate system
through diffusive transport of heat, chemicals, and other tracers are a more
difficult challenge. This project starts a global sampling program for internal
waves using profiling floats- measuring temperature, salinity, velocity, and
turbulenceâ€”that will yield new insights into internal wave regimes and
parameterizations, and that will provide direct and derived data products
tailored for use by modeling groups for comparison and validation. Velocity
profiling floats paired with microstructure sensors are an ideal, proven
platform for globally- distributed measurements of internal waves and their
mixing impacts. Much of the energy in the internal wave field enters at large
vertical scales (particularly true for internal tides), yet energy dissipation
happens through shear and strain at small scales. Velocity profiles resolve this
full range of vertical scales, and bursts of profiles provide the direction and
magnitude of energy flux in dominant frequency bands. Deployment of profiling
floats in all dynamical regimes around the globe will provide data sets
resolving both the waves and their impact on mixing. This project will also
create data practices for sharing direct and derived products (metrics) with
numerical modelers. The improved insight into internal wave forcing,
propagation, and dissipation will lead to improved forecasts of processes that
are influenced by internal wave mixing and transport. These include centennial-
scale forecasts of heat and carbon penetration into the deep ocean, seasonal
forecasts of coastal ecosystem nutrient supply through upwelling and shelf-slope
exchange, and decadal and longer evolution of upper-ocean stratification and the
meridional overturning circulation. Once developed, the sampling methodologies
and data tools can be applied to future velocity and turbulence profiling float
data sets. In addition, this work will permit maintenance of instrument
development and seagoing field work expertise and will support ongoing education
and outreach efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal activities
Include (1) deployment of 50 velocity and microstructure profiling floats from 6
cruises of opportunity, over 3 years, in diverse locations around the globe
spanning the range of the dominant parameters that determine the internal wave
environment. (2) derivation of internal wave products for use in (a) estimating
internal wave impacts on mixing and the kinetic energy budget of the ocean, (b)
projecting surface signatures of internal waves seen by satellite sensors into
subsurface vertical structure and frequency bands, (c) validation of internal
wave resolving models, and (d) internal wave resolving data assimilation. (3)
Development of operational data pathways from velocity and microstructure
profile collection to operational modeling and archiving centers. (4) Using the
merged and augmented profiling float measurement database to assess the relative
roles of wind, tides, topography, and mesoscale variability in generating and
dissipating the energy seen in the oceanic internal wave
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.