* 2232681
* Engineering Quantum Dots and Photonic Metamaterials for Ultrasensitive and Multiplexed Digital Resolution Biomolecule Detection
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2026
* Brian Cunningham, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 02/28/2026
* USD 399,999.00

This project will develop highly sensitive approaches for detecting many
disease-related molecules, called “biomarkers,” in blood at the same time. These
biomarkers will be detected by binding to light-emitting nanoparticles, called
Quantum Dots (QDs), that serve as a bright tag. By designing QDs to be easily
distinguished from each other, the research team envisions the capability to
detect as many as 45 different biomarkers in a single blood droplet. Biomarker
detection will be performed on engineered surfaces called “photonic crystals”
(PCs) that are able to amplify the QD brightness by several thousand-fold,
allowing QDs to be counted individually. The PCs also serve to direct the QD
light output in specific directions that are measured to tell the difference
between each type of QD. In addition, new approaches will be developed that can
rapidly convert each biomarker molecule into many QDs on the PC surface. By
combining PCs and QDs, the sensor can be simple, fast, and inexpensive, enabling
biomarker tests to be performed in places like clinics and hospitals. The Team
will develop a broadly accessible short course entitled “What’s in Your Blood?
Genomics Testing and You,” to be offered through the Osher Lifelong Learning
Institute. Aspects of the course will be adapted for public-facing programs
offered through the Woese Institute for Genomic Biology and an interactive
display at “World of Genomics” events that are offered annually at large science
museums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultrasensitive, ultraselective, and highly
multiplexed detection of biomolecules within complex media is a central
component of disease diagnostics, life science research, and environmental
monitoring. New “digital resolution” biomolecular detection methods are leading
toward unprecedented detection limits, but are hindered by complex procedures,
thermal cycling, and stringent sample preparation. Recent advances in the
capability for photonic metamaterial surfaces to substantially amplify the
collected photon output from semiconductor quantum dots are making assays with
digital molecule precision compatible with small, low cost instruments. Applying
QD tags with photonic crystal fluorescence amplification makes it possible to
digitally count target molecules and to perform multiplexing through the ability
to distinguish QD emission wavelengths by their outcoupled emission pattern. As
a result, single-step, room temperature, enzyme-free assays for microRNA with
attomolar-level detection limits and &gt;6 log(10) orders of dynamic range can
be achieved, with the potential to extend even further. In this project, the
Cunningham and Smith labs will design and synthesize novel QD tags that
incorporate engineered multispectral brightness, encodable emission saturation,
and encodable PC enhancement factor. The QDs will specifically couple with
photonic metamaterial surfaces to enhance their excitation, to modulate their
lifetime, and to extract their emission to differentiate up to 45 distinct QD
labels for molecular multiplexing. Finally, the team will introduce a new
paradigm for biomolecule detection in which each target molecule can generate
multiple downstream digital-resolution QD detection events to achieve
ultrasensitive detection limits with simple and rapid
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.