* 2232864
* CICI: RSSD: LaSIC: Labeled Security Information Capture
* CSE,OAC
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Julio Ibarra, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 01/31/2026
* USD 599,647.00

The University of Memphis (UofM) and Florida International University (FIU) are
partnering on project LaSIC (Labeled Security Information Capture) to support
NSFâ€™s mission to secure scientific assets. Scientific research relies heavily on
cyber assets (networked components and services) that must operate securely to
support fundamental scientific research and increase confidence in outcomes and
conclusions. Developing robust security requires high-quality, trustworthy
datasets to tune, test and validate security models and mechanisms. The research
value of such datasets increases greatly if they are labeled, which is essential
for developing new machine learning (ML) techniques, and establishing ground
truth. However, due to their distributed nature, volume and privacy issues,
labeled datasets have been extremely hard to produce and distribute to the
security community while respecting user privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LaSIC
captures, labels and distributes real traffic from AmLight, a production
international research and education network serving several scientific
communities, to researchers working on securing scientific data and artifacts.
AmLight provides connectivity to numerous science disciplines, including
Astronomy, Climate, High-Energy Physics, Genomics, and more. AmLight connects
Latin America, the Caribbean, and Africa to the U.S. through multiple submarine
optical cable systems, as well as other networks such as ESnet and Internet2 in
the continental US. LaSIC uses an existing, unique capture infrastructure and
capabilities to record, process, and label datasets, including the ability to
capture fine-grained network telemetry through Intel Tofino switches, a custom
packet capture tool that supports speeds up to 40G, unsampled flow data derived
from raw packet capture, network-wide sampled Netflow data, and alerts from a
commercial Intrusion Detection System (IDS) deployed in the network. LaSIC
provides multimode, structured, and labeled cybersecurity datasets of networking
events that support a wide range of security research. Finally, LaSIC
distributes these datasets through various mechanisms according to the
sensitivity of the data to protect user privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.