* 2232106
* EAGER: Evaluating a drought-driven hypothesis for the origin of obligate apomixis
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Amanda Grusz, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Fehlberg
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,930.00

Obligate apomixis—asexual reproduction by seed, spore, or egg—has evolved
repeatedly across the tree of life, in diverse organisms ranging from animals
(such as reptiles, insects, and fishes) to angiosperms (flowering plants) and
other vascular plants. Despite its many origins, and intriguing ecological and
evolutionary parallels among them, little is known regarding the causes and
long-term consequences of this heritable reproductive syndrome. Some recent
studies have proposed that drought, or periodic water limitation, could be key
to driving the repeated evolution of obligate apomixis. This project unites
environmental, developmental, and evolutionary data to evaluate the drought
hypothesis, leveraging ferns as a model system. Ferns are ideal for this work
because observing meiosis (i.e., the specialized cell division that produces
spores/gametes) is easy and efficient compared to other organisms. Additionally,
this study bridges generational gaps in technical expertise among next-
generation researchers for a variety of cutting-edge and classical approaches;
it stimulates interdisciplinary undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral
research, emphasizing the value and relevance of museum specimens for addressing
fundamental biological questions; and it expands international scientific
collaborations in Mexico and Latin America. Furthermore, because obligate
apomixis is highly coveted for, yet recalcitrant to, use in agricultural
applications (as a tool for stabilizing optimal genotypes), this study has the
potential to yield valuable insights with practical implications for humanity,
especially regarding medicine and global food production.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research combines genetic, spatial, environmental,
and life history data, across multiple evolutionary and ecological scales, for
around 47 species comprising Myriopteris Fée, a well-supported clade in the fern
subfamily Cheilanthoideae (Pteridaceae). Preliminary data are integrated with
newly-gathered observations of reproductive traits (karyotype, gametophyte
development, and spore size/number), climate and microhabitat, and a fully-
sampled, time-calibrated phylogeny to rigorously interrogate the relationship
between drought and the evolution of obligate apomixis. Specifically, these
results are leveraged to address three main questions: Does phylogenetic inertia
shape the distribution of obligate apomixis, or associated traits, within the
focal clade? Does macroecological niche predict obligate apomixis among deserts
of North America, including the Chihuahuan, Sonoran, and Mojave? And, is
microhabitat significantly associated with obligate apomixis or its constituent
traits across the focal clade? Importantly, this work also serves to resolve
complex evolutionary relationships among diverse, previously undescribed, hybrid
and polyploid lineages within Myriopteris.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.