* 2232969
* SBIR Phase II:  Optimized Hydrothermal Reactor for Scalable and Affordable Destruction of Per- and Polyfluorinated Substances (PFAS)
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Brian Pinkard, AQUAGGA, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rajesh Mehta
* 04/30/2025
* USD 979,270.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is the acceleration of a new technology for the
destruction of toxic per- and polyfluoroalkyl (PFAS), otherwise known as
“forever chemicals”. PFAS chemicals are widely used in firefighting foams and
consumer goods. However, they are incredibly recalcitrant environmental
pollutants, highly toxic to humans, and very hard to destroy. Widespread
contamination of soil, groundwater, and drinking water at sites near airports,
military bases, and manufacturing sites is driving a global effort to remove and
destroy PFAS toxins. PFAS are poorly broken down by incineration and they do not
have a natural half-life. The environmental remediation industry needs effective
technology for on-site, end-of-life destruction of PFAS. The technology being
developed in this SBIR Phase II project is energy efficient, scalable, pairs
with existing technologies, and can be deployed at-scale for the destruction of
PFAS-rich wastes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase II project
seeks to reduce technical risks related to system corrosion and chemical
consumption in the development and scale-up of the hydrothermal alkaline
treatment (HALT) process for the destruction of PFAS. Hydrothermal processing
has historically been plagued by challenges with corrosion and low component
lifetimes, and/or has requiring the use of expensive alloys, replaceable system
components, and/or elegant chemical corrosion prevention strategies. This said,
hydrothermal processes are some of the most effective and efficient technologies
for destroying hazardous wastes, such as PFAS. This project will focus on
measuring and mitigating the material corrosion challenges to enable more
widespread adoption of hydrothermal processes for waste disposal. Additionally,
HALT processing requires the use of alkaline chemicals as process additives. In
this project, by adopting chemical recycling strategies, the use of chemicals
may be drastically reduced, improving overall unit economics and reducing the
environmental footprint of HALT processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.