* 2232049
* EAGER: Toward unifying theories of living systems
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Olga Dudko, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 07/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

The goal of this project is to find physical principles that unify our
understanding of the seemingly unrelated and strikingly diverse membrane-fusion-
mediated processes in biology. These processes include the invasion of a host
cell by an enveloped virus, the rapid and precisely timed communication between
neurons, the fertilization of an egg by sperm, skeletal muscle formation,
carcinogenesis, intracellular trafficking, and cell secretion. The results of
this project will serve as an important step towards addressing the formidable
complexity of living systems through simplifying yet powerfully predictive
physical theories. While such simplifying and unifying approaches are common in
physics in the contexts of inanimate matter, they are underdeveloped in many
areas of biology. The educational and outreach activities associated with this
project will promote the advancement of physics research that straddles
traditional subject boundaries and the recruitment of young scientists from all
segments of society to the field of biological physics. This project will
introduce students from biology backgrounds to the enabling power of
quantitative approaches in scientific discovery and will facilitate the use of
physics by biology students in their research. These activities will encourage
early engagement with research as a catalyst in awakening and maintaining
interest of undergraduate students in science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Membrane
fusion refers to the topology-changing process during which the membrane
surrounding an independent biological entity (an enveloped virus, a vesicle, or
a cell) recombines with the membrane of a target cell such that their contents
can mix. Membrane fusion-mediated processes are realized by diverse entities,
are regulated by structurally unrelated molecules, respond to different
triggers, and occur on different timescales. Yet there are hints of unifying
principles: in all these processes, the overcoming of the high energy barriers
that hinder fusion is facilitated by protein conformational transitions in
response to a trigger, which allows the biological processes that occur by
fusion to proceed on time scales as short as a fraction of a millisecond. This
project aims to capture these principles in the form of a unifying analytical
theory rooted in nonequilibrium statistical mechanics that is reasonably simple
and abstract yet generates concrete, testable predictions. Uncovering the
unifying principles of living systems is crucial for the understanding of the
mechanisms by which evolution drives living systems toward their functional
behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Molecular
Biophysics Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences and the
Physics of Living Systems in the Division of Physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.