* 2232930
* SBIR Phase I:  Hybrid DNA-protein quantification platform for point-of-care diagnosis of syphilis and human immunodeficiency viruses (HIV)
* TIP,TI
* 02/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Alexander Trick, PROMPT DIAGNOSTICS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 07/31/2024
* USD 255,667.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the creation of the first all-in-one
automated syphilis test available at the point-of-care. The number of syphilis
cases in the United States have doubled in the past 5 years with a five-fold
increase in congenital syphilis passed from a pregnant mother to the fetus.
Annual infections now account for $170 million in lifetime medical costs. This
low-cost, portable test will enable care providers and outreach efforts to
immediately diagnose and treat patients in a single visit to halt the spread of
syphilis infections in the most vulnerable populations. Syphilis testing in this
platform will be readily combined with hybrid detection of human
immunodeficiency viruses (HIV) to streamline syphilis testing with existing
programs for HIV diagnosis and further encourage uptake of this test solution
into clinical practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project addresses the need for easier syphilis testing
solutions to provide comprehensive diagnosis on-site with the patient. Syphilis
diagnosis relies on two separate antibody tests, of which one requires
quantifying antibody levels with a tedious laboratory procedure called Rapid
Plasma Reagin (RPR) to confirm if the patient has an active infection. The lack
of resources and personnel to conduct RPR testing on-site severely limits the
ability of public health clinics to effectively diagnosis syphilis in a timely
manner. This project will combine both antibody tests including quantitative RPR
into an automated cartridge for rapid and complete syphilis diagnosis at the
point-of-care. The research proposed in this project will develop magnetic
particle-enabled assays for each antibody test and integrate the assays into a
multiplexed plastic cartridge. These cartridges, combined with a portable
instrument, will enable all steps required for syphilis diagnosis to be
completed within minutes in an affordable and easy-to-use
format.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.