* 2232857
* Research Infrastructure: CC* Data Storage: Multi-Petabyte Open Storage (MPOS) at the American Museum of Natural History
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Scott Schaefer, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 498,202.00

This project provides the American Museum of Natural History (AMNH) a major
expansion of data management and large-scale centralized storage supporting a
broad range of research projects and provides supporting services to facilitate
the acquisition, processing, and sharing of data. This significant expansion of
storage and additional services allows AMNH to address storage and data
management needs institutionally and addresses long-standing problems acutely
felt across the Museum’s research divisions and graduate school.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;In this project, AMNH expands its data storage capabilities using
Open Storage Network (OSN) storage pods, providing over 2 petabytes (PB) of
centralized storage for active research data. The OSN pods are connected to the
Museum’s Science DMZ, a high-performance network designed for research data
flows, which provides connections to onsite high-performance computing (HPC)
clusters, data transfer nodes (DTNs) in labs, and analytical systems, as well as
to other institutions and resources in the cloud via a connection to the
Internet2. The storage provided by the OSN pods is directly accessible by both
local and cloud-based resources such as compute nodes at various cloud services
and supercomputing centers nationally. AMNH leverages the Integrated Rule-
Oriented Data System (iRODS) for data management, indexing, automated ingest,
storage tiering, compliance, data integrity, and publishing services. The
Clowder Framework provides a scalable data management framework supporting any
data format across multiple research domains. Finally, AMNH makes available 20%
of its allocated OSN storage to the shared OSN cloud, making it accessible to
researchers nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.