* 2232810
* CC* Data Storage: Flexible Affordable Scalable Technology for Research Storage (FAST-Research Storage)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* John Board, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

The Flexible Affordable Scalable Technology for Research Storage (FAST) is a
shared research storage system based on commodity data center hardware and open
source CEPH software that provides a flexible, high-performance, cost-effective,
tiered data storage system in support of research data storage requirements. The
FAST system provides both Network Attached Storage (NAS) and Object Store
storage models, along with guidance for choosing wisely between them. Object
storage services support efficient packaging of data sets, including the
complete set of metadata, for both operational use and long-term data storage.
FAST also includes scripts to package, migrate data between storage tiers, and
facilitate the use of appropriate storage to meet researcherâ€™s requirements.
Cloud-based long-term cold storage environments are part of the data lifecycle
to support data retention requirements cost-effectively. By using commodity
hardware FAST is easily expanded and capable of incorporating researcher
purchased hardware into the environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The system (20%)
will be shared with the community via the Open Science Data Federation (OSDF) as
well as with minority service institutions in North Carolina through a community
storage grant program. Both sharing models allow researchers to publish data for
public consumption, stage data to facilitate local analysis and provide robust
storage service to schools which may not otherwise have access to these
services. The expected impact of FAST is to reduce the amount of time, effort,
and money that researchers spend managing their data, ensuring long-term access
to data, with the data stored in the right place at the right time and
cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.