* 2232860
* CC* Regional Computing: Taylor Geospatial Institute Regional AI Learning System
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* William Kramer, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

The Taylor Geospatial Institute Regional AI Learning System (TGI RAILS) project
provides a high-performance computing and data analysis system for use by the
regional consortium of academic institutions that is centered around the St.
Louis area and extends to states throughout the Midwest. The unifying focus of
this consortium is the Taylor Geospatial Institute (TGI), a comprehensive and
holistic geospatial research community of initially eight outstanding research
institutions in the Midwest central region. TGI comprises partnerships with
industry, government agencies, and research and educational entities to advance
multiple disciplines including AI, data analytics and geospatial science with
the targeted goals of producing significant societal benefits in the areas of
food systems, health and social equality, smart and resilient communities,
workforce development, national security, and economic
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TGI RAILS provides critical, shared computing
infrastructure that is otherwise lacking for the research and educational work
of the consortium, dramatically reducing time to insight for challenging
research investigations and providing staff, researchers, and students
experience with the latest AI and data analytics technologies. TGI RAILS
experience supports researchers in obtaining allocations on national computing
resources such as ACCESS systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TGI RAILS addresses
significant computational resource gaps at key under-resourced institutions,
particularly those serving minoritized or non-traditional students and
investigators. It prepares students with data science, computer science,
statistics, research, and scientific communication skills to design experiments
and communicate their findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.