* 2232532
* Collaborative Research: Linking 3He/4He with eruptive behavior: A time series analysis of recent Kilauea, Iceland, and La Palma eruptions
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2026
* Marc-Antoine Longpre, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 01/31/2026
* USD 74,624.00

Approximately 800 million people live in regions that are directly exposed to
volcanic hazards, yet eruptions remain difficult to forecast. In some cases,
earthquakes and ground swelling have been used to predict imminent volcanic
eruptions. In other instances, changes in volcanic gas emissions have been used
to infer changes in volcanic activity because gas emissions are thought to be
linked to the ascent of magmas beneath volcanoes preceding eruptions. This
project explores the possibility that volcanic gas chemistry might hold vital
clues about magma recharge that could help forecast the onset and course of
volcanic eruptions. Magmas from the deep Earth are rich in 3He (an isotope of
helium that is very rare compared to 4He). Thus, magma recharge events may cause
increases in 3He relative to 4He (i.e., higher 3He/4He). This hypothesis will be
tested by measuring 3He/4He values in lavas from recent eruptions in Hawai’i,
Iceland, and the Canary Islands. By comparing 3He/4He to other volcanic
indicators, including lava discharge rate, lava composition, earthquake
frequency and magnitude, and other chemical features of volcanic gases detected
by satellites, the team will attempt to link changes in 3He/4He to volcanic
activity. If helium systematics change in response to potentially hazardous
volcanic processes, real-time helium monitoring of volcanoes may be justified.
Not only does this project aim to broaden our understanding of volcanic systems,
it also emphasizes high school, undergraduate, and graduate education. In
partnership with the New Heights Charter School, in Brockton Massachusetts, the
science team will develop lectures and activities relating to volcanology. Two
undergraduate summer student fellows at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
will be recruited from City University of New York (CUNY), which has a diverse
student population. Two additional CUNY undergraduate students will participate
by conducting independent study projects. One graduate student enrolled in the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology-Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution Joint
Program will contribute to all stages of the research. And this work will
provide employment for an autistic woman through a partner organization that
facilitates rehabilitation for individuals with
disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Volcanic hazard forecasting
remains a pressing and elusive challenge for the volcanology community. Seismic
activity and ground deformation monitoring are often difficult to link with
magmatic processes. Integrative monitoring approaches show the most promise,
especially those that supplement established techniques with geochemical
monitoring. Helium isotopes show great potential in this regard because they (i)
are sensitive to recharge events and (ii) can be monitored—in fumaroles, soils,
geothermal waters, and lavas—during eruptions and during periods of repose.
Furthermore, previous work indicates that helium isotopes (3He/4He) are
sensitive to magma recharge events from the mantle. The goal of this project is
to assess the causes of 3He/4He variability on timescales of weeks to months in
order to determine whether costly real-time helium isotope monitoring efforts
would improve volcanic hazard forecasting. This study will produce magmatic
3He/4He time series records for three recent eruptions: the Lower Eastern Rift
Zone of Kīlauea in Hawaii (2018), Fagradalsfjall in Iceland (2021), and Cumbre
Vieja in the Canary Islands (2021). Magmatic helium will be extracted from
clinopyroxene and olivine mineral separates from lava samples spanning each
eruption. Comparison of lava 3He/4He, major and trace element abundances,
radiogenic isotopes, and remote sensing data—including ground deformation,
seismicity, satellite-based SO2 emissions, and lava discharge rates—will
establish whether magma recharge is principally responsible for 3He/4He
variability. Alternatively, source heterogeneity or lithospheric helium
assimilation might be dominant. By investigating multiple well-monitored
eruptions, this project will potentially identify common causes of helium
isotopic variability during volcanic eruptions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.