* 2232390
* SII-NRDZ: STRATA - STudy of INL for RAdio naTional fAcility
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Erik Kline, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* John Chapin
* 09/30/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This project studies creation of a National Radio Dynamic Zone (NRDZ) at the
Idaho National Laboratory (INL). The study envisions a national facility,
collaboratively operated by INL and the University of Southern California’s
Information Sciences Institute, for at-scale research and experimentation on
systems that use or manage the electromagnetic (radio-frequency) spectrum in
innovative ways. The study identifies the capabilities required for a NRDZ and a
national spectrum research facility, determines how the INL site and the team’s
abilities currently address the requirements, and identifies enhancements or
modifications required to resolve gaps. Historically, spectrum usage has been
tightly controlled through national regulations, which apply even at wireless
research facilities, significantly limiting research into advanced wireless
systems and spectrum management. Facilitating research is critical to promote
national leadership in spectrum-dependent sectors such as mobile wireless, and
to sustain the ongoing growth in spectrum usage that is essential for the
economy, scientific progress, public safety, and other national priorities. In
the near term, today’s manual spectrum coordination approach is sped up in the
NRDZ using automatic coordination, monitoring and enforcement processes that
allow experiments to be performed with fewer delays and increased safety. In the
long term, the vision is that national spectrum regulations can be relaxed in
the NRDZ, relying on automatic mechanisms to protect other users outside the
zone. Relaxing national regulations in the zone would allow experimentation
across wide frequency ranges with less limitation by the licenses and
restrictions established to prevent interference elsewhere.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INL presents an ideal location for a spectrum research
facility, operating 890 square miles of land and currently supporting wireless
experimentation. The proposed team combines the unique capabilities of INL and
the USC Information Sciences Institute to work towards creation of a national
facility capable of extensive spectrum experimentation while protecting other
users. The study will assess in detail the capabilities required for a NRDZ and
a national spectrum research facility. These capabilities include but are not
limited to: Hardware resources to enable experimentation, spectrum monitoring,
data collection and analysis tools, secure access control, experimental
isolation, remote and shared access, dynamic provisioning, and security
monitoring. The study will produce a report summarizing: 1) the capabilities of
the site and team, 2) upgrades required via an implementation plan, 3)
development, deployment, and operational costs, 4) spectrum access and
management capabilities, and 5) current and future community
engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.