* 2232494
* I-Corps: Combining Traditional Building Inspection Sensors with Deep Learning and Robotics
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Semiha Ergan, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to improve
buildings envelopes that exacerbate greenhouse gas emissions and cause quality
of life problems. The technology seeks to provide a non-invasive, integrated
solution to locate and document moisture intrusion, thermal bridges, and air
leaks to diagnose building envelope issues. The system identifies and quantifies
common envelope defects and applies long-wave radar and deep learning to detect
hidden deep moisture penetration and other major envelope defects. With this
system, it is possible to perform low-cost, targeted micro-retrofits to address
envelope issues. This project has the potential to (1) increase the efficiency
and detection abilities of building health monitoring techniques; (2) increase
the resilience of built infrastructure through comprehensive asset management
and preventative building maintenance owing to improved early detection
capabilities; (3) enable a strong cross collaboration across local government,
industry, non-profits, and academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
is based on the development of a non-invasive, integrated solution to locate and
document moisture intrusion, thermal bridges, and air leaks in buildings. The
system identifies and quantifies common envelope defects and applies long-wave
radar and deep learning to detect hidden deep moisture penetration and other
major envelope defects. Once identified, it may be possible to perform low-cost,
targeted micro-retrofits to address the envelope issues. This project is a
amalgamation of a number of complementary technologies that have the potential
to significantly improve the field of building health monitoring. Project
outcomes may enhance the ability to solve current building envelope inspections
problems, increase the resilience of widely-used aging commercial and
residential infrastructures, and provide a foundation for further study of non-
destructive testing on building envelopes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.