* 2232917
* CC* Regional Computing: Building Cyberinfrastructure to Forge a Regional Research Computing Alliance in Southern California
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Carl Kesselman, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2024
* USD 999,970.00

Educational institutions in Southern California, particularly those focused on
undergraduate studies, face challenges in accessing essential high-performance
computing (HPC) resources and cyber-infrastructure. This lack of accessibility
leads to decreased knowledge and experience with HPC among students and faculty
and inhibits advancements in data-intensive research activities. The University
of Southern California’s (USC) Center for Advanced Research Computing (CARC)
houses one of the largest HPC facilities in the region and is deploying new
cyberinfrastructure to expand their services and expertise to under-resourced
universities in the area. The implementation of this new HPC system with
corresponding user support services further solidifies the existing
collaboration between USC and the Los Nettos consortium, comprised of 6 member
universities and 30 associate networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new system
offers a similar computing environment to national HPC centers with advanced
computing capacity, high-speed network, and abundant research applications and
tools in its software stack. Additionally, the system leverages existing
cyberinfrastructure at USC such as central file systems, HPC cluster
interconnection, and federated authentication. This project significantly
increases the accessibility of advanced cyberinfrastructure to students and
researchers of regional institutions while catalyzing multi-institutional
research collaborations, thereby forming a computational research and education
hub in the region—the Southern California Research Computing
Alliance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.