* 2232776
* Workshop on Arithmetic and Topology Over Global Fields
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Jordan Ellenberg, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 08/31/2023
* USD 22,750.00

The award will fund participation in a workshop titled "Arithmetic and topology
over global fields," to be held October 7-9, 2022 at the University of
Wisconsin-Madison. This workshop will focus on developments at the interface
between two different fields of math, number theory and topology. The workshop
will bring together early-career mathematicians from both subjects in order to
spur further progress at this already-active boundary between fields. Funding
will be concentrated on graduate students, postdocs, and researchers without
other federal funding. Our conference also focuses on inclusiveness in the math
community by inviting many high-profile early-career female mathematicians, and
will apply to set up the conference in cooperation with the Association for
Women in Mathematics. A webpage with up-to-date information about the workshop
can be found at this link: https://sites.google.com/view/october-workshop/home.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Questions pertaining to monodromy have been highly
influential on recent work in areas like rational and integral points on
varieties, special points, unlikely intersections, statistics of Selmer groups,
etc. Many fundamental conjectures about motives or algebraic cycles are also
deeply connected to monodromy. This conference aims to bring together experts on
various topological aspects of varieties defined over arithmetic bases to give
talks to a wider audience consisting of graduate students, postdoctoral
researchers and other mathematicians working in arithmetic geometry. We also aim
for the workshop to be an environment for the participants at all levels to meet
and talk in person, and seek new collaborations, creating impact throughout the
field. We hope that the diversity of topics and talks given by senior
participants in the workshop will provide a fantastic opportunity for the junior
participants to learn about new developments and questions in the field. We
provide a 2-hour poster session for the junior participants, especially graduate
students, to present their projects and results to experts and peers. Our
advertisement and recruitment will prioritize graduate students and early-career
researchers, who stand to benefit the most from an introduction to this quickly-
moving area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.