* 2232404
* Conference: Incorporating Ethics into the Human-Centered Design of AI Solutions
* TIP,ITE
* 09/01/2022,02/28/2023
* John Horty, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Mike Pozmantier
* 02/28/2023
* USD 100,000.00

The goal of this workshop is to explore active human centered approaches to
develop a framework that supports the integration of ethical considerations and
constraints into the design of AIs, from the ground up, and starting from an
early phase of requirements gathering and feature specification. The hope is
thatthe human centered active approach, and the early consideration of ethical
and social requirements, will have a significant payoff in promoting human well-
being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will address four areas: 1.) Knowledge
Representation: The development of methodology(ies)for the acquisition,
validation, and representation of ethical information in a way that can be
incorporated into system design; 2.) Design Guidelines: Strategies that
incorporate human centered design principles into the design of User Interfaces
(UIs); 3.) Metrics: The definition of evaluation metrics to test the success and
limitations of prototype AI solutions in some selected domains; 4.) Regulation
and Compliance: Crafting regulations to be more easily incorporated during
design to improve and ensure compliance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.