* 2232120
* CAREER: A Highly Effective, Usable, Performant, Scalable Data Reduction Framework for HPC Systems and Applications
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2023,01/31/2023
* Dingwen Tao, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 01/31/2023
* USD 467,770.00

This CAREER project researches and develops novel algorithms and software to
improve the efficacy, usability, performance, and scalability of data reduction
for high-performance computing (HPC) systems and applications. It contributes to
the cyberinfrastructure (CI) of big data management for HPC applications in many
domains such as cosmology, climatology, seismology, and machine learning. The
research findings will be widely disseminated through open-source software
packages and publications in premier conferences and journals. An integrated
educational and outreach program is designed to foster CI workforce development,
including integration of concepts and use of data reduction in curricula,
research training for undergraduate and graduate students, and a specially
designed training program for scientists and engineers from universities and
national labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project simultaneously addresses
these four critical issues in scientific data reduction through comprehensive
analytical modeling and architectural performance optimization. Specific
scientific contributions include: (1) it builds lightweight models to accurately
estimate the compression ratio and quality of different techniques in the
prediction and encoding stages of prediction-based compression, and optimizes
the compression configurations to maximize the compression ratio under
compression quality constraints; (2) it develops new efficient predictors and
lossless encoding methods for lossy compression of scientific data on GPUs with
deep architectural optimizations to achieve both high throughput and ratio; and
(3) it deeply integrates the optimized compression with parallel I/O and MPI
libraries with a series of optimizations to improve the performance of data
movements and the scalability of HPC applications. The success of this research
agenda enables scientists and engineers to well address the increasingly severe
challenge of scientific data explosion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.