* 2232733
* Fast and Reliable Online Retraining and Adaptation for Robot Planning Despite Missing World Knowledge
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Gregory Stein, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 05/31/2026
* USD 499,481.00

The next generation of service robots will be required to act in unfamiliar and
ever-changing environments. At the request of human operators, such robots will
be expected to reliably complete complex objectives despite missing or out-of-
date information about their surroundings: locating key places, delivering
supplies, and finding personnel, even when they are uncertain where to look.
While machine learning has proven an important component of good behavior in
this domain, learning-driven strategies can be brittle to change, resulting in
poor performance in new or unfamiliar environments with little recourse to
improve without significant downtime and supervision. Poor performance begets
mistrust, limiting the adoption of service robots and thus their potential to
provide autonomy or assistance to human operators in settings ranging from homes
to hospitals. This project aims to overcome these limitations through
development of an approach for service robot decision-making designed to allow
state-of-the-art performance in challenging, unfamiliar environments and
facilitate fast and reliable improvement during deployment. Our contributions
will allow for more performant, reliable, and trustworthy robots capable of good
behavior in unstructured environments. One key aspect of our work will
facilitate non-expert users to quickly correct robot behavior, a capability
unique to our proposed approach in this domain that will help democratize robot
training, a step towards more trustworthy and ethical robots. Moreover, our
advancements will help to lower the barrier to entry for student engagement with
robotics and machine learning and our research program is integrated with
educational initiatives that engage both undergraduates and students from
underrepresented groups from D.C. area high schools.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Our
project will develop a principled approach for improving robot behavior during
deployment for long-horizon planning in partially-mapped environments,
emphasizing reliability, data efficiency, and performance. We will demonstrate
that the coupling of data-driven (learning-informed) and classical (STRIPS-
style) planning afforded by our abstraction will be a key enabler of this
advance; learning will augment model-based planning, allowing completeness and
introspection despite missing knowledge. Our robot will rely on two
complementary sources of information: (i) online experience, in which the robot
uses data it collects during deployment to self-audit and to retrain and adapt
its learned behaviors, and (ii) expert guidance, in which an environment expert
(e.g., a robot or human auditor) intervenes to prompt a change in long-horizon
behavior. Our project will build upon recent progress in planning under
uncertainty, trustworthy AI, robust planning, and domain adaptation, and
therefore has the potential to advance the state-of-the-art in multiple areas at
once. We will demonstrate both simulated and real-world experiments in which a
mobile manipulator robot must navigate large-scale, unfamiliar home- and
hospital-like buildings to complete complex multi-stage tasks involving locating
key places, interacting with the environment, and retrieving objects and
persons. We intend to both theoretically justify and demonstrate empirically the
utility of our proposed approach to quickly and reliably improve deployment-time
performance for a variety of service robot tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.