* 2232510
* BRC-BIO: The role of serotonin signaling in autoregulation of axon morphology, connectivity, and behavior in Drosophila
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Douglas Roossien, Ball State University
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 04/30/2026
* USD 503,000.00

The primary role of the nervous system is to perceive conditions in our
surroundings and elicit the appropriate behavioral response. This is controlled
by complex neural circuits that are interconnected through long cable-like
structures called axons. One important group of axons arises from serotonin-
producing brain cells, which integrate with circuits throughout the nervous
system to modulate behaviors such as mood, sleep, appetite, and cognition.
Ultimately, these behavioral outputs are determined by the precise growth and
wiring of axons. Recent work by the PI and others in the field has shown that
serotonin-producing brain cells use serotonin itself to help shape its axons
during early stages of development. This research will utilize cutting-edge
genetic tools available in fruit flies, Drosophila melanogaster, to understand
how this molecular mechanism works inside the cells, how it shapes circuits in
the brain, and how it impacts behavioral output. The fruit fly nervous system is
built with the same basic components, which assemble and direct neural
activities as they do in the human nervous system. The knowledge gained will
therefore provide insight into how abnormal serotonin exposure during
development can lead to behavioral disorders in humans. These studies will
provide students with multidisciplinary research experiences in genetics,
cellular biology, and neuroscience through paid research positions. By reducing
financial barriers to undergraduate research at an institute serving large
populations of low-income and first-generation college students, this project
advances the NSF mission to grow a diverse STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary in vitro experiments indicate the
serotonin receptor 5-HT1A initiates signaling events that autoregulate
serotonergic axon outgrowth. The first objective of this project is to determine
the intracellular mechanisms 5-HT1A engages using genetic and pharmacological
manipulation of candidate serotonin signaling pathways in primary Drosophila
serotonergic neurons paired with morphometric analysis of axon outgrowth and
live cell imaging of actin dynamics. The second objective of this project is to
determine how autoregulation shapes anatomical circuits using a single
serotonergic neuron (SP2-1) as a model. This neuron innervates the larval visual
system and can be labeled selectively using existing genetic tools, allowing 3D
reconstructions of the SP2-1 neuron under various experimental conditions. A
novel anterograde trans-synaptic Brainbow labeling approach will be used to ask
how changes in serotonin signaling alter connectivity of the SP2-1 neuron. The
third objective is to understand how defects in serotonin autoregulation can
alter behavioral outputs by manipulating serotonin signaling and correlating
changes in SP2-1 morphology to changes in vision-based behaviors. These studies
will provide the first molecular mechanism of serotonin autoregulation and its
impact on the morphological and functional development of the serotonergic
system. This research pipeline will also serve as a foundation for future
research including analysis of different cell types and/or circuits, behavioral
paradigms, other signaling molecules, and developmental
stages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.