* 2232826
* SBIR Phase I:  A Student Learning Dashboard
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Patrick Hong, PRENOSTIK, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 04/30/2024
* USD 274,471.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is in improving retention in higher education and increasing
graduation rates. Currently, the average U.S. college dropout rate is 40%.
Moreover, underserved Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics (STEM)
student populations are more likely to leave school without a degree. Due to the
COVID-19 pandemic, increased financial insecurity and mental health challenges
have negatively impacted student learning. This project aims to develop a
student learning dashboard platform that acts as a co-pilot during students'
higher education learning journey by delivering targeted, personalized, and
real-time actionable assistance. The solution holistically identifies each
student's unique learning motivation challenges (e.g., subject difficulty,
relevance to career goals, social and economic constraints, etc.) and provides
specific recommendations to overcome barriers. Coaching students to learn how to
learn more effectively based on their own context fosters a growth mindset,
grit, and agency to help them become successful lifelong learners. The
application also significantly improves diversity, equity, and inclusion in
higher education, especially in STEM, and thus increases effective workforce
training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project uses machine learning to understand each student's unique
learning challenges, map how barriers affect learning motivation, and influences
coursework engagement. Machine learning is applied to analyze qualitative and
quantitative learning motivation and behavior data to identify gaps so real-
time, targeted, and relevant guidance can be delivered while the students are
still progressing through the courses rather than waiting until it might be too
late for intervention. This project provides descriptive, predictive, and
prescriptive recommendations to simulate one-on-one, personalized advising at
scale and at a lower cost. The technology also acts as an early detection system
when students show the first sign of academic and non-academic struggles
affecting their mental state of readiness to learn. When in-person human
intervention is required, instructors, academic advising, and/or relevant on-
campus student support services can be alerted. This project can be used by any
educational institution or private company providing in-person, flipped/hybrid,
remote, synchronous, or asynchronous instruction
formats.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.