* 2232382
* EAGER: Prototyping Touch with FLS-Matter
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Shahram Ghandeharizadeh, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Cindy Bethel
* 06/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

This project investigates techniques and algorithms that enable immersive and
interactive 3D displays using swarms of flying light specks (FLS). An FLS is a
micrometer drone with one or more light sources to generate different colors and
textures with adjustable brightness. Synchronized swarms of FLSs will render
objects in a pre-specified 3D volume, an FLS display. An immersive FLS display
enables a user to touch and manipulate objects. For example, a user may pick up
an FLS illuminated teapot or throw an FLS illuminated rock. The building block
of these objects is FLS-matter, 2D (e.g., a square) and 3D (e.g., a pyramid)
geometric shapes using FLSs with extendable behavior. FLS-matter may
fundamentally transform how researchers think about human-machine interaction. A
successful realization of its proof-of-concept prototype will provide essential
insights into implementing an immersive and interactive 3D display. The size of
such a display may be a tabletop cuboid, a telephone booth, or even a room. With
the potential to transform the future of human communication and perception, and
the public's interactions with information and data, these displays can
potentially change how people work, learn, receive care, and socialize. The
project includes plans for K-12 STEM outreach and for mentoring and training
undergraduate, graduate, and high school students through this interdisciplinary
research. A new graduate level seminar course on holodecks will be introduced.
Apart from organizing the First international Conference on Holodeck at Los
Angeles, the research team will participate in outreach activities such as
Robotics Open House Events in the University of Southern
California.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;FLS-matter is a novel transformative idea that
requires a proof-of-concept prototype. This project focuses on creating a
prototype that includes design and implementation of physics inspired frameworks
that enable a swarm of FLS-matter to react to the force exerted by human touch
without causing injury to the user or damaging the FLSs. Since micrometer-sized
drones are not currently available, simulation studies will be used in
conjunction with physical studies evaluating behavior of and user interaction
with macro-sized off-the-shelf drones. The project will investigate the
feasibility of a positioning system to identify the location of the FLSs, which
in turn identifies the location of user touch. These studies will include design
and implementation of both centralized and decentralized algorithms, and an
evaluation of their accuracy and scalability characteristics as a function of
the number of FLSs. This research will also use a combination of quantitative
models in simulation and human subject studies with commercially available
drones to quantify the amount of force exerted by a swarm based on its speed,
flight pattern, mass of its FLSs, and the number of FLSs used at the
perturbation point by a human touch. These user studies with multiple FLSs
working together will determine the userâ€™s contact method and a set of
reasonable stiffness values for rendering an object. The tested FLSs will also
be calibrated to determine thresholds specific to an individual user. Through
the design and implementation of the FLS-matter concepts, this project addresses
the challenges in mid-air haptics for user interactions with a swarm of flying
robots, including failures, limited flight time between battery charges,
collision-free flight paths, and coordinated force
output.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.