* 2232748
* SBIR Phase I:  A Handheld Fine-Grained Radio Frequency IDentification (RFID) Localization System for Retail Automation
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Isaac Perper, CARTESIAN SYSTEMS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Parvathi Chundi
* 01/31/2024
* USD 274,960.00

The broader/commercial impacts of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will protect retail stores from loss of merchandise. Brick-and-
mortar retail is undergoing an unprecedented transformation, having lost
billions of dollars over the past decade due to labor shortages, competition
from e-commerce giants, and changing expectations from the modern consumer. To
address these issues, retailers have been adopting new digital technologies to
gain visibility into their inventory, optimize store operations, and gain
customer insights. A key technology that has been adopted by over 90% of US
retailers, is Radio Frequency IDentification (RFID). RFID tags are cheap,
wireless, and battery-less stickers (similar to barcodes) that have allowed
retailers to achieve accurate store-wide inventory, resulting in a significant
revenue increase for retailers. In contrast to existing (portable) RFID
technology which can only determine whether RFID-tagged items are&lt;br/&gt;in
the store (i.e., inventory), the proposed technology aims to precisely locate
these items throughout the store. The technology leverages billions of off-the-
shelf ultra-high frequency (UHF) RFID tags that are already attached to
clothing, footwear, and apparel items. In contrast to existing mobile solutions
which can only detect RFID-tagged items, the team's handheld device leverages
sophisticated signal excitation and processing techniques to pin down each
RFIDâ€™s exact position with decimeter-scale accuracy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
SBIR Phase 1 project will build a system capable of identifying and precisely
locating RFID-tagged items and includes three main innovative components: (1) a
portable, handheld wireless device for locating RFIDs, (2) a scalable cloud and
edge computing platform to process and store the data, and (3) a mobile and web
user interface for accessing the data and optimizing picking tasks for retail
store associates. Realizing the end-to-end platform requires developing
efficient sensor fusion algorithms and low-power, low-cost hardware for
accurate, robust, and low-latency localization. This technology necessitates
addressing challenges that arise from the computational, memory, bandwidth, and
power constraints on the edge device. The platform also requires developing the
split and cloud computing architecture to efficiently process data from multiple
handheld devices in real-time as well as provide the generalizable application
programming interfaces (APIs) to integrate this data pipeline with the retail
customers. By the end of the Phase I period, the project will have piloted the
fully-integrated system in a retail store to evaluate its real-world
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.