* 2232855
* RAPID: Impacts of Increased Light Transmittance on Ocean Heating, Primary Productivity, and Carbon Cycling Across a Pacific Arctic Continental Shelf Gradient
* GEO,OPP
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2023
* Karen Frey, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 07/31/2023
* USD 51,652.00

Arctic sea ice is undergoing tremendous changes. There has been a pronounced
decrease in summer sea ice cover, an overall thinning of the ice, and a
lengthening of the summer melt season. Some of the greatest changes in sea ice
cover across the pan-Arctic have been observed in the Chukchi and Beaufort Seas
surrounding Alaska, where there has been substantial loss of perennial sea ice
that persists year-round (including during summer). This Pacific Arctic sector
is also among the most biologically productive marine ecosystems in the world
and is an important region to monitor for the flow of carbon. Although sea ice
is a dominant feature in these shallow marine environments at high-latitudes, we
are only beginning to understand how changes in sea ice cover (through its
influence on light, seawater temperature, salinity, and nutrient availability)
will affect ecosystems in these regions. In particular, earlier ice-free
conditions in the spring (as well as later ice-free conditions in the fall) have
disrupted the timing of algae blooms and the livelihoods of marine mammals
farther up the food chain. This research is focusing upon measurements of light
transmittance through the ocean water column collected at science stations
during the Synoptic Arctic Survey (SAS) cruise on the US Coast Guard Ship Healy.
Measurements of light transmittance through the water column will further our
understanding of how light impacts heat distribution, algae growth, and carbon
flows throughout the region. In addition, this project is supporting an early-
career researcher and the team is contributing material for numerous
undergraduate courses and partnering with the Girls Inc. organization to involve
middle and high school students in opportunities to learn about Arctic Ocean
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is establishing new measurements of
light transmittance (320–780 nm) through the uppermost ~30–50 m of the ocean
water column at observation points across a continental shelf gradient (over the
Chukchi Shelf into the deep Arctic Ocean basin, with the return southward over
the Chukchi Borderlands). These measurements are providing the baseline
knowledge necessary to understand how light availability in the water column
changes spatially (across a ~2000 km long continental shelf/latitudinal
gradient) as well as temporally (across a seasonal gradient from early September
through late October). Using these measurements, the team is testing the
hypothesis that light transmittance increases with declines in sea ice cover and
varies with light absorbing impurities in the water column. The seasonal timing
and geographic location of the SAS cruise provide a rare opportunity to further
assess the connections of late-open-water-season light transmittance to all
three research focal areas of the SAS science and implementation plan: (1)
physical drivers, (2) ecosystem responses, and (3) carbon
cycling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.