* 2232539
* Collaborative Research: Planning: Track 1: Beyond Recruitment: Engaging Allies to Foster Black Junior Environmental Engineering Faculty Success
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Jacelyn Rice-Boayue, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Christine Grant
* 02/29/2024
* USD 8,356.00

Environmental engineers play significant roles in advancing socioeconomic and
environmental justice. In particular, Black Environmental Engineering faculty
are and have been stewards of workforce training in equitable environmental
engineering practices, and in designing and implementing technological systems
that directly impact underserved, marginalized communities. The
underrepresentation and stagnation of Black faculty in Environmental
Engineering, therefore, is particularly concerning for the future of the field.
Recent renewed efforts by higher education academic institutions to attract and
hire Black junior faculty and increase racial and ethnic diversity have limited
success due to: lack of inclusivity following recruitment; devaluing of Black
faculty contributions and approaches to research, teaching and service; and, the
existence of systemic implicit and explicit biases that derail professional
success and mobility. To help address this issue, the Broadening Participation
in Engineering project will develop a workshop at the 2022 Association of
Environmental Engineering and Science Professors (AEESP) conference to engage
the Environmental Engineering community regarding unique challenges facing Black
junior faculty, and strategies to improve recruitment and retention of Black
faculty. The findings from the workshop will be disseminated to the broader
Environmental Engineering community and beyond in efforts to uplift Black
faculty in the field and in other academic and scientific spaces.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to develop a workshop
for the 2022 Association of Environmental Engineering and Science Professors
(AEESP) conference to engage the community and identify strategies to promote
retention and increase success of Black, junior faculty in Environmental
Engineering. The number of Black, Environmental Engineering faculty has
stagnated despite efforts of academic institutions to target and recruit Black
applicants. Greater representation of Black faculty in Environmental Engineering
is especially important as historic engineering practices have
disproportionately negatively impacted disenfranchised communities, and
environmental engineers often champion democratized access to clean and safe
resources, goods and services. The specific goals of this project are to: (1)
raise awareness among the AEESP community of the significance of the 2022
workshop; (2) lead a workshop at the 2022 AEESP meeting to engage stakeholders
and identify roles for allies; and, (3) disseminate findings from the workshop
to the broader Environmental Engineering community. The workshop will be led by
three, Black, junior Environmental Engineering faculty, in addition a faculty
member with expertise in equity in engineering education and racial
marginalization in academia. The outcomes of this workshop will be leveraged to
springboard future research and framework development for use by academic heads,
departments and allies, and to ultimately increase participation and retention
of Black faculty in Environmental Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.