* 2232267
* 22nd International Symposium on Aviation Psychology
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Esa Rantanen, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 08/31/2024
* USD 25,253.00

Technological developments are bringing more sophisticated automation and
greater levels of machine autonomy to the global airspace (National Research
Council, 2014). Despite this, the human operator remains indispensable to the
aviation system, filling roles that include pilot, air traffic controller,
aircraft dispatcher, and aircraft and air navigation system maintenance worker.
These roles evolve with technology but are not displaced by it. Aviation systems
must therefore be built to accommodate the operatorsâ€™ abilities and limitations.
Effective human-machine integration translates fundamental knowledge of human
performance into sound design choices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International
Symposium on Aviation Psychology (ISAP) is a biennial meeting that convenes
scientists, operators, and research sponsors to bridge the gap between basic
perceptual/cognitive science and applications in aviation system design. At the
same time, ISAP recognizes the need to foster exchange of basic knowledge and
insights across domains of application. It welcomes all basic and applied
research into the role of humans in human-machine systems that supports
generalizations to or from aerospace psychology. The 22nd ISAP, to be hosted by
the Rochester Institute of Technology in Rochester, NY, will present cutting-
edge research on human cognition and performance within sociotechnical systems,
foster collaboration between researchers, engineers, and aviation operational
personnel, both from the civilian and the military sectors, and envision design
solutions that match aviation technology to human capabilities. The NSF support
will enable the construction of an affordable, high-quality program that will
draw diverse and broadly interdisciplinary groups of prominent researchers,
students, and aviation practitioners representing the academic, industry, and
government sectors from around the world with the common goal of ensuring a safe
and efficient air transportation system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.