* 2232725
* HSI Conference: Promoting Servingness across CUNY HSIs
* EDU,EES
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Diana Samaroo, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 09/30/2023
* USD 48,643.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI) Program, this conference aims to bring together faculty,
students, and staff from all City University of New York (CUNY) HSIs to
highlight successful HSI initiatives, reflect on CUNY campus HSI identities,
develop a plan for formalizing a CUNY HSI network and promote servingness across
CUNY. CUNY is the nation’s largest urban public university, made up of 25
colleges throughout New York City. New York ranks fourth in the nation in number
of HSIs with a total of 35 HSI colleges and universities. More than one half of
CUNY’s colleges are designated as HSIs, however there is no centralized CUNY
network. The proposed project is a two-day conference that will bring together
representatives from all CUNY HSIs in a call to action to intentionally serve
Hispanic/Latinx students through data, practice, and leadership. The conference
will improve the understanding of how to effectively measure Hispanic/Latinx
student success and the knowledge generated will inform institutions about what
supports, and environments are needed to assist Hispanic/Latinx students on
their path to degree attainment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference will
provide the platform for CUNY HSIs to define and promote servingness at their
campuses and foster a discussion on collaboration and establishment of
centralized resources and support across CUNY. The conference speakers and
workshop leaders will share their extensive experience with promoting
servingness across HSIs and guide the conference participants through working
sessions designed to produce the content of a white paper on the state of CUNY
HSIs. The participants will represent faculty, students, staff, and
administrators across CUNY HSIs. Results of this project will be published in
peer-reviewed journals, disseminated at conferences, and shared in white papers
with the HSI Community. The project will provide models of Best Practices at
HSIs that may be adapted, adopted, and replicated by colleges and universities
across the nation that seek to increase recruitment, retention, and graduation
rates for Hispanic/Latinx students. The HSI Program aims to enhance
undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by
the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.