* 2232515
* EAGER: CRYO: Development of materials and techniques to enable sub-Kelvin cooling via adiabatic decompression of para-nematic materials.
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Ian Fisher, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Part 1: Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Researchers at Stanford University
develop a new method to cool materials to within a degree of absolute zero
without requiring the use of costly liquid helium. Such extreme temperatures are
necessary for a variety of modern technologies, including some realizations of
quantum computers. This high risk/high reward project, which is jointly
supported by the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and
Transport Systems and the Division of Materials Research, investigates an
approach that works by alternately squeezing materials and then releasing the
strain. While the operating principle is straight forward, the technique
requires discovery of appropriate materials with very specific physical
properties. The proposed research will identify and characterize such materials
to enable a more sustainable approach to ultra-low temperature cooling.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Researchers at
Stanford University investigate a new approach to reaching sub-Kelvin
temperatures. The method works by alternately squeezing materials and then
releasing the strain, through the process of adiabatic decompression referred to
in the award title. For the functional material, a specific class of rare earth
containing compounds are considered, for which large temperature changes are
possible for modest changes in induced strain, i.e. para-nematic materials. The
researchersâ€™ approach to use such materials for cryogenic cooling has several
specific advantages over existing technologies: it does not require He-3, it
does not require magnetic fields, and it can be rapidly cycled. The project,
which is jointly supported by the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental and Transport Systems and the Division of Materials Research, has
three main objectives: development of appropriate candidate materials;
improvement in low-T characterization of their thermo-elastic properties; and
reduction to a working thermodynamic cycle. Activities to be performed include
crystal growth and characterization of candidate materials; measurement of low-
temperature elastocaloric response over a wide range of strains; improvements in
thermometry; and design, construction and testing of a simple working model that
would demonstrate such a cooling effect.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.