* 2232596
* Synthesis of marine time series to detect, understand, and predict benthic community responses to a rapidly warming Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Lee Cooper, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 02/28/2026
* USD 612,747.00

1. The Arctic is one of the fastest warming regions of the planet and long-term
observations have revealed that natural systems in this region are undergoing
substantial changes. Observed changes have been especially pronounced in the
Pacific Arctic, where increases in ocean temperature, decreases in sea ice
extent, and changes in currents have been observed alongside changes in the
composition of ecologically important biological communities that live in
sediments on the seafloor. Changes in these communities likely will have
cascading impacts on fisheries and seabird and marine mammal populations that
rely on food from the seafloor. The goal of this project is to examine
coincident changes in seafloor biological communities and physical environments
as recorded in samples collected over the last several decades to understand
relationships between environmental change and ecological responses in the
Pacific Arctic. In particular, this project will test how well observational
data collected annually for decades can be used to make forecasts of how marine
systems are likely to change in response to environmental change. A secondary
goal is to assess how well ongoing sampling efforts may be able to detect
biological changes in these systems. Ecological and environmental changes in the
Pacific Arctic also will have immediate economic and social implications,
especially for Indigenous communities that rely on subsistence harvests of
walruses and bearded seals. By helping to improve our ability to detect,
explain, and predict changes in these systems, this project will support
effective management and sustainable use of marine resources, while mitigating
social impacts on local communities. This project also will combine research and
education by providing interdisciplinary training in polar biology, modeling,
statistics, and data science to students at all levels and from backgrounds that
are historically underrepresented in these fields, including interns from rural
Appalachia, undergraduates, and an early career scientist. Lastly, we will share
research outcomes and acquire shared knowledge from Indigenous communities in
the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Biological communities found in
seafloor sediments of the Pacific Arctic are highly productive, influence
ecosystem processes, and are critical food resources for marine mammals and
birds. These seafloor communities are also sensitive to environmental change,
and recent observations indicate shifts in taxonomic composition associated with
increases in ocean temperature, decreases in sea ice extent, and changes in
currents. Changes in Pacific Arctic seafloor communities are likely to have
cascading impacts on seabird and marine mammal populations, ecosystem function,
and fisheries. However, improving our ability to explain and predict responses
of Arctic marine systems to rapid climate change remains a substantial
challenge. In remote, data-limited ecosystems like the Arctic seafloor, where
direct observation and experimentation are difficult, correlative models are
often used to link biological patterns to environmental gradients and to make
forecasts of ecosystem trajectories. However, few studies have performed
rigorous tests of the ability of these so-called “space-for-time substitution”
approaches to predict changes in community composition, in large part due to a
lack of contemporary datasets with sufficient spatial and temporal coverage. At
the same time, we lack a basic understanding of the role of thresholds, where
incremental changes in the physical environment result in sudden and fundamental
changes to community composition and ecosystem function, in driving biological
responses to environmental change. To address these hurdles, this project will
(1) analyze multi-decadal time series of paired biological and physical
observations that have been collected in the northern Bering and Chukchi seas
since the 1980s to characterize relationships between the physical environment
and responses of ecologically important marine seafloor communities; (2) test
the extent to which observational time series can inform forecasts of changes in
these systems; and (3) evaluate the efficiency of ongoing sampling efforts to
detect biological changes. In doing so, this project will improve our ability to
explain, detect, and predict biological responses in changing Arctic
environments and address associated knowledge gaps using novel modeling methods.
The Arctic is one of the most rapidly warming regions on the planet and
associated impacts on high biomass seafloor communities in the northern Bering
and Chukchi seas will have immediate economic and social implications for
potential northward fisheries expansion as well as co-management of subsistence
harvests of walruses and bearded seals by Indigenous communities. Our goal is to
improve our ability to detect, explain, and predict changes in these systems,
and in doing so we will support effective management and sustainable use of
marine resources, while mitigating social impacts on local communities. In
addition, we will integrate research and education in multiple ways by: (i)
mentoring summer interns from underrepresented groups attending a local college
in rural Appalachia; (ii) providing research experiences to undergraduates
through an existing Research Experiences for Undergraduates program; and (iii)
training of a graduate student in spatial modeling, marine science, and global
change ecology. These programs will provide interdisciplinary training that
spans polar biology, spatial modeling, statistics, and data science for students
from backgrounds that are historically underrepresented in these fields. Lastly,
we will share research outcomes and acquire shared knowledge from Indigenous
communities in the Bering Strait region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.