* 2232622
* Dissemination of ASEE Industry 4.0 Webinars and Summit Findings
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Ashok Agrawal, American Society For Engineering Education
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 07/31/2024
* USD 49,600.00

The industrial and professional world is undergoing rapid technological
advances. These advances comprise Industry 4.0, the Fourth Industrial
Revolution, defined as the convergence of digital, biological, and physical
technologies so as to disrupt manufacturing, agriculture, healthcare, and all
industries around the globe. Currently, educators and training providers view
Industry 4.0 technologies in segregated silos. To succeed in Industry 4.0,
educators will be required to radically rethink their models, methods, and
offerings to meet the needs of industry and a rapidly changing society. The
American Society for Engineering Education (ASEE) launched a multi-year dialog
among industry, academia, policymakers, professional societies and accreditors
on the desired content knowledge and practices needed to prepare graduates of
engineering, engineering technology, and engineering technician programs for
Industry 4.0 and beyond. These efforts culminated in a series of webinars and an
in-person Summit. To capitalize on the momentum of the new ideas and
relationships the webinars and Summit helped spark, the next step will be to
distill and communicate the key observations and findings from the
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will broadly disseminate the findings
of these webinars and the Summit among the nationâ€™s community and technical
colleges and engineering and engineering technology departments. Policymaker
briefings will summarize the key findings regarding the challenge of, and
opportunity for, meeting US engineering and skilled technical workforce needs,
and a Practitioner White paper will provide a more detailed PDF-format summary
of the work presented at the webinars and Summit. These materials will include
observations, suggestions, and the examples of best practices on the following:
Policies for Building Skilled Technical Workforce for High-Value Manufacturing;
Community Colleges and ATE Program Addressing Workforce for Industry 4.0;
Alternate Pathways, Platforms, and Policies: Educating Engineers and Skilled
Technical Workforce; Scaling Up Industry-Education Collaboration; Industry 4.0
Education, Policies, Perspectives, and Pandemics; A Call for Action for
Education 4.0 Pathways; Leveraging New Partnerships and Work/Learn Opportunities
for Workforce Development; Expanding Equitable Access to Engineering and
Technical Education; Role of Funding Agencies and Influencers in Improving and
Enhancing Education and Training Programs; and Preparing the Workforce to Meet
Societal &amp; Corporate Responsibilities. This project is funded by the
Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the Nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.