* 2232080
* RUI: Indirect Measurement of Reaction Rates in Laminar Flames
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2024
* Jeffrey Santner, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 11/30/2024
* USD 171,593.00

Chemical reaction rates that are relevant to combustion chemistry are typically
determined using theoretical computations or direct experiments. As with all
experiments, these have limitations. In one commonly used setup (rapid
compression machine), measurements are performed at conditions relevant to
ignition in engines – intermediate temperatures and high pressures. In the other
most commonly used device (shock tube), measurements can access a higher
temperature, however they are typically limited to very low reactant
concentrations. We will indirectly determine reaction rates at conditions that
are inaccessible to these devices by using a flame. This measurement will occur
at higher temperatures than the rapid compression machine and higher reactant
concentration than the shock tube. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reaction rates that are
relevant to combustion chemistry are typically determined using theoretical
computations or direct experiments. As with all experiments, these experiments,
such as shock tube (ST) and rapid compression machine (RCM) measurements, have
limitations. RCM measurements are valuable at conditions relevant to ignition in
engines – intermediate temperatures and high pressures. ST measurements can
access a higher temperature, however they are typically limited to low reactant
concentrations, and a radical pool that is not representative of flame
chemistry. We propose a new experimental campaign to measure the laminar flame
speed using a mesoscale diverging channel at mixture conditions where this
quantity is sensitive to targeted elementary reaction rates. We will then use
those flame speed measurements to improve characterization of the targeted
reaction rates. This represents indirect experimental measurements of reaction
rates using flame speed, an uncommon method to extract reaction rates that we
have successfully demonstrated in previous work. Using an in-house, open-source
software package, we have determined that the laminar flame speed for rich
ethylene flames at atmospheric pressure is sensitive to three reactions. We are
currently constructing an atmospheric pressure diverging meso-scale channel, and
the proposed project would fund validation of laminar flame speed measurement in
this channel at well-quantified conditions, as well as rich ethylene flames the
mentioned reactions. We will then use the measurements as validation and
optimization targets to improve characterization of these three reaction rates
at temperatures where there are limited experimental measurements in the
literature. If successful, this project will lead to future experimental
campaigns targeting other reactions by measuring laminar flame
speed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.