* 2232565
* EAGER: Investigating the Feasibility and Scope of Automated Refactoring for Distributed Software
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Eli Tilevich, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2024
* USD 150,000.00

As software is maintained over its lifetime and new features are added, it often
becomes necessary to restructure the software to continue working with expected
functionality and performance. This restructuring, called refactoring, is
tedious and error-prone, consuming software development time and delaying
releases. In modern software development processes, refactoring is routine but
only applies to software running on one machine. With the increasing ubiquity of
distributed applications, such as those for the web, mobile systems, and the
Internet of Things, refactoring techniques do not apply. This EAGER grant
explores the issues involved in extending refactoring to distributed systems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Refactoring is the application of semantics-preserving
program transformations to restructure software for better performance,
modularity, and other attributes. Refactoring has become an integral part of the
modern software development processes, but only for centralized software that
runs within a single address space. When evolving a distributed system,
programmers apply existing refactoring techniques to its individual components,
treating them as separate, unrelated parts, so these techniques remain unaware
of the distributed communication across these parts. When programmers can
refactor only the individual parts of a distributed system, (1) the overall
system’s execution semantics may not be preserved, and (2) the system’s
distribution cannot be changed, thus making it impossible to fulfill many
important objectives for modifying modern distributed systems. Distributed
applications have many accompanying challenges – such as being written by
independent programmers in decentralized ecosystems and in multiple languages
with different semantics that need to be related and preserved. This EAGER grant
will uncover technical possibilities and challenges as a step toward
understanding and addressing these challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.