* 2232204
* RUI: Combinatorial Synthesis of Protein-Polymer Conjugates by Post-Polymerization Modification of Side-Chain Reactive Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Maren Buck, Smith College
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 01/31/2026
* USD 168,936.00

Non-technical description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Life as we know it would not
exist without proteins. Proteins perform functions as wide-ranging as
transporting oxygen through the body to recognizing and neutralizing invading
microorganisms. Scientists have sought to harness the precise and exquisite
functions of proteins to solve a variety of challenges in human health, such as
by designing protein drugs that can diagnose and treat disease or by designing
new protein scaffolds as part of engineered tissues. Recently, researchers have
recognized the power of using chemistry to augment or tailor the functions of
proteins by modifying proteins with synthesized molecules. For example, large
molecules known as polymers can be linked by chemical bonds to proteins in order
to increase the stability of the protein or to tether drug molecules to the
protein to create better therapeutics. The goal of this project is to develop a
fundamentally new approach for linking proteins to polymers. This approach will
improve the efficiency of preparing protein-polymer conjugates (proteins linked
to polymers through chemical bonds) for a wide range of applications, including
drug delivery. The work will allow the structures of the protein-polymer
conjugates to be easily tailored to the needs of specific applications without
having to start from scratch. Finally, polymer structures that are degradable in
the human body can be coupled to proteins using this method, which is critical
for translation to the clinic. To demonstrate the utility of this method,
proteins that target cancer cells will be coupled to polymers for the
development of new therapeutic structures. The principle investigator will
conduct this work in collaboration with a diverse group of undergraduate women
to inspire future generations of women researchers. Further, the proposed
research will be conducted in an undergraduate organic chemistry laboratory to
offer cutting-edge research opportunities to a larger population of women. The
principle investigator will also invite graduate students and postdoctoral
scholars from nearby research universities to work together to teach
undergraduate chemistry courses as a means to train the next generation of
college faculty in best pedagogical practices in higher education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Protein-polymer conjugates couple the exquisite
and precise functions of proteins with the wide-ranging functionality of
synthetic polymers. These bioconjugates can be used to address important
challenges in biotechnology and medicine such as the diagnosis and treatment of
disease or engineering new tissues. Protein-polymer conjugates are generally
synthesized by polymerizing monomers from protein initiators, termed grafting-
from, or by coupling polymers containing a single reactive site at the chain end
to specific amino acids on proteins, termed grafting-to. Grafting-from requires
that the monomer be water soluble and compatible with the protein structure;
these requirements limit the range of chemical functionality that can be
incorporated into the structure. Grafting-to suffers from low coupling
efficiencies due to the need for two large molecules to react at a single site.
In both approaches, new polymer structures must be synthesized each time new
bioconjugate structures are desired. This NSF project seeks to directly address
these limitations by investigating side-chain reactive polymers for the modular
and combinatorial synthesis of protein-polymer conjugates. The proposed work
will use a post-polymerization modification strategy to synthesize hydrophilic,
side-chain reactive polymers that can be efficiently conjugated to proteins
through either amine-activated ester or thiol-maleimide reactions. Side-chain
and chain-end reactive polymers will be directly compared to establish side-
chain reactive polymers as an alternative to terminally reactive polymers. Side-
chain reactive polycarbonates will also be explored for the synthesis of
degradable protein-polymer conjugates. The work proposed here will demonstrate
efficient, combinatorial routes for protein-polymer-drug conjugate synthesis as
well as contribute to the collective understanding of how macromolecular
structure influences the function of protein-polymer
conjugates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.