* 2232819
* CICI: RSSD:Massive Internal System Traffic Research Analysis and Logging
* CSE,OAC
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Tracy Futhey, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 10/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

This project creates a dataset (the MISTRAL Dataset) for cybersecurity
researchers and network operators to use in identifying threats and thereby
better protect research-related resources. The sources of data contained in the
Dataset reflect actual network activity to and from several scientific
applications and their related cyberinfrastructure. These data are safely
captured, securely stored and accessible through authorized access to associated
cybersecurity researchers for in the purpose of detecting abnormal or malicious
activities that could represent threats to the identified science applications
and cyberinfrastructure. Because the data are collected continuously and through
automated means, the MISTRAL Dataset provides a realistic and relevant
characterization of threats over time. The project also produces a public
version of the Dataset.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MISTRAL project encompasses an
Infrastructure, the Dataset and a set of proof-of-concept analytic endeavors.
The Infrastructure includes a data storage pipeline for handling an estimated
1TB/day of data stored on-premises and/or in the cloud, a reference monitoring
framework, and tools for collecting, analyzing, and sharing the data and
relevant metadata that characterize both north-south (Internet-facing) and east-
west (lateral) data flows. The Dataset consists of safely captured domain
science workflow behavior using production network flows (e.g.,
source/destination IP, port, protocol, date/time, number, and size of
connections) and data centers and research labs, as well as supplemental data
from DNS, authentication logs, intrusion detection alerts and other security
event alerts (e.g., threat intelligence data detailing Indicators of
Compromise). The initial proof-of-concept analytics comprise various researcher
and student (graduate and undergraduate course project) data analysis efforts to
devise techniques for detecting abnormal or malicious activity or to study that
activity; these collaborators also test the MISTRAL environment and Dataset to
recommend refinement of the Infrastructure and the data collection
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.