* 2232189
* Atmospheric Particle Formation in Two Systems: Sulfuric Acid (H2SO4)/Water (H2O) plus Ammonia (NH3) and/or Amines, and Oxidation Products from Organic Compounds
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2025
* David Hanson, Augsburg University
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin (Ben) E. Brown-Steiner
* 11/30/2025
* USD 389,417.00

This project involves the conduct of new laboratory experiments to study
fundamental processes underlying new particle formation in the atmosphere with a
particular focus on the formation and growth of nanoparticles. There still exist
uncertainties and knowledge gaps related to new particle formation, and this
work will provide insights into new particle formation and enhance our
understanding of the formation of clouds, as well as the impacts on a changing
climate and human health. The experiments will be performed in two reactors
developed in previous NSF-funded work. Undergraduate students, including those
from underrepresented groups, will be trained and taught laboratory techniques
over the course of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two flow reactors,
developed in previous NSF-funded work, will be used in this project: a
Photolytic Flow Reactor (PhoFR) and a Growth Flow Reactor (GroFR). The
experiments will provide fundamental knowledge pertaining to Gibbs energy, van
der Waals effects, and the impact of particle phase composition of a H2SO4/NH3
system, as well as focus on organic particle formation from biogenic volatile
organic compound oxidation. The experiments with the PhoFR include: (1) study
the nucleation rates and cluster Gibbs energies in H2SO4/H2O and ternary (with
NH3) systems under various temperatures; and (2) study the growth of seed
particles by H2SO4 uptake as a function of seed particle size and composition,
as well as determine the effects of van der Walls forces and the hygroscopicity
of nanoparticles. The experiments with the GroFR include: (1) study the effect
of seed particle size and growth during the photooxidation of monoterpenes; (2)
study the synthesis of first-generation oxidation products of monoterpenes and
related compounds; and (3) the deployment of a mass
spectrometer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.