* 2232523
* Molecular Mechanisms of Cell-Cell Attachment
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Tina Izard, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 07/31/2024
* USD 549,429.00

Adhesive interactions between cells and their environment are crucial for nearly
all aspects of the life of cells. They directly regulate the assembly of cells
into tissues and organs, control cell motility, affect cell shape, and
orchestrate the activation of diverse transmembrane signaling networks which
determine the behavior and fate of cells. The balance between cell migration and
cell-cell adhesion is crucial in particular when cells migrate to specific sites
during development. Upon contact with each other, cells become stationary and
differentiate into tissues for which strong cell-cell adhesion is necessary to
maintain tissue integrity. On the other hand, changes in cell-cell adhesion
reinitiate cell migration to allow cell turnover necessary for example for wound
healing. The project seeks to advance our understanding of cell-cell adhesion by
studying the key regulator, alpha-catenin, that functions as a crucial sensor
of force of cell-cell junctions. This work will provide structural insights to
further our mechanistic understanding of the distinct alpha-catenin functional
states. Additionally, this project includes an educational outreach component
geared towards the underrepresented minorities and in particular the younger
population, including an established hands-on workshops for 7th and 8th graders:
a DNA extraction workshop and a drug discovery workshop; the researchers'
participation in the High School Student Summer Internship Program funded by the
William R. Kenan, Jr. Charitable Trust where the mentor high school students for
six weeks in the Summer and provide hands-on research experience; and the
Graduate Program faculty appointment of the PI. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project will use the first 300 kV cryogenic Atomic Resolution
Microscope (cryoARM300) to provide new near atomic resolution structures of
alpha-catenin in lipid raft and non-raft membrane conditions. This work is a
first step in elucidating the mechanism and specific functions of various alpha-
catenin states that bind to the actin cytoskeleton. Biochemical and cellular
assays will additionally validate the structural findings. Thus, significant
mechanistic insights into cell-cell adhesion will result from this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Molecular Biophysics and
Cellular Dynamics and Functions Clusters of the Division of Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences in Biological Sciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.