* 2232851
* CC* Data Storage: NRDStor: Nebraska Research Data Storage
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Hongfeng Yu, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 12/31/2024
* USD 496,207.00

The Holland Computing Center (HCC) at the University of Nebraska (NU) has a long
history of providing high-performance and high-throughput compute capabilities
and the associated storage resources. A long-standing hurdle many NU researchers
experience is the difference between their traditional work environments (i.e.,
desktop) and HCC computing environments, often incurring non-trivial data
transferring across these environments. The Nebraska Research Data Storage
(NRDStor) creates a cyberinfrastructure storage resource that unites the
familiarity of a researcher’s desktop environment with HCC’s computing
resources. NRDStor is accessible on HCC’s computing clusters, as well as
mountable by researchers on their lab computers and laptops. Fast data transfers
between research labs and NRDStor are enabled by leveraging recent upgrades to
campus networking. Data stored on NRDStor may be shared (at the user’s
discretion) via the Open Science Data Federation (OSDF).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NRDStor is available to all HCC users, including the four
primary NU campuses in Lincoln, Omaha, the Medical Center in Omaha, and Kearney.
The science drivers of NRDStor span the diverse scientific communities that vary
in practice from computational biology to wireless networking and encompass many
domains in-between. By providing a united filesystem accessible to researchers
on both their desktop environment and the clusters, NRDStor can lower a barrier
of entry and create a more consistent research environment, lessening their time
to science. Moreover, this effort can provide undergraduates with valuable
professional development experience by incorporating them to assist HCC
professionals in administrating the NRDStor resource and pursuing researcher
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.