* 2232929
* RAPID PHENOTYPIC EVOLUTION THROUGH THE RESHUFFLING OF PIGMENTATION GENES
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Leonardo Campagna, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Carling
* 12/31/2025
* USD 973,030.00

Speciation, or the origin of new species, is generally a slow process,
originating from long periods of geographic isolation and the eventual
accumulation of mutations. Rapid radiations, in which many species accumulate in
a short period of time, represent rare opportunities to study the genetic and
ecological contexts that lead to evolution and speciation. One possible
mechanism for rapid evolution is through mixing and reassembling old genetic
variants, which may already exist in other species, into novel combinations.
Hybridization may provide the source for the rapid generation of new genetic
combinations. This process can lead to the rapid evolution of novel traits, like
coloration patterns, without the long period required for new relevant mutations
to arise. Coloration is central to animal communication, mediating key behaviors
like mate choice, which over time can kickstart the speciation process. This
research will focus on a group of South American birds, the capuchino seedeaters
(genus Sporophila). These birds are remarkably similar genetically yet are
primarily differentiated at variants near genes involved in feather pigment
deposition. This project will combine expertise from evolutionary biologists and
materials scientists to understand how plumage coloration evolves and fuels
rapid evolution. The proposed research will lead to a better understanding of
the chemical, structural, and genetic mechanisms behind color production. It
will also explore how these changes contribute to speciation. The project will
enable student training opportunities and the results from this research will be
communicated to a broad audience through popular web
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will first consist of a detailed
study of the mechanisms behind color production in feathers, including the
pigment composition and the nano- and micro-structural properties of feathers of
different colors. This detailed understanding of coloration phenotypes will be
combined with gene expression data from growing feather follicles sampled at
comparable developmental times. Finally, the results from previous population
genomic studies on these taxa and the new transcriptional data will be used to
build a mechanistic and evolutionary model for how color diversity and
patterning are generated. The broader impacts of this project include an
interactive multimedia-based module on the mechanisms behind avian plumage
coloration hosted by the Cornell Lab of Ornithology (~10 million views per
year). The project will also be used as a platform to host a workshop for
students who seek to apply genomic techniques to answer their own research
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.