* 2232610
* SBIR Phase I:  Development and Integration of Reactor Enhancements for High Temperature Superconductive Wire Production
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2023,12/31/2023
* Shahab Khandan, Metal Oxide Technologies Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 12/31/2023
* USD 255,938.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to develop technology for the next generation
of high-temperature superconducting wire production that will increase the
throughput and quality of power transmission through the wire. Lowering wire
costs is an integral part in the commercialization of cables that carry 5-10x
more power than traditional copper cables and can meet increasing electricity
demands using existing rights-of-way. High-temperature superconducting
technology also enables magnetic-confinement fusion which has the potential to
provide abundant clean energy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project
proposes to perform research, development, and testing for the mass production
of high-temperature superconducting wire at high current capacity and low cost.
The goal is to understand the technologies, validate performance at a process
level, and then transfer the validated technology into reliable high performing
designs that will be integrated into the system design. The research focuses on
technologies that increase the conversion efficiency of the precursor material
into high-temperature superconducting film deposited on a textured micron-thin
metal base tape. The work focuses on the following technologies: design of solid
precursor feeds for solid to vapor flow generation and higher growth rate films;
development of photo-activation and ultraviolet-enhanced technologies;
enhancement of tape temperature uniformity for high current capacity via
susceptor material selection and radiation properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.