* 2232816
* CC* Data Storage: High Volume Data Storage Infrastructure for Scientific Research and Education at Kennesaw State University Shared as Open Science Data Federation Data Origin
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Ramazan Aygun, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This project develops a high-capacity storage system with around 4.3PB overall
usable storage as an Open Science Data Federation (OSDF) data origin to support
scientific research and education activities on both campuses of Kennesaw State
University (KSU). 30% of the storage is to be allocated for hosting datasets of
external researchers and sharing KSU spawned datasets to empower national
research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project enables a storage platform
for KSU’s researchers and students to maintain and share their datasets thriving
their collaborations without worrying about deleting files, transferring to
alternate storage devices, or mailing hard drives while augmenting KSU’s
research expertise into the national data ecosystem. This storage architecture
cultivates twenty-four science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
projects at KSU in a broad range of disciplines. The project also supports new
Ph.D. programs in Computer Science, Interdisciplinary Engineering in addition to
the first Ph.D. program in USA on Analytics and Data Science along with 20
master’s degrees in areas including civil engineering, mechanical engineering,
chemical sciences, computer science, and cybersecurity. To facilitate the
storage system effectively, KSU’s Center for Research Computing organizes
workshops for their faculty and students on utilizing national open science
resources and findable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable (FAIR)
principles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort will enable Kennesaw State
University to participate in national research and discoveries by connecting it
to OSDF. This integration into an open science network will present national
technical services as KSU develops research computing and data expertise while
cyberinfrastructure professionals at KSU adapt the state-of-the-art storage
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.