* 2232653
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Small: Supporting Privacy Negotiation Among Multiple Stakeholders in Smart Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Yaxing Yao, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 06/30/2026
* USD 163,132.00

Internet-of-Things (IoT) devices are increasingly used in shared spaces (e.g.,
homes, apartments, schools, hospitals, workplaces, and cities), turning these
spaces into smart environments. Different stakeholders in these environments,
including both direct users of smart devices and non-users such as visitors or
bystanders, have unique privacy needs and expectations. Although prior research
shows evidence of conflicts among stakeholders, there has been less
investigation regarding how stakeholders resolve such conflicts and negotiate
their privacy options. This interdisciplinary project is investigating different
stakeholders’ privacy negotiation behaviors in smart environments by designing,
developing, and deploying an interactive system to collect people’s real-world
privacy negotiation behaviors. The project is contributing solutions that help
people manage and negotiate their privacy in various smart environments,
especially when their privacy needs conflict with others’. The results will also
inform privacy negotiations within other emerging technologies (e.g., virtual
reality and the metaverse).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project moves
beyond the lab setting to investigate and support stakeholders’ privacy
negotiation behaviors in real-world smart environments. To do this, the project
team is identifying contextual factors that lead to privacy concerns across
multiple stakeholder groups and complex smart environments through the lens of
privacy as “contextual integrity”. It is capturing stakeholders’ privacy
negotiation behaviors in the real world by iteratively designing and
implementing a tool that collects data on smart environmental contexts and
privacy negotiation behaviors in real-world smart environments. Finally, it is
developing a data-driven approach to support privacy negotiations in the real-
world and evaluating its long-term impact on different stakeholder groups
through field studies. The team is facilitating the future extension of this
work to other new technologies by publicly sharing the anonymized dataset
collected using the developed system, features of the project’s machine learning
models, and a working prototype of the system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.