* 2232908
* SBIR Phase I:  Machine to fabricate a bioinspired insulation material: The Concatenator
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Chris Kratzer, OWLFLY
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 05/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is in the development of a novel, and more benign than
fiberglass, thermal insulation technology for use in homes across the United
States. Improvements in insulation technology have the potential to reduce
energy use nationwide, along with all carbon emissions associated with the
production and transmission of that energy. According to the Energy Information
Administration, 51% of all residential energy in the United States is used for
heating and cooling living spaces, which amounts to about 11% of the total
energy consumption of the country. This project aims to use the principles of
biomimicry to develop a more effective batt insulation. Unlike other insulation
materials, unprotected exposure by the insultation installers will not aggravate
respiratory issues, which is increasingly important for homeowners and working
people who suffer from the long-term effects of COVID-19. This project seeks to
push the potential and affordability of this new technology while creating new
American jobs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is inspired by the nests of
yellowjacket wasps that live in pockets of permafrost high above the Arctic
circle. The nests are protected from extreme temperatures by the hollow wall
structure surrounding the nestâ€™s interior. This structure can be adapted to
create insulation panels that are highly efficient, lightweight, water-
resistant, non-combustible, non-toxic, non-dusting, and irritant-free. The
project focuses on the development of such a thermal insulation material in an
efficient way to keep its price point competitive with the current products.
This involves designing a manufacturing machine capable of producing the new
insulation quickly and consistently. To further push the thermal performance of
the material, the company will also develop a complementary machine that can
scan insect specimens in museum collections to assess biological structures that
are highly reflective in infrared wavelengths and use the data to address
management of radiative heat transfer. The team will apply a six-sigma approach
to quality control for improving the insulation manufacturing
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.