* 2232915
* CICI: TCR: Improving the Robustness of Cyberinfrastructure via Scalable Vulnerability Discovery and Mitigation on "Big Binaries"
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Ruoyu Wang, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 12/31/2025
* USD 1,199,998.00

Researchers and scientists in critical scientific domains use software to
conduct geophysical imaging, sequence DNA, monitor air quality, and discover new
molecules for finding new drugs. Even more software powers daily and routine
activities that scientists must perform, such as building and updating academic
websites, sharing and transferring research data, writing and composing
scientific manuscripts, reviewing academic papers, video conferencing with
colleagues, browsing scientific websites and datasets, reading and sending
scientific correspondence, and so on. Unfortunately, a lack of software
engineering best-practices in research prototype software combined with the
wide-spread use of legacy software (often unmaintained due to researcher
graduation and drift) in scientific communities make scientists and researchers
extremely vulnerable to cyber attacks. Such cyber attacks directly threaten open
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores ways to apply binary
analysis techniques, which can theoretically find and mitigate vulnerabilities
in legacy software, to the analysis and improvement of scientific software.
First, it pursues the creation of a comprehensive corpus of binary software in
which the project will find and mitigate vulnerabilities and on which achieved
improvements can be measured. With this software in mind, the next thrust will
integrate and augment binary analysis techniques to address a lack of
scalability of current binary analyses (enabling them to scale to, for example,
large simulation software). Finally, this will be combined to a level of
automation that does not currently exist in practice so that the sheer amount of
scientific software in the research corpus that must be analyzed. The resulting
scientific software-focused Cyber Reasoning System will not only provide
economical and smooth transition paths for the identification and improvement of
legacy, insecure scientific software, but will pave the way for the creation and
deployment of next-generation binary analysis
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.