* 2232463
* Collaborative Research: SII-NRDZ: POWDER-RDZ - Spectrum sharing in the POWDER platform
* MPS,AST
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Sneha Kasera, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* John Chapin
* 09/30/2025
* USD 575,850.00

The POWDER-RDZ project investigates ways to share the electromagnetic (radio-
frequency) spectrum between experimental or test systems and existing spectrum
users, and between multiple experimental systems. This research team will deploy
and evaluate a prototype automatic spectrum sharing management system for the
POWDER testbed in Salt Lake City, Utah (part of the NSF’s “Platforms for
Advanced Wireless Research” program). Spectrum access challenges currently
create significant constraints on experimentation and testing at wireless
testbeds. Automatic spectrum sharing for safe access to additional frequencies –
beyond the frequencies reserved exclusively for testing – will relax these
constraints and thus increase the nation’s capacity to conduct wireless research
and development. Increasing this capacity will help accelerate growth and global
leadership of the US communications industry, strengthen academic research into
wireless systems, and benefit other spectrum-dependent sectors such as radar,
public safety, and national defense. As a pathfinder for the National Radio
Dynamic Zone concept, the project will help future federal/non-federal spectrum
sharing arrangements assure that spectrum sharing does not negatively impact
government users. &lt;br/&gt;The POWDER-RDZ team will design, develop, and
prototype an end-to-end radio dynamic zone (RDZ) for advanced wireless
communication. They will validate its functionality by performing spectrum
sharing experiments and field studies on the resulting artifact. The project
uses the existing POWDER mobile and wireless testbed as the physical
infrastructure of the RDZ. POWDER’s existing radios and other equipment supports
the spectrum sharing experiments and provides part of the RF sensing
functionality needed by the RDZ. The project will design and develop a modular
zone management system (ZMS) to manage, control and monitor all aspects of the
RDZ. The project plans to conduct experiments on spectrum sharing with users
outside of POWDER. Experiments potentially include RDZ shared access to federal,
non-federal, and commercial spectrum, such as coarse- and fine-grained spectrum
sharing with a commercial mobile operator and spectrum sharing with a weather
radar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.