* 2232689
* SBIR Phase I:  A platform to connect underserved and underrepresented communities to science, technology, engineering and mathemetics (STEM) careers
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2024
* Gina Coburn, NERRATIVE TECHNOLOGY INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 03/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is in providing more access to educational pathways, and
equitable opportunities for learning, professional development, and career
growth to marginalized student communities. The project proposes the development
and implementation of a digital human element to meet the needs of these
impacted individuals. The project is not such organizations, but also to create
pathways to equitable opportunities for those coming from marginalized
communities to participate in some of the most innovative learning modalities,
while studying for some of the most promising STEM careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project lies in the use of
big data and machine learning in personality and skills measurement. The
artificial intelligence algorithms will be juxtaposed onto game mechanics to
facilitate ease of use due to the familiarity with other existing user
interfaces. The interface has a complex and dynamic personality profiling
engine. The research will deliver standards and methodologies, evaluate existing
exchange formats, improve accuracy metrics for neural networks, and deliver an
initial digital human prototype. The technology will create a Data Lake
containing professions, skills, certificate requirements, social media profiles,
resumes, recorded interviews, and other online activities that are shared by the
users for establishing personalized, artificial intelligence (AI)-supported
career growth profiles. Information in the Data Lake will be curated to
facilitate the development of personalized career development strategies. A
Delta Lake model will be used to continuously stream data with improved data
quality to drive the personalization requirements of both the digital human and
the user.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.