* 2232593
* Collaborative Research: CCRI: New: Syntactic Differencing Infrastructure for Software Evolution Research
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Michael Decker, Bowling Green State University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 06/30/2026
* USD 303,057.00

The proposed new software infrastructure, srcDiff (SouRce Code DIFFerencer),
which brings together investigators from Bowling Green State University and Kent
State University, will directly support research on how software changes and
evolves over time. The core of the infrastructure is a highly scalable syntactic
differencing algorithm that models a programmerâ€™s viewpoint of software change.
The infrastructure also supports querying and exploration of changes and is used
to determine which programming language syntactic structures change between two
source code versions. Current differencing approaches have no understanding of
the syntax of the programming language being used. Thus, srcDiff produces a more
accurate and human-understandable difference of changes. The approach is very
scalable and can be applied to large software
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurately analyzing changes to software is vital
for studying how large critical software systems evolve. srcDiff provides a
means to produce accurate differences in an efficient and scalable manner. The
proposed infrastructure will greatly reduce the burden researchers and
practitioners incur in obtaining, analyzing, and processing software changes.
Changes to software are used directly or indirectly for a wide variety of tasks
including software merging, clone detection, author attribution, bug
localization, feature location, recommender systems, commit classification, and
much more. Several tools for differencing exist, but there is no other syntactic
differencing approach for source code that is accurate, scalable, lossless, and
supports analysis of the results. Currently, no usable syntactic differencing
infrastructure is widely available to researchers or
practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Change is an integral part of software
development. Knowledge about changes is required for the day-to-day activities
of software developers. srcDiff will reduce the cost to perform various types of
research and enable a platform for the development of various types of tools to
directly aid software developers. As part of their daily development tasks,
developers need to inspect recent and past changes, perform code reviews, merge
branches, and debug software. Software project managers need to make informed
decisions that require knowledge of changes to their systems, such as change
impact analysis. The proposed infrastructure has the potential to positively
impact and improve the quality of all types of software. The srcDiff
infrastructure appeals to a variety of stakeholders, including researchers,
students, and software practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The srcDiff project
website is at www.srcDiff.org. The infrastructure is freely available, and the
site includes downloads of the srcDiff tools, documentation, tutorials, and
links to the repository of the open-source system. This site will be maintained
until at least 2030.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.