* 2232026
* I-Corps:  Collaborative robotics using discrete variable stiffness actuators
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Dongming Gan, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of collaborative robot manipulators to allow full use of human
intelligence and robotic precision and strength to improve industrial
performance and safety. The proposed technology seeks to support manufacturing
industries in automating their manufacturing processes by using collaborative
robotic manipulators to complement their workforce. The proposed technology may
speed up the adoption of co-robots in manufacturing industries to supplement the
lack of skilled workers and release workers from repetitive and dangerous tasks
to increase manufacturing efficiency with fewer accidents. In addition to
manufacturing applications, this next generation of compliant co-robots also may
be applied to logistics, military service, medical care, home companions,
education, and other applications.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is
based on the development of collaborative robot manipulators using discrete
variable stiffness actuators that provide both human safety and robotic
performance. Currently, existing variable stiffness actuators rely on continuous
stiffness change mechanisms. The proposed technology brings a discrete design
methodology for fast stiffness level selection, low power consumption, zero back
driving force in stiffness change, and compact design. In addition, the proposed
actuators provide a unique solution for the development of next generation of
compliant robotic manipulators that may balance human safety (low stiffness) and
robotic performance (high stiffness) using fast switching of representative
stiffness levels. The proposed compliant actuators may be applied to sectors of
the robotics industry that require adaptable compliant dynamics enabled by
variable stiffness such as walking robots, exoskeletons, medical and educational
robotics with human-robot physical interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.