* 2232598
* Explore Impacts of Head Motion on Cerebrospinal Fluid Dynamics using Simulation and Real-Time Medical Imaging
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Madoka Nakajima, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 09/30/2024
* USD 222,804.00

Exercise is a form of physical activity and is a link between brain health and
body health. The health benefits of exercise and physical activity are well
established. During most physical activities, the head moves. Flowing deep
inside the brain, the cerebrospinal fluid performs many irreplaceable tasks that
are critical to the functioning of the brain. Volume transmission of the
cerebrospinal fluid flow, for instance, could help regulate brain functions,
such as the circadian rhythm and certain neuroendocrine responses. Because
Americans spend a large amount of their time on daily activities, there is a
need to gain a better understanding of cerebrospinal fluid dynamics with the
head in motion. This exploratory project is designed to address the knowledge
gap. The hypothesis is that ventricular cerebrospinal fluid flow physics is
impacted by the head motion. If the concept and the technical approach are
proven valid and accurate by the results of this project, they could enable
studies to link biofluid dynamics toward an understanding of the roles the
cerebrospinal fluid dynamics plays in the health benefit of exercises.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A medical image-based approach will be developed in this
project to examine the effects of head motion on the cerebrospinal fluid
dynamics in the brain. The approach uses an advanced in vivo MRI medical
technology that can track unsteady cerebrospinal fluid flow in a brain in motion
and uses in silico computational fluid dynamics simulation for in-depth
investigation of the resulting cerebrospinal fluid dynamics. Anatomically and
physiologically correct modeling of the brain based on MRI images are developed.
Simulation results and MRI data are examined to unveil crucial fluid dynamics,
such as how flow disturbances generated by the head motions grow and decay and
how the convective mixing of the CSF flow varies with the head motions. This
approach is expected to yield an in-depth and fundamental understanding of the
responses of ventricular cerebrospinal flow dynamics to the head motions. The
knowledge, which currently does not exist, could help shed lights on connections
between the neurological fluid dynamics and the health benefits of exercise. For
a broader impact, the knowledge discovered could potentially lead to insights on
brain disorders and injury, such as concussion and traumatic brain
injury.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.