* 2232607
* Collaborative Research: Supporting Leadership in Diversity, Professional Development, and Geoscience Capacity Building for Veterans in STEM: The VRC-CDLS Veterans in STEM Program
* GEO,RISE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Djuradj Babic, East Los Angeles College
* Continuing Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 05/31/2028
* USD 190,394.00

This project aims to sustain a cross-institutional geo/environmental science
diversity leadership program, between East Los Angeles College (ELAC) and The
University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), which recruits from the veteran
community. The veteran community is comprised of people who, through their
service, have been exposed to a leadership-driven background which often
develops unique skills, experiences, and mindsets. This makes veterans prime
candidates to serve as diversity champions in the geo/environmental science
communities. But as with many underrepresented communities in the geoscience,
environmental science, and the STEM community overall, veterans face additional
barriers which must be addressed to facilitate their development as diversity
leaders. By developing a plan to recruit from and simultaneously address these
barriers the PIs plan to create unique experiences to develop champions of
diversity in veteran communities and create faculty leadership empathy towards
the veteran community to better inform them how to create expansion efforts to
enhance inclusion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many veterans are from under-invested
communities; therefore, the PIs will focus efforts on recruitment from these
communities, which will contribute to broadening participation efforts in the
geosciences. The PIs desire to create a data-backed model program that can be
used at various institutions to inform larger veteran inclusion and leadership
development efforts that can directly, and effectively address the “Supporting
Veterans in STEM Careers Act”. The PIs are looking to employ a multi-dimensional
approach that will simultaneously address social, personal, and academic issues;
strengthen veteran involvement in the geo/environmental science research
communities; further develop essential skills to become effective leaders in
these fields; and create a model that can be used to address veteran inclusion
and leadership development at various types of
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.