* 2232507
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Infrapopulation trait distributions link nutrient availability to host-parasite dynamics
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2023
* Edward Hall, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 07/31/2023
* USD 26,509.00

The replication rate and harm caused by a parasite can be affected by the
nutritional content of its host’s diet. However, the magnitude and direction of
these effects vary unpredictably among different hosts and parasites. The goal
of this research is to improve our ability to predict how specific parasites
will respond to shifts in the nutrient content of their host’s diets. Generating
these predictions is important because human activities add nutrients like
nitrogen and phosphorus to many ecosystems, directly altering the nutrient
content of the diet of animals. Such dietary shifts could favor specific
parasites over others. This research will test the hypothesis that the effect of
host diet on parasite replication rate is dictated by the flexibility of a
parasite’s own nutritional requirements. This project will also improve science
education outcomes for students at a local high school. Two high school students
will become integral members of the primary research lab for a summer,
conducting a small study at the end of their assistantship, and presenting their
work to fellow high school students the following year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers will experimentally manipulate the nutrient content of the diet of
an invertebrate host and determine if the relative abundance of carbon,
nitrogen, and phosphorus in host diets, hosts, and parasites can help predict
outcomes for the parasite and host. To rigorously quantify the nutrient content
of microbial parasites, the researchers have adapted an energy dispersive
spectroscopy workflow previously used to quantify the nutrient content of free-
living microbes. Measurements of multiple single celled parasites within a host
will be used to create trait distributions of the nutrient content of parasitic
populations within a host. These trait distributions capture within-host
variation in parasite nutrient content which will be used to estimate the
flexibility of each parasite’s nutritional requirements, and, ultimately, to
predict the response of each parasite to shifts in the host’s
diet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.