* 2232070
* AAAS Science &amp; Technology Policy Fellowships (2022-2027)
* O/D,OIA
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2027
* Rashada Alexander, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Pugh
* 08/31/2027
* USD 4,714,308.00

The American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) and the National
Science Foundation (NSF) will continue its collaboration in providing scientists
and engineers experiential professional development and public service
fellowships via the AAAS Science and Technology Fellowship (STPF) Program. The
STPF program objectives are to: educate scientists and engineers on the
intricacies of federal policy making; provide information and analyses that
support decision makers confronting challenges that involve scientific and
technological issues; empower civic engagement and leadership by scientists and
engineers by enhancing their skills to assess, communicate and apply science and
technology in policy contexts; foster STEM leaders with skills and experience in
policymaking and policy implementation; increase the involvement and visibility
of scientists and engineers in the policy realm; and foster positive exchange
between STEM professionals and policymakers. In the long-term, the STPF program
seeks to build science and engineering leadership capacity to support evidence-
based policy and practice by developing scientists and engineers who understand
government and policy-making and are able to develop solutions to the nation's
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fellows are selected by the AAAS annually
through a highly competitive process and placed for one-year fellowships in
offices throughout the NSF. Under the guidance of mentors, fellows work on
projects of mutual interest to the fellow and the host office. Fellowship
activities enable the fellows to gain insight into how national science and
technology policy goals are translated into programs at NSF that reflect the
agency's mission. The AAAS provides an orientation on executive branch and
congressional operations, as well as knowledge- and skill-building professional
development seminars throughout the year. The AAAS conducts extensive outreach
for recruitment, including scientists and engineers from traditionally
underrepresented populations; administers a rigorous merit review process to
identify finalists; matches fellows with host offices; and provides support for
the fellows throughout their fellowships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.