* 2232761
* SBIR Phase I:  Radar Snow Retrieval
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Baxter Vieux, APPLIED RESEARCH TEAM, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Parvathi Chundi
* 04/30/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will develop transformative, machine-learning
algorithms that will improve water management. Water management is critically
important to the social well-being, food supply, and climate resiliency of the
local population in the Western United States, yet water managers lack adequate
snowpack depth and water content information necessary for the management,
storage, and transfer of water for irrigation and consumption. Water deficits
are made worse when snowpack depths are in error, potentially resulting in
devastating damage to agricultural economies and vulnerable populations. The
proposed technology will be able to scale from storm events to seasonal snowpack
estimations and provide accurate mappings of snowpack depths and water
equivalents for watershed areas needing water
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project develops algorithms for determining snowpack depth and water
content. Snow retrieval algorithm development has not kept pace with the
deployment of short wavelengths. C- and X-band radars are used as ‘gap-filling’
radars in mountainous valleys. Developing effective algorithms for detection of
snow water equivalent is needed for these short wavelength radars. Artificial
Intelligence/Machine Learning (AI/ML) and optimization algorithms are expected
to improve estimation accuracy compared with point-scale (sensor) observations
and across watershed areas relevant to water management. Physics-guided neural
networks (PGNNs) can produce physically consistent results and generalize to out
of sample scenarios. Application of a PGNN to snow retrievals is expected to
perform better than purely data-driven or deterministic algorithms. Anticipated
technical results will provide water managers with a cloud-based subscription
service updated in real-time, using historical and current radar data to improve
operational decision-making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.