* 2232327
* Conference: Convergence Accelerator Workshop: Bio-inspired Design
* TIP,ITE
* 09/15/2022,02/28/2023
* Donald Ingber, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Ibrahim Mohedas
* 02/28/2023
* USD 96,689.00

Since the days of Leonardo da Vinci, living things have served as the
inspiration for architecture and engineering. Living cells, tissues, organs, and
organisms have abilities that far exceed those of human-made machines or
structures, including the ability to self-assemble, reproduce, heal wounds,
tolerate errors, and work together as collectives. By learning how to provide
these capabilities to engineered systems, new areas of engineering will be
created with the potential to provide new solutions to some of the most pressing
problems faced by society. Examples of applications that could be addressed
using bio-inspired design include climate-friendly manufacturing, bioenergy
production, artificial foods, novel materials for medical applications, and new
ways to rapidly build large resilient structures in civil engineering. At the
same time, the effort to engineer bioinspired materials, devices, and
manufacturing approaches will provide a new opportunity to discover the
fundamental principles by which life is organized. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some
examples of bio-inspired design solutions that are already being investigated
and on the cusp of being useful to society include: industrial-scale, climate-
friendly manufacturing of proteins, cells, and artificial foods enabled by
synthetic biology; synthetic systems for energy harnessing and storage inspired
by living systems; autonomous robot swarms for construction and civil
engineering; hybrid biomaterials that interact seamlessly with the human body
for wound healing and tissue engineering; nanomaterials that mimic natural
structures for enhanced strength, resilience, and enhanced optical properties;
and programmable molecular robots for nanofabrication of high density
multifunctional materials as well as medical applications. However, researchers
in these disparate areas rarely interact with one another, and there have not
been any national-scale workshops or conferences in this space.  This is a
missed opportunity, as it is clear that convergent interactions between these
groups could drive innovation.  &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PIs propose a workshop
in the convergent area of Bio-inspired Design to bring together researchers that
have rarely interacted previously, based on the idea that focused attention in
this space will drive forward high-impact translational solutions to major
problems that the world faces today. The vision of this workshop is to discuss
how several distinct bio-inspired approaches achieve a desired functionality,
identify the highest value key challenges that are most approachable using bio-
inspired design principles, identify hurdles that are currently preventing bio-
inspired design ideas from being practicable, and identify and disseminate best
practices for achieving translational outcomes such as spinning off start-up
companies, developing licensing agreements, and enabling distribution of
commercial products. The proposed workshop will bring together experts in
different areas related to bio-inspired design, ranging from robotics and
nanotechnology to cell and organismal biology, with the goal of identifying
emerging areas of research that are poised to take the next step into real world
application. These experts will meet in person at the Wyss Institute for
Biologically Inspired Engineering at Harvard University, where they will work
through a process of idea generation and refinement with the ultimate goal of
putting together a roadmap for bio-inspired design that will then serve as the
basis for soliciting funding applications for new
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.