* 2232138
* Understanding the Influences of Microphysical Interactions with Pollution and Water on  Dust Scattering Properties and Radiative Effects
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Zhibo Zhang, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 12/31/2025
* USD 196,786.00

Mineral dust is an integral component of the Earth system that influences
weather and climate via a suite of complex interactions with the energy, water,
and carbon cycles. Once aloft, dust can be carried by winds for intercontinental
or even hemispherical transport. During long-range transport, the dust particles
can become mixed with pollutants such as ammonium sulphate, ammonium nitrate,
hydrochloric acid, and biomass burning particles, leading to changes of dust
composition and hygroscopicity which in turn influence how dust interacts with
water. In the past, many studies have investigated how pure, unpolluted dust
aerosols interact with radiations, such as sunlight, infrared radiation and
lidar signals. However, the scattering behaviors of polluted dust and hydrated
dust are still poorly understood, which undermines our understanding of the role
of dust in the climate system, as well as our capability to detect and retrieve
dust aerosols using advanced remote sensing techniques.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is to study how microphysical interactions
with pollutants and water influence the scattering properties of dust aerosols
and assess the implications for dust radiative effects and dust remote sensing.
This goal is achieved through major tasks: First, the scattering properties of
dust particles in different mixing states, including pure dust, coated dust and
dust-aerosol coagulation, at different sizes and for different wavelengths will
be computed using advanced scattering models; Second, the scattering properties
of internally mixed dust particles will be compared with those of pure dust;
Third, radiative transfer models will be used to simulate and compare the
radiative effects of dust in different mixing states to understand the impacts
of dust-pollution-water interactions on the climate system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves mentoring two graduate students to be
the next generation of atmospheric physicists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.