* 2232190
* RUI:OSIB:The effects of high disease risk on uninfected animals
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Patricia Lopes, Chapman University
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 05/31/2026
* USD 399,334.00

Pathogens, such as harmful bacteria and viruses, can cause significant damage
once they infect an organism. As such, organisms have evolved physiological
strategies to deal with infections (i.e., to destroy pathogens or reduce their
damage). Interestingly, research has shown that in many species, including in
humans, the mere risk of infection (such as observing someone who is sick) can
already trigger physiological responses. However, these physiological responses
to disease risk are not well characterized. In particular, it is not known if
these physiological responses to disease risk affect survival and reproduction.
To address those gaps in knowledge, the proposed work will use a model species
and a parasite that infects that species and causes visible symptoms. An
understanding of the mechanisms driving physiological response to disease risk
will advance human health, animal welfare, as well as likely affect the way
biomedical research is conducted. Undergraduate students from backgrounds
historically underrepresented in science will participate in the research,
providing a formative educational experience. Undergraduates will also be
matched with high school students from similar backgrounds to facilitate a peer
mentoring program that will increase student interest in science, as well as
improve their confidence in their ability to pursue their own careers in
science. Middle school students who visit the university during the university’s
open day will have the chance to interact with the older groups of students and
learn about their experiences.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Emerging research is
suggesting that pathogens affect not only infected animals, but also those
around them. For example, recent studies have shown that cohabitation with sick
conspecifics or exposure to disease or parasite cues leads to changes in the
physiology and behavior of healthy conspecifics. If these physiological changes
help reduce disease burden or speed up recovery from disease, they can have
cascading effects on disease dynamics. The objective for this proposal is to
study how exposure to disease risk affects the physiology and reproductive
investment of uninfected animals, as well as their own responses upon infection.
To accomplish this goal, a host-parasite system (canary - Mycoplasma
gallisepticum) will be used, where responses to disease risk have already been
demonstrated to occur. To quantify how observation of infected symptomatic birds
(disease risk treatment) relative to observation of healthy birds affects
animals, the project will 1) use a transcriptomic approach to address how
multiple organs respond to disease risk over time, 2) evaluate whether and how
disease risk information modifies the damage and the time course imposed by a
subsequent infection, and 3) quantify changes in reproductive behavior and
investment imposed by the presence of disease risk. Integrated into this project
are several research and engagement opportunities for under-represented middle,
high school, and undergraduate students interested in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.