* 2232686
* Collaborative Research: Deciphering the nanoscale interactions during mineral nucleation and scale formation on polymer surfaces
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Xitong Liu, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 07/31/2026
* USD 282,196.00

Mineral precipitation, or the formation of solid mineral phases from solutions,
is a process of great importance in the natural environment and engineered
systems. Mineral scaling on surfaces, or the unwanted deposition of mineral
precipitates, poses a technological challenge to many industrial processes. In
membrane-based water treatment, mineral scaling of polymer membranes decreases
membrane flux, diminishes energy efficiency, and shortens membrane module
lifespan. In the oil and gas industry, mineral scale deposition on the interior
surface of pipes can result in complete blockage of pipelines and disrupt oil
and gas production. Despite its importance, the role of polymeric solid
substrates on mineral scaling is poorly understood. This research aims to
understand how the surface characteristics of polymers impact the formation of
mineral scales. The investigators will employ combined experimental
characterization and theoretical analysis to examine the nanoscale interactions
that drive mineral scale formation on polymeric substrates. The findings of this
work will inform design of anti-scaling polymer surfaces in submerged aqueous
environments, which will bring significant economic benefits to industries in
which mineral scaling plagues system performance and long-term durability. This
research project will provide outreach activities through public engagement at
both George Washington University and University of Maryland. The investigators
will host a yearly student-run symposium on environmental nanoscience, and host
high school student interns and deliver guest lectures to local high school
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mineral scaling on surfaces, or the unwanted
deposition of mineral precipitates, is a ubiquitous yet unwanted phenomenon in
many industrial processes including reverse osmosis, water desalination, heat
exchangers, and oil and gas production. One promising strategy for mitigating
scaling is to modify polymer surface characteristics or apply polymer coatings
to non-polymer surfaces to render the surface scaling resistant. Currently,
there is a significant knowledge gap in understanding the nanoscale interactions
and physicochemical processes in the initial stages of scale formation on
polymers. This knowledge gap limits rational development of scaling-resistant
membranes and surface polymer coatings. In this research, the investigators will
integrate liquid phase transmission electron microscopy, real-time measurement
of scale formation dynamics using quartz crystal microbalance, and theoretical
modeling to establish nucleation mechanisms during scaling of silica and gypsum
on polyamide surfaces. The research objectives are to 1) investigate the effect
of surface charge and hydrophobicity of polyamide films prepared via molecular
layer-by-layer assembly on mineral scaling rate, 2) employ liquid phase
transmission electron microscopy to visualize and quantify mineral nucleation
dynamics on polyamide surfaces in real time at the nanometer length scale and 3)
derive theoretical models for nanoparticle attachment and nucleation kinetics to
identify the nanoscale interactions involved in scale formation as a function of
polymer surface chemistry. The results of this work will facilitate rational
manipulation of nanoscale mineral-membrane interactions to prevent mineral
scaling on engineering polymers in the aqueous environment. Educational and
outreach aspects of the project will incorporate research findings into
undergraduate and graduate course materials, host joint student-run nanomaterial
and water symposia, and enhance the participation of underrepresented students
in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.