* 2232448
* CCRI: Planning-C: Capturing and Logging Ecological Virtual Experiences and Reality (CLEVER)
* CSE,IIS
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2024
* Ryan McMahan, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Cindy Bethel
* 04/30/2024
* USD 115,965.00

Artificial intelligence (AI), computer vision, and machine learning have seen
advances in research, driven in part by the creation and sharing of large
datasets. These types of datasets do not exist for the virtual reality (VR)
research communities. This planning grant forms a framework for the creation of
large VR-related datasets. Experts in the VR community will create, capture, and
share these needed VR datasets. This data will include head, hand, and eye
tracking data. They will collect information on user behaviors and interactions
while using VR systems. These datasets will advance VR software development,
techniques, and applications. This will allow software advancements like
observed in the VR hardware consumer markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A primary
goal of this planning grant is to design and create a large VR dataset
infrastructure. This project will address an important gap in virtual reality
research. A team of experts in VR will help capture multi-modal VR data (e.g.,
head tracking, eye gaze) and set up sharing of this data. They will also track
interactions and behaviors with VR systems. VR experts will administer
standardized questionnaires within most VR applications including consumer
applications. It is expected that this will result in ecological validity of the
datasets. The project plans to capture and publish a large dataset to help form
the framework for use by the VR community. The project will provide an open-
source toolkit for researchers to capture their own VR datasets. It is a goal
that they will then contribute their datasets back to the VR research community.
A key part of this project is to form an advisory board of computing experts to
guide VR research directions. The project will organize a full-day workshop to
engage the VR research community. This will help to identify community needs and
priorities to advance research. The participants of this workshop will support
the development of this important infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.