* 2232344
* LEAPS-MPS: Uncovering and Exploiting Multiscale Structures in Big Data Using Diffusion-Based Representation and Optimal Sampling
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Karamatou Yacoubou Djima, Wellesley College
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 08/31/2024
* USD 129,587.00

Consumers of information desire efficient methods for processing data, and
scientists are interested in understanding patterns and structures in data to
explain why various phenomena occur. The focus of emerging big data analytics
research has shifted to alternative data structures, especially (combinatorial)
graphs, and networks. Although graphs and networks require mathematically
complex algorithms, they have built-in links that highlight important
relationships between nodes and make them simpler to interpret in applications.
This project introduces new theories and algorithms to address aspects of graph
data challenges that have impacts on diverse segments of society including
imaging tools used by medical professionals to diagnose and treat diseases, and
on applications ranging from the regulatory networks describing the interactions
between genes, RNA, and proteins in the brain, to hardware and sensor
technology. The methods explored expand the family of harmonic analysis
algorithms that produced tools such as the wavelet-based ones for images used in
commercial applications and sampling theorems for telegraph communication. The
project also involves training and mentoring undergraduate students,
particularly students from underrepresented groups with less exposure to careers
in science and technology. The intent is to motivate and prepare them for
careers in advanced mathematical sciences and increase the global
competitiveness of the US-based STEM workforce. Other activities include
promoting equity and inclusion in STEM fields through public lectures and
coordinated outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Applied harmonic analysis
tools will play a central role in the two-year project. The primary research
objectives include: (i) enhancing the quality of multiscale representations of
data signals on graphs and networks, (ii) the optimization of sampling
strategies for high-dimensional, non-bandlimited signals, and (iii) the design
of compression algorithms to demonstrate the potential for datasets on graphs.
The analysis combines frame theory, diffusion geometry, and directional
multiscale modeling; novel numerical techniques will be developed using
numerical linear algebra and computational harmonic
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.