* 2232794
* LTREB: Long-term provenance study of phenotypic plasticity, local adaptation, and response to climate in Quercus (Q-PLAD)
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Victoria Sork, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 12/31/2027
* USD 138,082.00

This study provides a unique analysis of the response of a widespread California
endemic tree, valley oak (Quercus lobata), to a changing climate. Climate is a
critical component of the environments where organisms live. Trees face unique
challenges because they are long-lived and once they become established, they
must either tolerate the local climate or die. Given the ecological, economic,
and inherent value of trees and forested landscapes, understanding how trees
respond and adapt to new or changing conditions is crucial to inform
conservation and management strategies. Such information can only be gained
through long-term experiments such as this project, where growth, survival, and
seed production data will be collected on a large set of valley oak trees, grown
from acorns gathered from throughout the species range and planted into two
large field plots. Also, the results of this study will provide training of
students from groups that are underrepresented in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ten
years ago, a long-term study of Quercus lobata, was established using 11,000
acorns sampled from 95 localities and 672 maternal trees from across the
speciesâ€™ range. This project continues this long-term study, dubbed Q-PLAD, to
determine how specific climate-associated traits, growth, survival, and seed
production vary within and among half-sib families in relation to local and
source climatic conditions. Over the next 5-10 years, the project will: (1)
establish an integrated data system to archive existing and future datasets and
facilitate public data availability and analysis; (2) robustly test hypotheses
about plasticity in leaf and flower emergence and climate-associated local
adaptation in those traits; (3) conduct focal experiments to assess plasticity
and adaptation in climate-associated functional traits; and (4) determine the
extent of local adaptation in various fitness components associated with
climate. Q-PLAD addresses fundamental questions in evolutionary biology
concerning the evolution of phenotypic plasticity and local adaptation. In
addition, these findings will enhance our understanding of how to sustain the
health of tree populations that protect key habitats and ensures carbon capture
to help mitigate human-caused carbon emissions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.