* 2232455
* Collaborative Research: SII-NRDZ:Spectrum Sharing via Consumption Models and Telemetry - Prototyping and Field Testing in an Urban FCC Innovation Zone
* MPS,AST
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Gil Zussman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* John Chapin
* 12/31/2025
* USD 289,839.00

This project investigates ways to share the electromagnetic (radio-frequency)
spectrum using an automatic spectrum management system with the potential for
order-of-magnitude gains over current static allocation practices. The project
prototypes a management system for spectrum sharing within and among disparate
services such as communications and active and passive scientific uses. The
project involves two facilities in West Harlem, New York City: (i) the COSMOS
testbed sponsored by the NSF Platforms for Advanced Wireless Research (PAWR)
program and (ii) the Cooperative Science Center for Earth System Science and
Remote Sensing Technologies sponsored by NOAA (NOAA-CESSRST). The two facilities
are in an Innovation Zone created by the FCC to facilitate research and testing.
The project uses systems available at the facilities for spectrum sharing
experiments, potentially including: communications-passive sharing using a
weather measurement radiometer at 28 GHz; terrestrial-satellite communications
sharing using an environmental sensing satellite earth station receiver dish at
1.7 GHz or 7.7-8.2 GHz; communications-radar sharing using a weather monitoring
radar at 9.5 GHz; and communications-communications sharing using unlicensed 5G
cellular and WiFi networks at 6 GHz. The New York City dense urban environment
is a stressful case for spectrum sharing. Techniques validated using these
scenarios in an urban testbed are expected to function well in other cities as
well as in less-dense environments. Enhancing spectrum sharing will increase the
amount of wireless activity that can be supported in the limited available
spectrum. In this way, the project helps sustain future economic growth, social
benefits, and scientific discoveries that are threatened by growing spectrum
congestion. In addition to the research and prototyping tasks, the project
includes outreach to stakeholders, impact on education via an established
Rutgers WINLAB summer program, and outreach to the local Harlem community
building on an established program for teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
automatic system to be prototyped is called the Zone Management System (ZMS) of
a Radio Dynamic Zone to be established around the two facilities. The ZMS
represents a new spectrum management approach that combines a standardized
fundamental information model, measurement-assisted decision making, scalable
spectrum sensing, and continuous risk analysis and management. The fundamental
information model of the ZMS is Spectrum Consumption Models (SCMs), recently
standardized as IEEE 1900.5.2. SCMs capture the transmission and reception
spectrum use boundaries of wireless systems so their compatibility (i.e., non-
interference) can be arbitrated by efficient and standardized computational
methods. This project develops techniques for efficiently generating SCMs and
using them in a large-scale ZMS. The project develops spectrum sharing and
interference management algorithms that use SCMs and measurement feedback to
achieve high spectrum efficiency, low processing complexity and communication
overhead, and scalability. The project also develops an adaptive scalable
framework for spectrum sensing in a dense environment. The adaptation is
controlled by a risk analysis subsystem that focuses monitoring resources on
devices and situations most likely to cause interference, and to rapidly detect
malicious actors. The ZMS is evaluated via simulations and via real-world
experimentation at COSMOS and NOAA-CESSRST. The ZMS is envisioned as a
pathfinder prototype for the broader concept of Radio Dynamic Zones. The project
reduces risk for and contributes technology towards a potential future National
Radio Dynamic Zone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.