* 2232502
* SBIR Phase I:  A novel method to scaling mentoring and career development in Institutes of Higher Education
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2023,09/30/2023
* Anita Balaraman, EPIXEGO INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 09/30/2023
* USD 275,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is to increase post-secondary student success via academic and
career guidance. A large body of research on career navigation has studied how
post-secondary education, career readiness (understanding viable career paths at
graduation), and its interconnectedness are important for a growing number of
first-generation, low-income, and underrepresented students. With increasing
undergraduate degree program offerings in response to an evolving future of work
and student-to-counselor ratios of 1: 1,800 in public colleges, career guidance,
and academic navigation risk being unavailable. As a result, during the
pandemic, Institutes of Higher Education (IHEs) that serve students of color and
students from low-income backgrounds saw declines in enrollment that far
outpaced their predominantly White peer institutions. The proposed platform
intends to increase the visibility, accessibility, and discoverability of
competencies to potential career and academic paths for students at IHEs. The
platform envisions doing this via near-peer role models who are similar in their
dimensions of self-efficacy. With more than 85 million jobs that could go
unfilled by 2030, the proposed platform may help alleviate part of that shortage
by widening the talent aperture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of
this project is in the company’s patented technology of a unified, multi-
dimensional, data representation model that creates a ‘competency fingerprint’
for each user. The data representation method enables better machine learning
models to ‘infer’ competency from unstructured data of a student’s traditional
and non-traditional learning experience, rather than degrees, majors, grade
point averages (GPAs), or test scores. The platform uses a consistent, scalable,
competency nomenclature for hard and soft skills gained via traditional academic
and outside-of-the-classroom experiences to discover academic-career paths where
the students’ learning competencies may be in demand. There is a significant
technical challenge in adopting this technology for the inter/cross-disciplinary
jobs of the future: such a platform requires a robust, larger data set to
evaluate the relevance of matching, in a discipline-agnostic context. Reduction
of this variability is the key technical risk to be overcome by the proposed
research and development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.