* 2232803
* CC* Data Storage: Institutional Storage for the University of Notre Dame (NDStore)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Bradley Smith, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 08/31/2024
* USD 500,000.00

This project equips the Center for Research Computing at the University of Notre
Dame (ND CRC) and its scientific users across all Notre Dame colleges and
departments to enable transformative research in social and physical sciences
and engineering domains through the acquisition of institutional storage called
NDStore. Major beneficiaries of NDStore are researchers utilizing various
research cores at Notre Dame, such as the Genomics and Bioinformatics Core and
the Notre Dame Integrated Imaging Facility, as well as other researchers from
University Centers and Institutes, such as the Institute for Data and Society,
in addition to the broader national community via the Open Science Grid.
Together, these different facilities and researchers generate hundreds of
terabytes of data per year, and they enable expert users to address the most
complex research problems of today’s world. The major capabilities provided by
NDStore accelerate existing research otherwise throttled by insufficient storage
capability. They also enable full data lifecycle at previously inaccessible
scales, enable new national data-intensive collaborations, and incubate new
research projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NDStore brings to Notre Dame an
additional 2 petabytes of storage capacity for data manipulation, curation, and
long-term preservation, as well as 250 terabytes of fast scratch storage for
machine learning-related workloads. NDStore is a highly available solution based
on an open-source Ceph-based storage clustering standard. It was designed with
the flexibility to meet the needs of researchers at various stages of their
research. NDStore provides a clear benefit to researchers who generate data with
various instruments in core facilities and need to transfer the data to their
home directories for analysis and curation before the data is shared with their
communities. Before this project was funded, the amount of storage provided by
ND CRC to each faculty lab was not satisfactory for most of the users dealing
with large data coming from instruments at core facilities, such as microscopes,
sequencing machines, or other benchtop devices. In addition, ND CRC’s high-
performance scratch storage system has been shared between high-performance
computing and machine learning workloads; very often, mixing these workloads led
to performance bottlenecks, negatively impacting all of the storage system users
at Notre Dame. NDStore helps Notre Dame create an independent scratch system for
machine learning workloads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another important aspect of the
intellectual merit of this project is the opportunity for the CRC to deploy
NDStore in such a way that the entire data lifecycle at Notre Dame’s research
enterprise is supported. Research data use cases at ND are highly diverse,
complex, and heterogeneous. They differ in types of data captured, scientific
instruments used, data processing and analyses conducted, policies and methods
for data sharing and use, and, internal to the lab, cyberinfrastructure-related
knowledge. Data life cycle stages include: 1) data capture; 2) initial
processing near the instrument(s); 3) central processing at data centers or
clouds; 4) data storage, curation, and archiving; and 5) data access,
dissemination, and visualization. Until NDStore was deployed, Notre Dame
infrastructure could adequately support only stages 1-3 and 5, with very minimal
support for stage 4. NDStore fills this gap. NDStore will also be integrated
into classroom and undergraduate internship programs hosted by numerous faculty
in colleges and ND CRC. Through user training, research experience for
undergraduates, pre-college programs for high school students, workshops,
internships, and experiential training programs, ND CRC will ensure that NDStore
has the broadest possible impact on the local and national academic
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.