* 2232589
* Travel: NSF Student Travel Grant for the 2022 IEEE International Conference on Computer Design (ICCD)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Omer Khan, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 07/31/2023
* USD 25,200.00

This proposal is to support travel support for students in order to defray the
costs of attending and participating in the International Conference on Computer
Design (ICCD) during October 2022 in Lake Tahoe, California. The ICCD for the
past 39 years has been the premier academic forum where emerging trends and
novel concepts in computer systems and design are explored. The conference
brings together professionals from academic and industrial background to address
the challenges and discuss practical and theoretical work covering systems and
applications, workload characterization, computer architecture, security,
verification and test, design tools and automation methodologies, and nanoscale
design technologies. Highly original ideas, new approaches, and groundbreaking
results are expected. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Travel support will make possible
the participation of students who would otherwise be unable to attend. ICCD
conference will expose students to the discipline and encourage them to pursue
careers in emerging issues in computer system design. Particular attention is
paid to directing support towards under-represented groups. A small number of
undergraduate applicants will also be considered to better reach out to
potential researchers in this field. The support will provide students who
attend with the opportunity to interact with a diverse group of mentors and
peers, furthering their education and research
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.