* 2232225
* Conference: Advanced Air Mobility: Will Law Lift or Ground a New Era of Human Transportation?
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Laurie Campbell, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 07/31/2023
* USD 49,999.00

A new era of human mobility is on the horizon as investment pours into
transformative airborne technologies referred to as advanced air mobility
(AAM)—the local, on-demand movement of people and goods by air using autonomous
or uncrewed electric aircraft that take off and land vertically (eVTOL). “Flying
taxis” and the concept of aerial ridesharing at traditional taxi prices portend
a reduction in congestion and a radically improved urban mobility experience
relative to heavy-infrastructure approaches such as roads, rails, bridges, and
tunnels. AAM thus promises to democratize flight by offering affordable and
environmentally sustainable transportation between places previously not served
or underserved by aviation, including “rooftop-to-rooftop” suburban destinations
along intracity and intercity corridors. Engineering challenges ostensibly
present the highest hurdles to achieving clean, reliable, high-speed, air
mobility networks. But, in fact, legal and regulatory issues present the
greatest headwinds. These include problems of property (e.g., airspace and land
use), jurisdiction and federalism, safety and security, and community
acceptance. Also implicated are auxiliary issues including cybersecurity,
artificial intelligence, crime and policing, and social and economic equity
where law and the “rules of the road” for new technologies are still
indeterminate. To realize the full transformative potential of AAM, formulating
comprehensive and cohesive analysis addressing these and other matters is
critical (and wanting).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference seeks to generate
new knowledge and identify further areas of inquiry with respect to the
significance and feasibility of AAM. Its goal is to provide traction on
challenging questions relating to an ongoing revolution in mobility by gathering
perspectives from across disciplines about how to (re)calibrate the legal-
regulatory framework for civil air transport alongside extraordinary
breakthroughs in aeronautical engineering. It will do so in two dimensions.
First it will study “above the ground” issues, including an evaluation of known
and anticipated legal and technical challenges in enabling the safe, secure, and
efficient operation of an increasingly complex airspace. Second, it will examine
“on the ground” concerns including safety and security, governance challenges,
the environment, and community impact. Equitable and ethical considerations will
permeate the conference as panelists will assess whether the central imagined
benefit of AAM—inexpensive, green, on-demand aerial mobility—is inclusive and
accessible across all social demographics. Relatedly, whereas women and
individuals from underrepresented groups have had limited opportunities to
participate in the development of transformative innovations in aviation, law,
and science historically, this project is intentional about featuring new voices
from the broadest demographic continuum so as to effect the core aspiration of
AAM as an equalizer of access. In all, by exploring the intersection of legal
and technological innovation in a new era of aviation, the reach of this project
will extend beyond aviation as the findings it disseminates could benefit other
scholarship at the intersection of science and law that seeks to understand how
new technology disrupts legal equilibria, renders existing laws obsolete, and/or
requires the creation of new rules and frameworks to account for pioneering
inventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.