* 2232533
* Conference: CAS Climate: Synthesizing and assessing wholistic urban climate solutions in Texas
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Xinyue Ye, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 12/31/2023
* USD 42,670.00

Urban populations and associated infrastructure continue to grow globally amidst
the increasing risk of extreme heat, rainfall, and flooding, especially in high
hazard regions and vulnerable areas. A wholistic understanding and assessment of
our current state of knowledge on urban climate is thus greatly needed. A multi-
day workshop will be conducted in Summer 2023 at Texas A&amp;M University,
College Station, TX. The main theme of the workshop is to develop a research
agenda for holistic urban solutions in response to climate change, using the
fast-growing Texas as the case. A synthesis report on Texas urban climate will
be produced and distributed to stakeholders to catalyze interdisciplinary
efforts and facilitate real-world actions. The strong synthesis of knowledge and
practices is crucial to guide future urban development strategies, environmental
regulation, and adaptation recommendations to advance climate and environmental
justice in both large cities and small towns. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing
resilient human settlements responding to climate change needs an integrated
framework and interdisciplinary actions. The workshop will discuss the high-
impact urban climate solutions in Texas, including adaptation and mitigation
measures, and to plot a course forward for further research and application. The
enhanced communication and collaboration among different research fields such as
atmospheric sciences, urban planning, geography, public health, economics, civil
engineering, computer science, etc., will enable the research community to
efficiently and ethically tackle pressing climate and sustainability challenges
facing people and urban system in coming decades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.