* 2232131
* Conference: CAS-Climate: Materials Chemistry in Electrochemical Energy Storage
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2022,01/31/2023
* Tianbiao Liu, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 01/31/2023
* USD 35,000.00

The Division of Chemistry is sponsoring this workshop entitled "CAS-Climate:
Materials Chemistry in Electrochemical Energy Storage" to be held on September
26-30, 2022 at the Telluride Science Research Center (TSRC), Telluride,
Colorado. Battery technologies play a leading role in harnessing renewable
energy and combating global warming and environmental challenges caused by
current dependence on fossil fuel. In the meantime, rapidly increasing energy
storage demands for consumer electronics, electric vehicles, electrical grids,
and clean energy storage raise the level of urgency for the development of
advanced rechargeable batteries with superior energy storage performance
compared to the state-of-the-art lithium ion batteries. This workshop will focus
on the mechanistic understanding and exploration of materials chemistry in
electrochemical energy storage, including in lithium ion batteries, multivalent
batteries, and redox flow batteries. This workshop aims to gather established
leaders and emerging investigators to exchange novel ideas and address materials
challenges in energy storage science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Tianbiao
Liu from the Chemistry Department of Utah State University is organizing this
workshop. There are five sub-topics: (i) lithium ion and lithium metal
batteries, (ii) beyond lithium ion batteries, (iii) electrolyte and interfacial
chemistry, (iv) batteries for scalable energy storage, and (v) advanced
characterization and computational modeling. Through these discussions, the
workshop participants will share knowledge and exchange perspectives on the
challenges and opportunities for chemistry in the field of electrochemical
energy storage. The outcomes of the workshop will be disseminated to the
scientific community via a workshop report.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.