* 2232980
* Collaborative Research: MEGA - Mercury biogeochemical cycling and export from Greenland to the Arctic
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Brett Poulin, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 04/30/2026
* USD 670,323.00

Mercury is a toxic element that is of concern for the health of the environment
and humans. There are particularly high amounts of mercury in Arctic food webs
due to the transport of mercury in the atmosphere to the Arctic, primarily from
mining and industrial regions. The main source of mercury to the Arctic is
thought to be human emissions to the atmosphere (for example, from processing of
material in gold mining and fossil fuel burning), but there may also be large
natural sources of mercury that could change with climate warming. Glaciers and
ice sheets, large rivers of ice, have recently been identified in Greenland as
possible sources of mercury to the Arctic through glacier physical grinding (as
they bulldoze their way through the landscape) and melt, but data is still
sparse and these existing datasets highlight significant uncertainty. In the
MEGA project, the investigators will sample (i) a range of glacial meltwater
rivers across Greenland, (ii) the oceans these meltwaters flow into, and (iii)
the air next to the water sampling sites, to understand whether these natural
mercury inputs are important and/or are likely to change with increased glacier
melting in a warming climate. This new data will improve our knowledge of the
importance of glaciers and ice sheets in the Earth System, and provide critical
process information using modern measurement techniques. The MEGA project will
ultimately help us understand how mercury moves and changes through Arctic
systems. MEGA will support two PhD students, several undergraduates, and a
number of early career scientific researchers. It will establish an
international collaboration between US, Danish, German, Czech and Greenlandic
researchers, and provide unique opportunities for teachers from under resourced
high schools in West Philadelphia to participate in Arctic
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mercury is a toxic element that accumulates and
magnifies in food webs, making it of particular concern to human populations.
Concentrations of mercury in the Arctic region are of particular concern for
policymakers because they are high in Arctic marine organisms. This is important
for Arctic communities that rely on fishing and hunting for significant
proportions of their diet. The major source of mercury to the Arctic is
atmospheric deposition of anthropogenic mercury from lower latitudes (for
example, from artisanal gold mining and fossil fuel burning), transported to the
polar regions by prevailing atmospheric circulation. More recently, natural
sources of mercury, such as from permafrost melting, have received attention as
potentially important components of the Arctic mercury cycle that could change
in a warming climate. However, large gaps in scientific knowledge surround these
climatically sensitive but potentially significant natural sources of mercury,
particularly glaciers and ice sheets. The Greenland Ice Sheet is by far the
largest ice mass in the northern hemisphere, covering over 20% of the land
surface in the Arctic. Recent research suggests the ice sheet may be an
important source of mercury to surrounding ocean ecosystems, but the data is
limited and additional research is needed. The MEGA project will produce the
first complete model of mercury mobilization, movement and transformations from
source (ice) to sink (ocean). The investigators will develop a robust numerical
budget for mercury in Greenland by sampling (i) meltwater rivers flowing from
the ice sheet, (ii) the coastal areas these rivers enter, and (iii) the
atmosphere from where mercury can be deposited/transported. MEGA will use
innovative methodological techniques like the chemical fingerprint of the
mercury (e.g., mercury isotope ratios) to provide information that
contextualizes the importance of the Greenland Ice Sheet processes in the Arctic
mercury cycle. The MEGA project will support a diverse range of researchers,
including undergraduate students, two graduate students, an early career
postdoctoral researcher, and four early career faculty. The project will also
develop collaborations, networking and capacity building between US
researchers/institutions and researchers/institutions from Greenland, Denmark,
the Czech Republic and Germany. MEGA will also embed two K-12 educators from
Philadelphia in fieldwork to cultivate interests in STEM, Arctic research, and
Earth systems science, helping inspire their teaching curriculum and their
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.