* 2232922
* Conference: Permafrost and Infrastructure Symposium: Merging science, engineering and community-based knowledge
* GEO,OPP
* 11/15/2022,01/31/2024
* Benjamin Jones, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 01/31/2024
* USD 35,483.00

The Permafrost &amp; Infrastructure Symposium will bring together national and
international Arctic science and engineering experts to share knowledge on how
to address impacts of permafrost thaw on roads and community infrastructure.
Participants will include U.S. researchers working in Northern Alaska, their
international colleagues with expertise in other parts of the Arctic, and local
experts from Alaska’s North Slope, including regional planners, project
managers, and policy makers. The symposium will be held in the field—along the
Dalton Highway, in Utqiaġvik (formerly Barrow) and the village of Point Lay —
giving participants the opportunity to see the issues firsthand and to learn
from those who design, build, repair, and live with thaw-susceptible
infrastructure. The concept for the event is based on a convergence research
model to pair scientific and engineering research practices with local knowledge
and priorities to develop better strategies for improving Arctic infrastructure.
The symposium will result in a roadmap document that directly addresses the
permafrost-related challenges prioritized by local and regional residents and
planners. Key findings will be presented to local policy makers and at Arctic
science and policy forums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Permafrost degradation is
threatening the stability and shortening the lifespan of residential,
transportation and industrial infrastructure, resulting in serious economic
hardship and health and safety hazards. With continued Arctic warming, up to 70%
of fundamental circumpolar infrastructure will be at risk by mid-century. The
rate of adaptation now needed to address these risks requires that engineers
work closely with scientists to better understand predictive models of
permafrost thaw and the variability of permafrost at local scales. Through its
convergence approach, the symposium will address NSF strategic priorities for
advancing a systems-level understanding of the rapid changes occurring in the
Arctic, while fostering practical, science-based approaches to adaptation by
linking the knowledge developed by the science community with the experience of
the engineering community and the priorities of Arctic residents and planners.
The participation of researchers from multiple Navigating the New Arctic teams
studying permafrost thaw and coastal erosion will enhance synergies between NSF
projects while reducing the demands of outreach and engagement on local and
regional partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.