* 2232971
* Collaborative Research: Late Cretaceous - early Cenozoic paleolatitude of the Walvis Ridge hotspot: Implications for true polar wander and hotspot geodynamics
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2025
* Sonia Tikoo-Schantz, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 01/31/2025
* USD 195,036.00

The Walvis Ridge is a volcanic ridge in the South Atlantic Ocean that was
erupted on the African plate as it drifted over a hotspot, similar to the
Hawaiian-Emperor seamount chain in the Pacific Ocean. Scientists are debating
how accurately such hotspot tracks record plate motion. During the formation of
the Emperor chain paleomagnetic data show that the hotspot moved southward by
~10-15°to its current location. This shift might be caused by movement of the
hotspot. An alternate cause could be the shift of the Earth’s spin axis, or true
polar wander (TPW). If TPW occurred, it should cause a consistent global shift:
southward hotspot motion in the Pacific would be paired with northward hotspot
motion in the Atlantic. This project will study volcanic rocks and sediments
cored from Walvis Ridge during International Ocean Discovery Program Expedition
391 (December 2021-February 2022) to produce a record of paleolatitudes for
comparison with Hawaii-Emperor paleolatitudes. The project supports several
early career researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
analyze and publish studies of sediment and basalt core paleomagnetic data from
IODP Expedition 391, with the object of developing a paleolatitude record for
Walvis Ridge hotspot volcanoes for Late Cretaceous and early Cenozoic. IODP
Expedition 391 drilled four sites, three on the Cretaceous Valdivia Bank plateau
and one on a Paleocene guyot. Previous studies from Emperor and Louisville
seamounts in the Pacific Ocean have been influential in studies of hotspot
geodynamics. Prior to Deep Sea Drilling Project/Ocean Drilling Program
(DSDP/ODP) drilling of Emperor seamounts, hotspots were considered fixed mantle
markers, defining plate motions by seamount age progressions. DSDP/ODP cores
showed that northern Emperor guyots were formed ~15° farther north than the
current Hawaiian hotspot. IODP Expedition 330 cored coeval Louisville guyots,
finding insignificant latitudinal motion, concluding that hotspot motion is the
preferred explanation for inter-hotspot motion. Consequently, other explanations
for hotspot latitude changes are not currently favored. One such phenomenon is
true polar wander (TPW), the coherent shift of the entire mantle relative to the
spin axis. TPW has been deemed insignificant for the past ~100 Ma, even though
it is occurring at present and it has occurred deeper in the past. Hawaii and
Louisville paleolatitude data show a small amount of mutual southward motion. If
this results from TPW, the Walvis Ridge, almost antipodal to Hawaii and
Louisville, should show the opposite paleolatitude change. This project will
produce paleolatitude data for the Walvis Ridge using Expedition 391 cores (with
data from DSDP Legs 72 and 74). A major objective is to test the hypothesis of
Late Cretaceous-early Cenozoic TPW. This project hypothesizes that observed
paleolatitude shifts are a combination of TPW and mantle flow. The project
addresses important geodynamical problems that ultimately reflect mantle
structure and convection. This project supports three early career
investigators. In addition, the two faculty on this project will recruit
undergraduate student workers from under-represented groups for internships that
will help them advance in STEM education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.