* 2232439
* Collaborative Research: The Internal Wave Spectrum and Boundary Mixing in the Sub-Tropical South Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2025
* Kurt Polzin, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 07/31/2025
* USD 3,146,190.00

The research will examine the capability of global scale Ocean Circulation
Models (OCMs) to represent internal gravity waves, their dynamics and mixing
with characterizing the oceanic internal wavefield at regional scales through a
targeted field campaign and numerical investigations. The project will obtain
new observations through a field campaign and targeted numerical simulations and
will leverage existing data. This project is jointly funded by NSF and the
Office of Naval Research (ONR) through the National Oceanographic Partnership
Program (NOPP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A moored array will be deployed in the
Brazil Basin to quantify near boundary flow distortions due to finite amplitude
topography, near boundary internal wave breaking, and momentum and buoyancy
fluxes in both turbulent and internal wavebands. Extant data obtained as part of
a Tracer Release Experiment in the same domain and data from the Global Drifter
Program will be used to create a regional statistical characterization of the
oceanic internal wavefield in the Sub-Tropical South Atlantic. This
characterization will be compared to a hierarchy of five models: an operational
forecast model (HYCOM), O(1-3) km horizontal resolution ROMS-CROCO, a
nonhydrostatic ROMS-CROCO ’mountain scale’ simulations with 50 m resolution, a
realistic Large Eddy Simulations (LES), and a quasi-analytic spectral
representation of the internal wave energy spectrum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.