* 2232813
* CICI:UCSS: ARMOR: Secure Querying of Massive Scientific Datasets
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Gagan Agrawal, AUGUSTA UNIVERSITY RESEARCH INSTITUTE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 12/31/2025
* USD 599,996.00

Currently, scientific data, which is often important for ongoing research
collaborations, is shared in clouds or servers with almost no protection. This
effort focuses on technological solutions to address such sensitive data's
security and privacy risks. The specific type of solution approach chosen is
based on a class of techniques known as encrypted data querying. These methods
involve a particular type of encryption that allows the (cloud) servers to
answer queries asked by clients while keeping the data encrypted. Compared to
other approaches, these solutions have lower overheads but a higher risk of
information leakage to the server. Both the solutions and their limitations
depend upon the nature of the data and the queries, and previous work has not
explicitly focused on complex scientific data and associated queries. With this
observation, this effort aims to establish encrypted data querying as an
attractive method for protecting sensitive scientific data on clouds. A highly
interdisciplinary team with expertise in system security, cryptography,
scientific data management, and data science workflows supports the agenda of
this work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With distinct characteristics of science data
and typical queries on them, the current state-of-the-art in encrypted data
querying needs to be extended in terms of the methods themselves, the design of
leakage attacks, and the understanding of leakage risks. The research thrusts
include: 1) New Encryption and Query Processing Techniques, where challenges
with several types of queries that include equality-based selection, multi-
dimensional range selection, and joining on value similarity or ranges are
addressed. 2) Scale and Efficiency Oriented Designs, which includes novel
representation that supports joins and encryption, and how parallelism in
scientific data processing can be combined with encryption. 3) Evaluating
Overheads and Leakage in Science Contexts, where the overheads and leakage are
studied using several real cases. In the process, the recent literature on
leakage attacks is being extended to work with science cases and the methods
being developed. In terms of broader impact, the resulting work will directly
result in higher security of sensitive science data in the cloud and on
organizational servers. This effort also involves many contributions to
curriculum and human resource development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.