* 2232718
* Collaborative Research: Room-temperature Superfluorescence in Multi-fluorophore Protein Cages and Its Origins
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Jodi Hadden-Perilla, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 02/28/2026
* USD 375,000.00

Ordinary light from an incandescent lamp is emitted by the independent
excitation and relaxation of atoms in the filament. Twice the number of emitters
makes the light twice as bright. Atoms are no ordinary emitters and can
synchronize when certain conditions are met. When synchronization happens, the
ensemble becomes super-radiant, and doubling the number of emitters quadruples
light intensity. Synchronizing quantum emitters is easier said than done, but
can be achieved under certain conditions. In this project, hundreds of molecular
dyes will be chemically bound to the protein shell of a small plant virus. After
a fast excitation pulse, the dyes spontaneously synchronize and collectively
emit a burst of intense light. This project will tease out the mechanism by
which the virus scaffold promotes coupling and synchronization of the dyes, at
room temperature. Project outcomes could lead to future technologies for high
contrast bioimaging. The research project will be complemented by STEM outreach
activities, including opportunities for students to explore the innovation to
invention pipeline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The spatial scale and the symmetry
afforded by a virus scaffold have not been sufficiently explored in relation to
emergent behavior, mainly due to the lack of comparable structural control. The
preservation of quantum coherence at room temperature is especially intriguing.
Emission occurs after pulsed excitation, as a delayed intense burst of ∼ 10 ps
duration. Such non-classical dynamics contrast those of the much slower
conventional exponential decay of uncorrelated chromophores. As a consequence,
optical power density at deep sub-wavelength spatial scale, maximum turnover
rate, and signal-to-background ratio dramatically increase. The project’s goal
will be pursued through a theory-experiment collaboration. Approaches will
couple experimental spectroscopic and molecular biology manipulations with
predictive all-atom simulations that examine the structure and emergent dynamics
of engineered virus-like particles. Proof-of-principle experiments are
envisioned that exploit super-radiance and illustrate improved microscopic
imaging contrast in single-particle analysis applications. The outcomes of this
project could inspire future biophotonic technologies, providing control and
understanding of the relationship between molecular structure and dynamics, and
improved photonic properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.