* 2232899
* STTR Phase I: Internet of Things (IOT) Safety Device and System for Micro-Mobility Products
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Wencong Su, Systems Research and Consulting
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 03/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is the development of new technologies to
enhance the safety of micro-mobility vehicles and fleets (bicycles, electronic
bikes, and electric scooters). Micro-mobility has a high potential to reduce
congestion, emissions, and noise pollution in urban settings. These vehicles can
address many first- and last-mile transportation challenges. The technology
developed in this project will integrate low-cost sensors, advanced machine
learning and model-based algorithms with Internet of Things (IOT)-based
technologies for micro-mobility safety devices. Furthermore, IOT-based early
detection and warning systems can address safety concerns in the use of micro-
mobility, resulting in the development of strong
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
Phase I project will develop and evaluate a cost-effective. innovative, IOT
technology and turn it into a product and service that are essential to the
safety and reliability of the micro-mobility vehicles and fleets. The technology
involves predicting likely future failures in vehicle braking components and
systems in advance of their occurrence as well as early detection of hazardous
driving conditions (due to misbehavior of riders, road conditions, or weather
conditions). The solution will issue warnings to the rider and proactive alerts
with actionable recommendations (e.g., for proactive maintenance). The project
will develop and evaluate model-based and machine-learning-assisted algorithms
for the detection, isolation, and prediction of failures and hazardous driving
conditions as well as the associated level of confidence in the accuracy of the
decisions. The performance of the safety device and operation under experimental
conditions and constraints will be evaluated using end-to-end simulation and a
testbed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.