* 2232475
* STTR Phase I:  Refrigerant Ionic liquid Separation
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Kalin Baca, ICONIUM ENGINEERING COMPANY
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 03/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will be to provide the refrigerant industry with
the first commercial designs for separating complex, multi-component, azeotropic
refrigerant mixtures for economical recycling. The American Innovation and
Manufacturing Act authorizes the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to phase
down production and consumption of refrigerants causing global warming by 85
percent over 15 years. The societal, economical, and environmental benefits are
estimated to create thousands of jobs and increase manufacturing by billions of
dollars in the U.S. while reducing venting and incineration, and subsequently
global temperature rise. There are millions of metric tons of mixed refrigerants
that cannot be reclaimed using current fractional distillation technology. The
proposed ionic liquid extractive distillation technology will make possible the
separation and reuse of these complex refrigerant mixtures. The startup company
funded through this project will provide a novel separation technology to the
refrigerant industry that is of strategic national interest. Outreach
activities, especially toward the inclusion of women and underrepresented
minorities will be supported through this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
STTR Phase I project proposes to demonstrate that complex, multi-component,
azeotropic refrigerant mixtures can be separated using ionic liquids, and that
the products can meet industry standard specifications. Refrigerant mixture
R-404A, used broadly throughout the commercial refrigeration industry (e.g.,
grocery stores) is a complex, ternary azeotropic mixture containing HFC-143a
(1,1,1-trifluoroethane), which has a high global warming potential. HFC-143a
will be one of the first refrigerants to be reused in new low global warming
blends containing hydrofluoroolefins if the HFC-143a can be economically
separated. Over 100 complex, multicomponent refrigerant mixtures exist in the
market. This project will enable the development of processes, technologies, and
systems designs required for industry to meet and exceed the phase down goals.
The program objectives include the separation of R-404A into components, the
creation of a process model, and testing of recovered R-404A from industry to
understand the effects of impurities. The results will be used to develop a
technoeconomic model and commercial scale designs that the team will build
and/or license to the refrigerant industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.