* 2232579
* Cloaking Anisotropic Capillary Interactions Through Tunable Nanoscale Surface Topography
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Peter Beltramo, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 08/31/2026
* USD 381,851.00

Novel materials, such as solar photovoltaics, antireflective coatings, synthetic
membranes, and biosensors, may be engineered for improved performance through
the nano- and micro-scale ordering of small particles. Next generation versions
of these technologies require ordered two-dimensional structures that have
direction-dependent organization. In this project, the research team will
investigate a new approach to creating such ordered assemblies of particles
using stretched polymer spheres, termed “ellipsoids”. Such particles
irreversibly pin to air-water interfaces to conveniently create a two-
dimensional layer; however, forces between the particles cause disorganized
assemblies to form. This hurdle will be overcome in this project by engineering
the interactions between the particles through novel particle synthesis
techniques that give the particle surface a controlled degree of roughness. The
project will focus on how particle roughness can be designed to dictate the
forces between the particles and lead to their ultimate ordered assembly at the
air-water interface. By doing this fundamental science, the foundational
paradigm to develop two-dimensional materials applicable to a variety of fields,
including plasmonics, solar photovoltaics, coatings, membranes, and biosensors,
will be established. In addition, several educational and outreach activities
are integrated into the project. Undergraduate students from local community
colleges will be exposed to opportunities in STEM by recruitment for summer
research experiences. The PI will also develop active learning workshops for
middle and high school students aimed at increasing interest in STEM fields by
exposing students to the exciting real-world applications of particles at
interfaces. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will investigate how nanoscale
surface topography (roughness or porosity) dictates the capillary interactions
and assembly of anisotropic polymer ellipsoidal particles at fluid interfaces.
This work is motivated by the plethora of novel materials (e.g., antireflective
coatings, synthetic membranes, hierarchical surfaces, biomimetic materials)
enabled from the two-dimensional ordering of anisotropic colloids. However,
strong capillary attraction between particles at fluid interfaces dooms
anisotropic particle assembly. The central hypothesis is that the capillary
forces can be tuned by altering the curvature of the fluid interface surrounding
pinned microparticles through the rational design of particles with controlled
porosity or roughness. The research team seeks to apply a novel synthetic
approach to create polymer ellipsoids with tunable roughness and porosity,
quantitatively characterize the capillary interactions between such particles,
and ultimately control the microstructural organization of particles whose
detrimental capillary interactions have effectively been “cloaked” via their
surface topography. First, seeded emulsion polymerization will be used to create
biphasic, chemically patchy polymer colloids which can be transformed into rough
and porous ellipsoids. Second, the capillary interaction energy between
particles will be determined via a combination of monitoring two-particle
approach profiles and using Mirau interferometry to measure undulations in
particle-liquid contact line with nanometer scale precision. Finally, ordered
assemblies will be created using particles with promising interaction energies.
By linking the nanoscale particle surface characteristics with interfacial
interactions, we will be able to identify design principles for nanoscale
surface topography that minimize (i.e., “cloak”) strong capillary interactions
to unlock ordered 2D microstructures comprised of anisotropic particles. These
well-defined and otherwise inaccessible monolayer assemblies are directly
relevant to applications in the fields of energy harvesting, photonics,
particle-stabilized emulsions, biological interfaces, membranes, and/or
hierarchical materials. The project will include the development of active
learning workshops focused on interfacial materials and self-assembly concepts
for K-12 educators and school-aged children, as well as expanding access to
engineering research opportunities for underrepresented groups through
coordination with local community colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.