* 2232824
* CICI: UCSS: Confidential Computing in Reproducible Collaborative Workflows
* CSE,OAC
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Keke Chen, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Rob Beverly
* 12/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

Data-intensive scientific research projects often involve multiple collaborative
parties. Some parties may demand confidential processing of their sensitive
assets to protect intellectual property, embargo data (or algorithm) sharing
before publishing a paper, conform to legal requirements, or avoid the
responsibility for releasing sensitive data. However, integrating confidential
computing into scientific workflows raises significant challenges. (1) Most
science domain developers find it challenging to learn specific confidential
computing frameworks and secure their code to protect from side-channel attacks.
(2) The interplay between the private components and other components in a
collaborative workflow may enable new attacks and side channels for adversaries
to explore. The proposed project aims to address these challenges with a
scientist-friendly development framework for confidential computing and a
holistic attack study and mitigation framework for collaborative workflows. The
success of this project will enable domain scientist developers to adopt the
best confidential computing practices easily and use publicly available
resources without the concern of confidentiality and privacy breach, boosting
the idea of open, collaborative science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the
proposed research focuses on the scientist-oriented trusted-execution-
environment (TEE) based development and studies its integration with
collaborative scientific workflows. (1) The project explores different
protection and usability solutions for domain scientists and allows them to
tradeoff between their research goals and security and privacy concerns. (2) It
develops an efficient and transparent TEE access-pattern protection framework
that uniquely combines the best practices in data-intensive computing and
framework-based mitigation methods. (3) It takes a holistic approach to study
new security and privacy threats around confidential components in a
collaborative workflow, covering stages including task execution, logging,
provenance analysis, and reproducibility verification. The solutions will
integrate techniques like TEE, blockchain, and differential privacy. (4) It is
science-driven, motivated, and validated by collaborative research projects in
biomedical sequence processing, image-based remote diagnosis, and healthcare
data analytics. This project will generate open-source toolkits and
demonstration systems. It also includes several educational and outreach
initiatives to enhance cybersecurity and data science programs, attract
underrepresented students, help local high school CS education, and strengthen
industrial collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.