* 2232581
* Collaborative Research: Dynamical Mechanisms for Midlatitude-Arctic Interactions and Associated Weather Extremes in a Warming Climate
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2026
* Gang Chen, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 03/31/2026
* USD 707,741.00

Persistent weather systems in winter cause cold spells, heavy rainfall, or snow.
These weather extremes are closely related to the location and intensity of
midlatitude jet streams, which blow from west to east and often shift to the
north and south. As Earthâ€™s climate gets warmer, the jet streams are affected by
the tug-of-war between the rapid surface warming over the Arctic and the
enhanced upper-tropospheric warming in the tropics. The investigators will
examine several interrelated dynamical mechanisms for midlatitude-Arctic
interactions and the associated weather extremes. The first theme is the linkage
between the planetary waves in the stratosphere and the risk of cold events.
This task will test the hypothesis that extreme wave events in the stratospheric
polar vortex serve as a source of intraseasonal predictability for cold events
over North America. This linkage between the stratosphere and surface
temperature will be analyzed in observations and climate models. Secondly, the
investigators will examine a hypothesis that a weaker jet stream under rapid
Arctic warming would lead to more frequent weather extremes in mid-latitudes.
This task will perform idealized numerical simulations to examine the effect of
jet speed or jet structure on the north and south shifts of a jet and thus
attempt to reconcile different views on the changes in midlatitude circulation
waviness in response to climate warming. The third task is on atmospheric
rivers, the narrow intense moisture transport associated with midlatitude
cyclones. Atmospheric rivers dominate the poleward moisture flux in the middle
and high latitudes, which contribute to Arctic warming. Intense moisture
transport can be influenced by either wind speed or temperature, and the two
factors will be studied in an atmospheric transport model of water vapor and
cloud tracers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Midlatitude weather extremes have profound
socioeconomic impacts. Predictive skills from extreme stratospheric events could
improve the sub-seasonal forecast of winter cold spells over North America, with
important implications for energy consumption and transportation. A better
understanding of extreme cold events in a warming climate can foster better
communications of global warming science between the scientific community and
the public. Improved predictions of the intense moisture transport by
midlatitude cyclones into the Arctic help better adapt to the changing Arctic.
Besides supporting an early career scientist at Penn State University, the
proposal will train two graduate student researchers at UCLA in the analysis of
observations and climate models. Several UCLA undergraduates will be trained in
statistical analysis of climate data, particularly for STEM majors and
underrepresented minorities. The idealized models developed in this study will
be made available on a GitHub website with sample python
scripts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.