* 2233633
* BRC-BIO: Bird feeders in the city: the effect of urbanization on ecological immunology and microbiology in cardueline finches
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Joel Slade, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 02/28/2026
* USD 467,622.00

Urban bird feeders promote social contact between seed-eating birds, increasing
potential exposure to bacteria containing antibiotic resistance genes. This has
negative consequences for birds and humans who handle soiled bird feeders, as
they may acquire antibiotic-resistant bacteria from these feeders. Birds
exhibiting strong immune responses may not be harmed by these microbes, but
urban environments can stress birds and thereby impede their immune system.
Also, urban development causes habitat fragmentation, which can decrease the
spread of beneficial immune gene variants between rural and urban bird
populations in species with limited dispersal. To explore these issues, the
researchers will gather data across three sites along an urban-rural gradient
for three finch species that routinely occupy bird feeders in California. The
project aims are to (1) measure the presence of antimicrobial resistance genes
in birds and at bird feeders, (2) measure the birdsâ€™ bacteria-killing ability in
vitro, and (3) measure the variation between six immune genes in house finches.
The researchers will involve the community through a regional birding society
and scouting organizations. They will also have students in four courses at
their minority-serving institution help collect, process, and analyze their
data. Ultimately, their goal is to increase the participation of historically
marginalized people in scientific research and connect with the public on the
importance of how humans can impact avian health and how they can help protect
local bird populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Along an urban-rural gradient near
Fresno, California, the researchers will study the effect of urbanization on the
innate immunity of three finch species (pine siskins Spinus pinus, lesser
goldfinches Spinus psaltria, and house finches Haemorhous mexicanus) by
performing bacteria-killing assays and analyzing leukocytes profiles. The
researchers will measure immunogenetic diversity and differentiation of the
major histocompatibility complex (MHC; the cornerstone of the adaptive immune
system) and Toll-like receptors (TLRs; innate immune genes) and at neutral loci
in non-migratory house finches, which commonly occupy feeders in rural and urban
environments. The researchers will quantify and characterize the prevalence of
bacteria and their antimicrobial resistance genes (ARGs) in these birds and on
the bird feeders. To accomplish this, the researchers and their students will
catch and sample finches along an urban-rural gradient to (1) measure
constitutive innate immunity by running bacteria-killing assays against three
bacteria species and analyze leukocyte profiles with light microscopy; (2)
measure immunogenetic variation by genetically characterizing the hypervariable
peptide-binding region of MHC class I and II using high-throughput sequencing,
the pathogen-recognition domains of four TLRs, and measure neutral genetic
diversity using 14 microsatellite loci; and (3) perform metagenomic analysis to
characterize microbes and ARGs in the three finches and the bird feeders they
use. Ultimately, this research will allow biologists to better understand how
urbanization plays a role in the evolutionary ecology of the avian immune system
and the spread of microbes containing ARGs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.