* 2233191
* Planning: Toward OpenHMI, A Community-Designed Infrastructure for Human-Machine Interaction Research
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Maja Mataric, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 07/31/2023
* USD 100,000.00

Human-machine interaction is an area of research where scientist study how users
work together with robots and other devices. It is a broad, cross-cutting area
of computing with great potential for supporting wellness, education, and
training of people from various backgrounds and with diverse needs. The
technology in this field is expanding rapidly, and leverages major areas of
development, including computer vision and computer intelligence. However, this
area of research is stifled by the lack of tools and software platforms that are
accessible, affordable, and appropriate for use with real-world users in
replicable real-world research studies. This planning project aims to spend a
year understanding this field of research community needs toward designing, what
is called “OpenHMI:, an open-source, affordable and modular platform for
enabling scalable and accessible research and outreach in human-machine
interaction (HMI)”. OpenHMI aims to broaden participation in research by
enabling affordable and inclusive real-world studies and data collections. By
creating an accessible low-cost and a community accessible platform, this
infrastructure will broaden participation of researchers from a range of
institutions and levels of research support, in particular opening doors to
under-resourced researchers and groups. By involving researchers in the
community in the design process, this work establishes an ecosystem that aims to
remove barriers to entry for researchers from traditionally under-represented,
under-resourced, and/or minority-serving groups and institutions, thereby
expanding computing research ideas and projects. The low cost of OpenHMI
hardware can also make it an affordable platform for demonstrating introductory
computing, computer coding, robotics, and design topics to K-12 and enabling
safe hands-on learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This one-year planning project uses
surveys, interviews, and workshops to collect information about the computing
community needs toward developing OpenHMI. Specifically, three nation-wide
surveys assess detailed needs of the community, including hardware and software
infrastructure needed and specific prioritized features of each. Using that
input, mockups, early prototypes, and simulations of hardware and software are
developed and used in two nation-wide virtual workshops designed to be broadly
accessible and inclusive. The workshops serve to train the participants with
hands-on experiential activities while collecting information about usability,
priorities, and preferences. The large corpus of collected community data
informs the design of OpenHMI so that it can be community-informed and designed
to ensure its ability to significantly advance research in human machine
interaction research by being open-source, accessible, modular and scalable and
to facilitate inclusive, safe, privacy-centered and effective integration of
this field of research into everyday lives of users to better support ethical
data-driven research. The community design process also establishes an open and
collaborative ecosystem to accelerate the transition from research studies in
small-scale short-term laboratory settings to large-scale long-term deployments
in real-world environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.