* 2233613
* Collaborative Planning Grant: Building Northwest Psychology Partnerships and Pathways for Talented Low-Income Psychology Students
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Alicia Ibaraki, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 09/30/2023
* USD 100,000.00

This project will contribute to the national need for well-educated scientists,
mathematicians, engineers, and technicians by strengthening collaborations and
planning for a future Track 3 S-STEM proposal that would support the retention
and graduation of high-achieving, low-income students with demonstrated
financial need at Heritage University, Western Oregon University, and Oregon
State University. Talented low-income students at Heritage University and
Western Oregon University bring unique community and cultural connections to
their educational experiences. Psychology is a popular STEM major across the
U.S., and although some low-income, high potential students do not at first
think of themselves as “scientists”, they are attracted to the discipline for
many reasons. Often, they are highly invested in applying the fundamental,
transferable skills in research design, statistics, human thinking and behavior
to problems related to their communities, including problems related to
environmental and climate science. This project will examine the needs of
potential scholars and develop cross-institution and community partnerships in
order to develop appropriate programs and supports to be integrated into a
future Track 3 proposal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project
is to strengthen collaborations and prepare for a future Track 3 proposal to
increase STEM degree completion of low-income, high-achieving undergraduates
with demonstrated financial need. The project has 3 main goals: 1) leveraging
and expanding existing and new connections among the three higher education
institutions; 2) strengthening partnerships with community groups relevant to
the success of talented, low-income students; and 3) identifying the specific
needs of potential scholars with an emphasis on their unique strengths. Specific
aims include collaborating with financial aid to understand how high financial
need is determined across sites, holding culturally informed focus groups to
gather information from low income, high potential students on their needs and
goals, collaborating with the STEM Learning research center at OSU to develop a
plan for research centered on the population of prospective scholars; and
developing an evaluation plan in consultation with the evaluation center at
Western Oregon University. Pre-award grant support, cultural consultants, and
other campus partners at Heritage University, Western Oregon University, and
Oregon State University will assist in the planning of components necessary for
a quality Track 3 S-STEM proposal. This project is funded by NSF’s Scholarships
in Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics program, which seeks to
increase the number of low-income academically talented students with
demonstrated financial need who earn degrees in STEM fields. It also aims to
improve the education of future STEM workers, and to generate knowledge about
academic success, retention, transfer, graduation, and academic/career pathways
of low-income students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.