* 2233004
* SBIR Phase II:  Computer Aided Design Toolkit for Desktop Digital Fabrication of Circuits on Paper
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2025
* Jie Qi, CHIBITRONICS INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ela Mirowski
* 05/31/2025
* USD 991,408.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project is to bring new and more diverse audiences to circuit design
and digital fabrication through an integrated STEAM (science, technology,
engineering, art, and math) approach. Research shows that the STEAM approach is
especially successful for reaching underrepresented minorities, girls, and
women. This project continues the development of the Phase I circuit design
software and accompanying physical toolkit for do-it-yourself (DIY) digital
fabrication of circuits on paper. Through the design, development, and
evaluation of this toolkit, the team will contribute to the scientific
understanding of human computer interaction design for STEAM learning,
accessibility, and equity. By introducing the novel category of technology-
integrated crafts to mainstream education and craft markets, open market
opportunities create a new ecosystem of products and accessories, customers, and
inventors. This innovation brings the digital manufacturing of electronics out
of traditional technical environments and into entirely new, more mainstream,
and more diverse audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will continue the development of the Phase I
activities towards commercial deployment. The team is developing a novel
electronics design software that greatly reduces the complexity of existing
computer-aided design tools and prepares a custom toolkit optimized for the do-
it-yourself digital fabrication of circuits. The research objective is to blend
engineering activities with arts and crafts in innovative ways to radically
reduce the barriers to entry for learning, designing, and producing electronic
circuits. The team will develop a production version of their software that
includes advanced simulation and design features, as well as a library of
projects and resources to scaffold the circuit learning and design process. The
team will also refine and manufacture the toolkit for user testing and
deployment at scale. In close partnership with K-12 educators and hobby
crafters, the technology will be developed to meet the needs of target
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.