* 2233168
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Reusable Launch Platform: Two-Body Separation Under Unique Aerodynamic Circumstances
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Paul Phillipsen, FENIX SPACE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 04/30/2024
* USD 274,996.00

The broader impact and commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is in its positive influence on both the growth
of the Low Earth Orbit economy and stimulation of innovation in space
technology. The growing demand for satellite launches is currently limited by a
bottleneck of low availability, flexibility, and high cost of existing orbital
launch services. Orbital delivery services enabled by this advanced in-flight
separation system will enable a new level of launch responsiveness leading to
lower costs, much greater contractual flexibility, and the availability of daily
launches without the need for costly launch infrastructure, greatly accelerating
time-to-market for satellite service providers and increasing their
profitability. Low cost and frequent access to Low Earth Orbit will enable
ubiquitous internet access, 5G capabilities, and valuable Earth observation
technologies. The flexibility and reduced cost of these launch services will
help maintain the United States' position at the forefront of space technology
development and space research. The technology will provide the US Armed Forces
access to a responsive, secure, flexible, and available gateway to space that
will boost reconnaissance, observation, communication, and intelligence
capabilities. Moreover, it will represent the most ecofriendly launch delivery
service available, able to reduce carbon dioxide emissions by three times (3x)
compared to ground launch.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project seeks
to demonstrate an innovative concept of in-flight aircraft/rocket separation in
which the rocket is launched from the top of the carrier aircraft, instead of
the widely used launch from beneath. This new separation system is the core
innovation enabling an advanced air-launched orbital delivery system that will
dramatically reduce the cost of dedicated satellite launch, minimize propulsion
and structural requirements, and enable orbital delivery flexibility and
precision, while significantly reducing the carbon footprint of space launch
operations. The proposed concept will be the first top-carry air-launch service
commercially available. The goals of the Phase I project are focused on building
a prototype of the separation system and validating it in a sub-orbital test
flight. The main technical challenge is to ensure that the design of the
improved separation system will work under a broad range of real flight
conditions. This technology will be achieved by research leading to a better
understanding of aerodynamic behavior at the separation event and the
development of an improved design methodology that considers all relevant design
parameters and their aerodynamic effects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.