* 2233695
* Enhanced Growth and Stress Tolerance in Plants After Treatment With Ethylene
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Brad Binder, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Aruna Kilaru
* 07/31/2026
* USD 675,256.00

Enhancing crop yields is a major challenge because of an increasing human
population, climate change, and reduction in arable land. Methods to increase
growth and stress resistance in plants are key to addressing this challenge.
However, the success of these approaches is not guaranteed since improvement in
growth often leads to a decrease in stress tolerance and vice versa. This trade-
off can have profound implications on bioengineering strategies to enhance plant
yield. Plants are regulated by a variety of hormones including ethylene, which
is a gas known to regulate many aspects of plant growth, development, and stress
responses. We recently discovered that transient ethylene treatment early in
seedling development leads to long-lasting changes that increase both growth and
stress tolerance. This potentially provides a simple technique to improve plant
vigor and yield. We propose to use a variety of scientific approaches to
determine the mechanisms for this unanticipated result and develop treatment
protocols applicable to a variety of plant species. Results from the proposed
research will reveal new paradigms for treating plants and will provide targets
for genetic modification to increase plant growth and vigor to improve food
security. Overall, this research is expected to have significant impact on crop
productivity, and enhance scientific and educational infrastructure and
opportunities for students mentored including women and minorities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We recently made the surprising observation that ethylene
treatment of germinating seeds in darkness, followed by transfer to light and
ethylene-free conditions caused plants to grow much larger and display enhanced
abiotic stress tolerance. Correlating with these changes, ethylene pre-treatment
also led to long-lasting increases in both photosynthesis and the levels of
starch, carbohydrates, and various core metabolites. We hypothesize that
transient ethylene treatment of seedlings at critical times in their development
results in epigenetic changes that cause long-lasting increases in
photosynthesis and carbon metabolism leading to increased carbohydrate levels
which enhance both growth and stress tolerance. The main goals of this research
will be to test this hypothesis, uncover the mechanisms responsible, and
establish how wide-spread these effects of ethylene are across plant species. To
do this we propose an integrated set of experiments do determine the signaling
pathway(s) responsible and determine the changes that occur in photosynthesis
and carbohydrate metabolism. These studies involve multiple spatiotemporal
scales and combine genetics, molecular biology, biochemistry, and physiology to
provide mechanistic details about enhanced plant vigor. These studies will
furnish links between subcellular events and whole plant responses. This
research is jointly funded by the Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics
program in the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems and the Cellular
Dynamics and Functions cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.