* 2233714
* Research Infrastructure: Sustaining Medicago truncatula mutant resources for legume biology research
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Kirankumar Mysore, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 07/31/2028
* USD 807,845.00

Legumes play a crucial role in sustainable agriculture due to their capability
of symbiotic association with soil bacteria to fix nitrogen gas for plant
growth. Medicago truncatula is a model legume species to study biological
processes that are unique to legumes because most legumes have complex genomes
that make genetic manipulations infeasible. Mutants in M. truncatula are thus
irreplaceable resources in understanding gene functions in legumes. From 2004 to
2013, the PI and the Co-PI generated legume mutant collection with ~21,000
insertional mutant lines in M. truncatula. In addition, a large-scale fast
neutron deletion mutant collection was also generated in M. truncatula. These
mutant resources are hosted at Oklahoma State University and are accessible to
worldwide users through a web-based database. From 2007 to 2022, more than
15,500 mutant lines have been distributed to 220 research groups in 29
countries. Students on the project will receive infrastructure management
training to handle seed requests, seed retrieval, seed cleaning, documentation,
invoicing, shipping, and PCR reverse screening that includes primer designing,
PCR amplification, gel electrophoresis and sequencing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From
2004 to 2013, ~21,000 Medicago truncatula retrotransposon Tnt1 insertion lines
(Tnt1) were developed at the Noble Research Institute and out of these lines,
about 400,000 flanking sequence tags (FSTs) were recovered by using next
generation sequencing. In addition, a large-scale fast neutron bombardment (FNB)
deletion mutant collection was also generated in M. truncatula. In 2021, these
resources were transferred to the Institute for Agricultural Biosciences,
Oklahoma State University. The mutant collections are accessible to users
worldwide through a web-based database, which contains phenotype descriptions
and photos of individual lines, BLAST-searchable FST sequences and a JBrowser
genome viewer. Since the first seed distribution in 2007, a total of more than
15,100 Tnt1 lines and 400 FNB lines have been distributed to 220 research groups
in 29 countries. Continued distribution and characterization of mutant lines is
expected to support research into basic biological mechanisms and applications
related to the bioeconomy or biotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.