* 2233769
* CPS: TTP Option: Small: Consistency vs. Availability in Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2025
* Edward Lee, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 12/31/2025
* USD 599,000.00

Distributed cyber-physical systems (CPS), where multiple computer programs
distributed across a network interact with each other and with physical
processes, are challenging to design and verify. Such systems are found in
industrial automation, transportation systems, energy distribution systems, and
many other applications. This project is developing a “systems theory” for such
applications that provides a good analytical toolkit for understanding how a
system will behave when networks misbehave. It is building tools that make it
possible to reason about the design of safe and reliable distributed CPS
applications in an accessible user-friendly environment. In distributed
applications, Brewer's CAP theorem tells us that when networks become
partitioned, there is a tradeoff between consistency and availability in
distributed software systems. Consistency is agreement on the values of shared
variables; availability is the ability to respond to reads and writes of those
shared variables. This project builds on an extension that has shown that
consistency, availability, and network latency can be quantified, and that the
CAP theorem can be generalized to give an algebraic relation between these
quantities. This generalization is called the CAL theorem because it replaces
“network Partitioning” with “Latency,” where partitioning is just a limiting
case of latency. The CAL theorem can be used to help design distributed systems
that fail gracefully when network performance degrades. With increasing latency,
either consistency or availability (or some measure of both) must be sacrificed,
and the CAL theorem quantifies these sacrifices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is applying the CAL theorem to distributed CPS. The project is deriving
the fundamental limits implied by the CAL theorem and developing a methodology
for systematically trading off availability and consistency in application-
specific ways. The application of the CAL theorem to CPS generalizes consistency
to include agreement on the state of the physical world and availability to
include the latency of software responses to stimulus from the physical world.
Instead of focusing solely on network latency, the project adopts a measure
called “apparent latency” that includes network latency plus all other sources
of latency (e.g., computation time). This measure is practically measurable. The
project builds upon the recently developed Lingua Franca coordination language
to provide system designers with concrete analysis and design tools to make the
required tradeoffs in deployable software. The tools automatically produce
graphical renditions of systems and user-friendly feedback on the concurrent,
distributed, and real-time aspects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.