* 2233868
* In situ Rb-Sr mica petrochronology: a transformative approach to characterizing tectonic processes
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2025
* Alicia Cruz-Uribe, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 12/31/2025
* USD 391,286.00

The radiogenic decay of 87Rb to 87Sr is an important “clock” that geologists use
to measure the age of rocks and minerals. However, these measurements have
traditionally required time-consuming lab work on pooled mineral separates.
Several technical advances have recently alleviated this problem by enabling in-
place (in situ) Rb-Sr measurements, but there are still barriers to their
widespread use. These include a lack of appropriate reference materials, as well
as questions about what Rb-Sr dates record in different rocks. This proposal
addresses these problems in two ways. First, the researchers will develop two
Rb-Sr reference glasses to significantly expand the use and application of Rb-Sr
dating. They will also determine Rb-Sr dates from three well-studied rock
suites, to provide key context for similar data elsewhere. This technique is
novel because it allows us to accurately date mica, one of the most common
minerals in Earth's crust. It also facilitates the measurement of rock Rb-Sr
dates in less than an hour, far shorter than the traditional method (weeks to
months). This project is led by middle and early career scientists and supports
the professional development of two undergraduate and two graduate students. It
additionally promotes scientific collaboration between two rural institutions in
the northeastern US.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The scientific goals of this proposal
are two-fold. First, the researchers will produce two mica glasses (muscovite +
biotite) and characterize them for major + trace elements and Rb-Sr isotopes.
This includes high-precision isotope-dilution techniques as well as a community-
wide, multi-instrument proficiency testing scheme (G-Probe). Their mica glass
reference materials will be freely and widely disseminated, filling a critical
analytical gap and spurring further development of the Rb-Sr technique in other
labs, which will inevitably lead to other significant discoveries. As part of
this effort, a data reduction scheme (DRS) for processing laser ablation Rb-Sr
data will be further developed to include mass-shifted isotopes from
multicollector instruments and downhole fractionation assessment. Second, they
will determine in situ mica Rb-Sr dates by single- and multi-collector LA-ICP-
MS/MS from three well-characterized locales representing endmember tectonic
cases: the Mooselookmeguntic contact aureole, ME (USA); the Franciscan
Subduction Complex, CA (USA); and the Ivrea-Verbano Zone, S. Alps (Italy). By
performing campaign-style mica Rb-Sr geochronology in three tectonic case
studies, within the context of other textural and geochemical data collected
during this work, the researchers will test the behavior of the Rb-Sr system
across a range of geologically relevant conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.