* 2233083
* BRC-BIO: Carbon sequestration potential and drought resilience with wet meadow restoration under a changing climate
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Jennie DeMarco, Southwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 12/31/2025
* USD 502,901.00

Global air temperature has increased by over one degree Celsius since the
industrial revolution and is on its way to reaching two degrees Celsius by 2041.
This scenario will cause devasting impacts on both social and ecological
systems. Particularly hit hard is the western United States. That region is
experiencing widespread warming, decrease in precipitation, and decline in
snowpack resulting in more frequent and severe droughts. Land restoration
practices can impact ecosystem resilience to drought conditions by affecting the
ability for soils to effectively store water. In addition, restoration has the
potential to increase soil carbon through increased plant growth and decay.
However, how restoration efforts influence the amount of soil water and carbon
stored in soils is poorly understood over large spatial scales. In addition,
land restoration projects may affect the ability for soils to effectively store
water. By taking an integrative approach, this research will study what can be
learned about land restoration projects and changes in soil conditions at a
landscape scale. It will provide new insights into the use of data from remote
sensing tools to quantify ecosystems changes. The work will also provide
immersive research and education experiences for undergraduate students. These
experiences included participation in a summer field course where students will
have opportunities to connect with a variety of non-academic partners.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Restoration projects cover large landscapes, making on the
ground measurements inadequate in accurately quantifying carbon storage and
resilience at broad spatial scales. This project will assess the effectiveness
of using remote sensing tools to quantify changes in soil moisture across
landscapes. The work will evaluate the carbon sequestration potential of
restoring wet meadows within the Gunnison Basin of Colorado. Remote sensing soil
moisture data will be collected within restored watersheds using Sentinel-1
satellites and commissioned flights with the UAV, Black Swift S2 and will be
validated with in situ soil moisture data to check retrieval accuracies. Carbon
sequestration potential will be evaluated by measuring soil carbon stocks in
restored and unrestored watersheds. Until now, data from these different sources
have not been combined to quantify soil moisture in an ecological context. This
study will be the first to do so. So, not only does this research provide an
opportunity to address important land management questions, it will also explore
an innovative methodology. Results from this study will help assess the impact
of restoration efforts and their potential to serve as a climate mitigation tool
within the Gunnison Basin and beyond as similar wet meadow restoration projects
are occurring across the western United States in regions where the near
threatened greater sage-grouse (Centrocercus urophasianus) occupy. Restoration
practices that help restore hydrology within this region, the headwaters of the
Colorado River, have the potential to impact the millions of people reliant on
the Colorado River water supply.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.