* 2233612
* SBIR Phase I:  Novel Circulation Control for Electric Aircraft
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Graham Doig, SEAFLIGHT TECHNOLOGIES INC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 03/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will be the accelerated adoption of electric flight. Currently,
the limited range and payloads of small electric aircraft make them economically
unviable on most routes. Increased aerodynamic efficiency is required for longer
range. The circulation control technology being developed generates extremely
high lift only when needed (takeoff and landing), but unlike other propulsion-
based approaches aimed at the same effect, it is low cost and allows for a
smaller and more efficient wing without any mass or performance drawbacks for
the cruise portion of flight where range is needed. More rapid adoption of
electric aircraft will enhance US leadership in this nascent field, facilitate
the use of the countryâ€™s 5000 small, regional airports for transformative,
quiet, accessible, electric air mobility, and become a new area of economic
growth in underserved parts of the country. Moreover, decarbonization is an
urgent challenge in aviation, with the industry being among the least able to
electrify. Radical new aerodynamic approaches and configurations must be
adopted, such as those which the proposed technology will enable, to reach a
true net zero future for air transportation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
involves research and development of novel aerodynamic circulation control
applied to the wings of electric planes to generate extremely high lift. The
technology introduces a high-energy narrow jet of air over control surfaces like
flaps, allowing for much higher deflections and potentially tripling the lift of
a wing at takeoff and landing. Previously deemed too risky and expensive for
commercial application by industry based on earlier concepts fueled by
combustion engines and complex plumbing, this innovation simplifies the physical
implementation in a way that is only now possible with the latest electric
aircraft architectures. This project develops a combination of high-fidelity
computational fluid dynamics simulations and physical aerodynamic testing to
uncover the fundamental turbulent flow characteristics that must be produced to
ensure that maximum wing lift coefficients of 4 to 5 can be achieved reliably,
particularly in off-design conditions. Detailed performance modeling will
establish benchmarks of existing vs. modified performance to include circulation
control and then apply this data to an entirely new type of maximum efficiency
wing that can become a new industry standard.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.