* 2233111
* EAGER: CRYO: Refrigeration across temperature scales with electrically-tunable spin-orbit materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Jian Shi, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 08/31/2024
* USD 297,189.00

Non-technical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum computing and communication
technologies, which will become increasingly critical for competitiveness and
security in the next phase of the information age, require ultralow temperatures
that are hundreds to thousands of times smaller than room temperature. Currently
the predominant approach to reach such temperatures relies on repeatedly mixing
and separating two isotopes of helium, He-3 and He-4, in a dilution
refrigerator. However, helium in general, and He-3 in particular, are rare and
increasingly expensive. This poses a severe challenge to the widespread adoption
of quantum technologies. With this high risk/high reward project, supported by
the Division of Materials Research, researchers at the Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute investigate a new approach for achieving ultralow temperatures without
relying on rare elements. Specifically, they leverage the unique interactions of
the spin of electrons in a class of materials called Rashba materials with
electric fields. Preliminary simulations show that switching a voltage applied
to these materials on and off in a specific pattern and direction may allow
reaching low temperatures efficiently, making these potentially promising
materials to compete with dilution refrigerators. In addition to enabling the
widespread adoption of quantum technologies, the success of this new approach to
reach very low temperatures could make a wide range of low-temperature
phenomena, such as superconductors, more scientifically and technologically
accessible. To educate the next generation of STEM workforce, the researchers
integrate the underlying theory and experimental demonstrations of ultralow
temperature refrigeration into undergraduate and graduate curricula as well as
high-school outreach programs. This helps introduce future scientists and
engineers to the technological challenges on the path to the age of quantum
information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With
support from the Division of Materials Research, the researchers leverage Rashba
spin-orbit coupling in materials as a new platform for enabling new approaches
to reach ultralow temperatures down to 0.01 K, breaking the current dependency
on the extremely rare He-3 isotope required by dilution refrigerators. They
study new thermodynamic cycles that take advantage of the dependence of the
electronic entropy on electric fields, due to the change of the spin-orbit
splitting with electric field strength in Rashba materials. In particular, they
investigate the possibility for refrigeration by adiabatic electrification of
Rashba materials and determine if this can provide sufficient cooling power that
matches or even exceeds that of typical dilution refrigerators. Research
objectives include exploring a wide class of Rashba materials with different
spin-orbit coupling strengths, synthesize structures capable of electric field
cycling in these materials and quantify the field- and temperature-dependent
thermodynamic parameters of these materials relevant for refrigeration. If
successful, this approach may be extensible to a wide temperature range due to
the broad range of Rashba energy splits, potentially opening up a pathway to
cool from liquid nitrogen to millikelvin temperatures in a single material
platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.