* 2233201
* BRC-BIO: GalapaGenomes: Building and Diversifying Undergraduate Research Capacity using Natural History Collections
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Jaime Chaves, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Carling
* 06/30/2026
* USD 452,465.00

Natural History Collections play an important role in society in fostering
education and fascination. They have a specific impact on biological research
and applied conservation genomics by providing key genetic information obtained
from biological specimens. For example, they can inform how species have changed
in a changing world. Further, collections can help identify when and what
factors have influenced such changes, Finally, they can provide data to aid in
planning how to take action to mitigate future loss of biodiversity.
Unfortunately, museum collections are often seen as cabinets of little-used
artifacts useful only for school visits. It’s possible that lack of exposure and
restricted access to specimens contribute to this negative viewpoint. One place
to start changing this perspective is in academic institutions. Therefore,
exposing students to positive Natural History Collections experiences by
creating exciting research programs, such as combining biological specimens and
genomics, is a goal of this project. This research will connect students with
collections-, field- and lab-based research in generating data to answer
fundamental questions in conservation genomics using the iconic Galapagos
Islands as a backdrop. Several species on these islands have experienced
dramatic population declines in recent decades, some have gone locally extinct,
and the genetic consequences in surviving populations are not understood. Many
of these species are endemic to their islands, highlighting the urgency for
accurate genetic estimates to inform future conservation planning. For these
reasons, the researcher has created GalapaGenomes, a platform to generate
specimen-derived genomic data. Crucially, the work will also provide immersive
research experiences in the lab, museum, and classrooms for the next generation
of scientists belonging to historically underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Two outstanding questions regarding conservation genomics in island
species require resolution. First, what are the changes at a genomic scale in
natural populations that have suffered declines in the context of well-
documented ecological transformation? Second, how might these changes affect the
survival of these populations? GalapaGenomes will first immerse students in a
newly designed course-based Undergraduate Research Experience (CURE). One goal
is to use Natural History Collections to improve the retention of URM students
through early research experiences. Second, it will take advantage of the
researcher affiliation to the California Academy of Sciences’ unparalleled
Galapagos collection (&gt;7,000 specimens) to generate new genomes of three bird
species. The genomes will be used to gain insight into conservation genetic
measures. Ultimately, this research will diversify and broaden student
participation in science and positively impact their interest and incursion into
the STEM workforce. This plan will expand the researcher’s existing Galapagos
program and strengthen his research and teaching capacity at SFSU, a Primary
Undergraduate, Hispanic and Minority Serving
Institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.