* 2233779
* I-Corps:  Markerless biomechanical evaluation of musculoskeletal disorders to improve rehabilitation outcomes
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2023
* gianluca zanella, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a technology to evaluate musculoskeletal (MSK) disorders to
improve rehabilitation outcomes. Musculoskeletal disorders lower the quality of
life for millions of affected individuals, result in increased national
healthcare costs, and are a leading cause of lost workdays in the United States.
The proposed technology may help patients with musculoskeletal disorders better
understand the biomechanical root cause of their problem, inform their
rehabilitation plan, and improve their recovery outcome. In addition, the
proposed technology may improve the process for patient evaluation, patient
outcomes, and reporting requirements for insurance reimbursement of healthcare
providers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a markerless biomechanical evaluation technology. The proposed
technology is designed to automate the collection, analysis, and reporting of
biomechanical data for patients with musculoskeletal disorders. The technology
uses a markerless motion capture camera device (hardware) along with
corresponding analysis and reporting software to provide actionable
biomechanical evaluations to patients with lower back pain, lower limb
musculoskeletal disorders, and general musculoskeletal disorders to improve
rehabilitation outcomes. Patients are recorded and the video is processed using
computer vision algorithms that generate virtual biomarkers identifying the
patient’s body position and joint angles. This information may be used for
biomechanical analysis to identify movement deficiencies and may provide insight
into finding the root cause of the patient’s pain and create the foundation for
actionable reporting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.