* 2233640
* Workshop: Mid-scale RI-EW Concepts for a Tornado-Downburst-Gust Testing Facility to Study Wind/Debris Impact on Civil Infrastructure; Chicago, Illinois; 20-21 October 2022
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2023
* Partha Sarkar, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 07/31/2023
* USD 49,993.00

Non-synoptic windstorms, tornadoes, downbursts, and gust fronts annually cause
billions of dollars of property damage and inflict numerous fatalities and
injuries in the United States. Major tornadoes, with an intensity of Enhanced
Fujita (EF) 3 or greater (136 mph or greater, three-second gust), have struck
large population centers in the past causing multiple fatalities and significant
damage to structures. Property damage from downbursts and gust fronts are
equally devastating. Damage to civil infrastructure will only increase in the
future with growing urbanization and increased intensification/frequency of such
windstorms because of climate change. To improve the resilience of civil
infrastructure in these extreme wind events and reduce their economic and social
impacts on society, an advanced research and testing facility is needed in the
United States that can simulate realistic wind fields and a weather-like
environment with wind speeds up to 250 mph. This award will conduct an
engineering workshop that will identify the concepts for a university-based
national testing facility that will be capable of generating wind fields
associated with EF1 to EF5 tornadoes (86-250 mph), intense downbursts (150-175
mph), and gust fronts with wind speeds up to 100 mph. Such a facility, with
capabilities that exceed those of existing facilities, would enable
investigation of the impacts of non-synoptic windstorms on civil infrastructure
at mid-to-large length scales (1/10-1/2) for studying the near-ground wind
field, and wind loading, debris impact, and damage mechanisms for a range of
structures with small to large footprints and heights. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
two-day workshop, organized by Iowa State University, will be held in Chicago,
Illinois, on October 20-21, 2022. It will bring together 25-30 participants from
universities, government agencies, and industry to discuss the scientific needs
and requirements and conceptual design of the mid-scale research infrastructure
facility. The workshop will facilitate (a) advancement of knowledge of the
transient characteristics of the non-synoptic winds and the hazards they pose
that cause structural damage, (b) understanding of the mechanics of the wind-
structure and debris-structure interactions in non-synoptic winds, (c) need for
new experimental data and its integration with computational mechanics to
improve structural modeling and damage prediction, (d) discussion of facility
components and instrumentation, and (e) development of a Project Execution Plan
(PEP) for the design of a new facility. The workshop outcomes will be
synthesized in a report that will be disseminated to the engineering research
community via the Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure (NHERI)
Data Depot (https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.