* 2233120
* EAGER: PHY-GRS: A Diamond Quantum Control Testbed
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Kai-Mei Fu, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 08/31/2023
* USD 298,185.00

Quantum computing is a new type of computation that uses quantum mechanical
states to encode information in a quantum bit, or qubit. Once a quantum computer
is large enough, it will be able to calculate solutions to a set of problems
that are not possible to solve on classical computers with bits. Scaling quantum
computers is extremely challenging, however, due to the level of control needed
to operate the quantum bits. Access to multiple qubit quantum processors at the
level needed to improve quantum control only exists in laboratories that have
the expertise to build the entire hardware systems. In this project, the PI and
their team are building a multi-qubit quantum processor that can be utilized by
control engineers without advanced expertise in the hardware. The processor is
available to users both within and outside the University of Washington in the
Quantum Technologies Teaching and Testbeds (QT3) user facility. QT3 is an unique
combined teaching and user facility which provides state-of-the-art optical
characterization tools for quantum technologies. As part of QT3, the Diamond
Quantum Control Testbed is accessible to researchers via a user proposal
mechanism and students via laboratory classes, capstone projects and masters
theses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The testbed is based on a single nitrogen-vacancy
center in diamond, in which low temperature and resonant laser control enable
single shot readout of the qubit register. Just as IBM first envisioned that
building a small scale quantum computer would generate interest and solutions in
quantum computing, building a small scale quantum control register will generate
interest and solutions in the area of quantum control. Access to the Diamond
Quantum Control Testbed will enable advances in the areas of quantum noise
spectroscopy and decoupling control sequences, open quantum systems, cluster
state tomography and entanglement verification, and advancing machine learning
in quantum systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.