* 2233169
* BRC-BIO: Bioconversion of Food Waste with Non-model Organisms
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Haibo Huang, Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 06/30/2026
* USD 502,793.00

Each year 2.86 trillion pounds of food is wasted globally. The U.S. alone wastes
approximately 200 billion pounds, which accounts for $240 billion in revenue
loss, equal to 30-40% of the total food supply. This waste ends up in landfills,
contributing to 3.3 gigatons of greenhouse gas emissions. To reduce waste and
greenhouse gases, this research proposes the conversion of food waste to
2,3-butanediol and other valuable end-products. Food waste will be collected
from Elementary and Middle Schools within the Nashville, TN Metro Public Schools
District to evaluate its potential in bioproduct production, while also
increasing awareness and participation from young, underrepresented future
scientists. Food waste samples collected from schools will be analyzed with
regards to nutrient composition, sorting methods, and storage conditions. These
results will help determine the best methods for collecting food waste in the
future. To carry-out conversion of food waste to valuable compounds, heat-stable
bacteria will be added to food waste to take advantage of naturally occurring
microbial fermentation. Unique heat-tolerant bacteria can outcompete other
contaminant microbes found in food waste when incubation temperatures are
increased to approximately 50 °C. In doing so, food waste will not require
sterilization, reducing the cost of conversion and the impact on the
environment. Overall, this study will address the existing knowledge gap and
help to provide an efficient means of converting food waste to bioproducts. The
project will also provide educational and research opportunities for
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major goal of this project is
to convert non-sterile food waste into valuable bioproducts through “open”
thermophilic fermentation. One of the major concerns of using food waste for
bioproduct production is the unpredictable heterogeneity and inconsistent
nature. While food waste does contain high energy macromolecules for microbial
fermentation, a consistent feedstock is needed to sustain a potential bioeconomy
through food waste remediation. Another issue limiting the usage of food waste
is the cost associated with sterilization. To remove native contaminant
microorganisms, sterilization methods (e.g., high-pressure steam) must be
carried out. However, to skip these processes and suppress native microbes, a
novel high-heat fermentation method with Bacillus licheniformis YNP5-TSU is
proposed. In addition to this approach, collections of new thermophilic
microorganisms and metagenomic sequencing of hot springs, within Yellowstone
National Park, will be conducted to yield novel heat stable enzymes and/or
microorganisms that can be used to improve current thermophilic food waste
conversion. The effectiveness of this study will impact future endeavors to use
food waste as a sustainable feedstock.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.