* 2233983
* Collaborative Research: MODEL ENABLED MACHINE LEARNING (MnML) FOR PREDICTING ECOSYSTEM REGIME SHIFTS
* BIO,DBI
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2025
* Lisa McManus, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 12/31/2025
* USD 199,984.00

Ecosystems can change radically, suddenly and without warning. There are
numerous examples of this on land, in our rivers, lakes and oceans. From African
savannahs to Californian kelp forests, these ecosystem “regime shifts'' as they
are called, have had large impacts on the provision of key ecosystem services,
such as food and income. There is a need for new bioinformatics and
cyberinfrastructure that can predict these regime-shifts, and for identifying
the drivers of such changes so that policies and technologies can be developed
to help avoid them (should that be desired). Current methods for anticipating
regime shifts perform poorly: either theoretical models of ecosystem dynamics
are too abstract to provide useful operational forecasts, or data-driven
approaches suffer from overfitting and cannot accurately forecast the emergence
of novel conditions (i.e., those not seen in historical data on which models are
trained). In this project, a new approach for forecasting ecosystem regime
shifts will be developed. This new approach is called Model Enabled Machine
Learning and it combines scientific understanding of ecological dynamics (i.e.,
theoretical models) with the predictive power of machine learning. This new
approach will be co-developed with ecosystem stakeholders, so that the outputs
of the models are useful and actionable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Model Enabled
Machine Learning will be developed for three ecosystem case-studies and tested
against other state-of-the-art approaches for predicting ecosystem regime
shifts. This will involve using existing and developing new mathematical models
of ecosystem dynamics for each case-study, as well as collecting empirical data
for training the machine learning models. The goal is to significantly improve
upon existing methods for predicting ecosystem regime shifts. The ecosystem
case-studies include: 1) Tropical coral ecosystems that switch between coral-
and algal-dominated states; 2) Freshwater lakes that exhibit harmful algal
blooms; 3) Mangrove ecosystems that suffer from multiple stressors. The
potential of Model Enabled Machine Learning as a new bioinformatic tool used by
ecosystem managers lies not just in its predictive skill, but also in the clear
interpretability it provides, which will maximize its utility as an operational
tool. Importantly, Model Enabled Machine Learning has the potential to promote
equitable science by reducing the data requirements of machine learning driven
predictions, giving stakeholders in data-poor systems a useful operational tool
that would otherwise be unavailable. To facilitate user engagement, the Model
Enabled Machine Learning methods developed in this project will be
operationalized as R and Julia coding packages/libraries, two common coding
languages used by the stakeholder communities. Numerical methods in these
packages will be co-designed with stakeholders to ensure that future ecosystems
regime shifts are anticipated and managed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.