* 2233279
* FOSBE 2022: Foundations of Systems Biology in Engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Ioannis Androulakis, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 08/31/2023
* USD 15,524.00

Systems biology has been established in recent years as an interdisciplinary
point of convergence where molecular biology, high-throughput experimentation,
mathematical and statistical modeling, and computational sciences meet to
advance fundamental understanding of living systems. In parallel, research into
the potential of personalized and precision medicine has highlighted the need
for machine learning techniques to accurately link drug therapies to individual
patients. To mutually advance these fields, better communication channels
between engineers, systems biologists, pharmaceutical scientists, and medical
professionals are needed. The 9th International Conference on the Foundations of
Systems Biology in Engineering (FOSBE 2022), to be held at the Royal Sonesta
Cambridge, Massachusetts, 28-31 August 2022, is intended to address this need by
bringing together the synthetic biology and personalized medicines communities.
Meeting participants will consist of experts in the areas of systems biology and
drug development, early-career investigators, postdoctoral researchers, and
graduate students; speakers and session chairs represent a nearly even mix of
academic and industrial researchers. FOSBE conferences provide ample time for
informal gatherings, providing a constructive atmosphere for brainstorming and
creative thinking among the attendees. This workshop was partially supported by
the Process Systems, Reaction Engineering, and Molecular Thermodynamics and the
Engineering of Biomedical Systems Programs of the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Systems biology has been for years at the
forefront of innovation in the context of biological modeling. Under the
umbrella of dynamic systems analysis, computation systems biology models have
evolved from few variables and few equations to large multi-scale systems. The
emergence of big data and machine learning present exceptional opportunities for
moving the frontiers even further. FOSBE 2022 will explore the connections
between systems biology and the emerging field of quantitative systems
pharmacology (QSP) which aims to integrate systems biology, systems
pharmacology, systems physiology, and data science. FOSBE will examine the
opportunities offered by big data in the context of translational personalized
approaches. The conference is structured to enhance sharing of updates on
scientific advances as well as charting the path forward in terms of fundamental
modeling and computational tools, efforts towards translating these advances to
practical applications, and education and student training requirements. To
break barriers and increase communication between academia and industry, FOSBE
2022 participants will represent each in equal proportions. The increased
participation from the industry will ensure that a strong bidirectional
communication channel is established to ensure that the latest academic advances
are presented to the industry, and the latter articulates the translational
needs and gaps. Special emphasis will be placed on diversity, equity, and
inclusion issues, with a panel discussion dedicated to DEI. To ensure
dissemination of results conference organizers have established a collaboration
with Frontiers in Systems Biology (where the conference Chair serves as the
Special Editor in Chief) so that a special issue of the journal is devoted to
dissemination of key FOSBE 2022 outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.