* 2233961
* Collaborative Research: Studying Carbon Injection and the Silicate Weathering Feedback over the Paleocene Eocene Thermal Maximum Using Ca Isotopes and Modeling
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Matthew Fantle, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 04/30/2026
* USD 298,200.00

The Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum (PETM) was a strong warming event that took
place 55 million years ago. The PETM was driven by a large addition of carbon
dioxide to the ocean and atmosphere at that time. This project will quantify the
PETM carbon dioxide addition and document the response of the Earth’s carbon
cycle to that addition. The study will explore how the Earth system responds to
climatic perturbations, including the rates and mechanisms of that response.
Events in the geologic record show the climatic, hydrological, and geochemical
evolution of the Earth in response to rapid warming. Thus, this study will
provide a valuable comparison with modern climate change and future climate. The
project broader impacts include support for a graduate student and undergraduate
researchers. The project will also create YouTube video content for use in
undergraduate courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will utilize Ca isotopes
as recorders of the temporal evolution of bottom water calcite saturation state
over the recovery interval of the PETM, an interval that has received less
attention in comparison to the onset and ocean acidification phases.
Understanding the dynamics of the recovery interval is critical because this is
the time during which the silicate weathering response to climatic warming is
expressed, primarily as an alkalinity 'overshoot'. This interval is a favorable
focus for study because it is more likely than the interval of intense carbonate
dissolution to be recorded, and preserved, in marine sediments. Complementary
numerical modeling approaches – reactive transport (RTM) and intermediate
complexity Earth System (cGENIE) modeling – and existing reconstructions of
oceanic dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC) will be used to elucidate (i) the
amount of C input to the ocean-atmosphere system, and (ii) the silicate
weathering response. A significant advantage of this approach is that the
interpretive framework is not impacted by the rate of carbon injection (i.e.,
for the most likely injection time scales &lt;10 ka), removing a significant
uncertainty in reconstructing the mass of carbon injection. The rate at which
the Earth System recovers from hyperthermals depends critically on the rate at
which the silicate weathering feedback operates and the strength of the
feedback. Despite the significance of this knowledge, there are few constraints
available to minimize uncertainties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.