* 2233430
* Conference: Scientific Collaboration Network Evaluation and Strategy Using Graph Analysis
* O/D,OISE
* 01/15/2023,08/31/2023
* Michael Witt, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Kara C. Hoover
* 08/31/2023
* USD 87,233.00

Scientific networks are at the heart of the National Science Foundation’s (NSF)
AccelNet program and its goals to accelerate the process of scientific discovery
and to prepare the next generation of U.S. researchers for multi-team,
interdisciplinary, international collaborations. Networks in this case are not
just a metaphor but can also be a quantifiable object of study that can be
documented, analyzed, evaluated, and acted upon. To that end, this project will
offer an intensive three-part workshop series for participating AccelNet Teams
to: 1) learn how their goals related to increasing collaboration can be thought
of in the terms of social network analysis and network science, 2) gain the
skills and experience to collect and curate network data related to their
project; and 3) analyze and visualize their data to make informed decisions
about their AccelNet network to inform their project’s strategy and assessment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In these three virtual workshops, intended to be taken in
sequence, each team will be shown examples of published scientific collaboration
studies (and ongoing case studies of two AccelNet Teams the investigators are
involved in: GLASSNET and AccelNet-MultiNet) and will be introduced to ways they
can collect their own data through existing sources (like bibliometric databases
or administrative records) and/or through new sources (such as network surveys
or observation). Participants will be given detailed workflows and example
scripts for collecting and analyzing data and provided technical support and
office hours after each workshop to complete their work. The project will also
disseminate an assessment template that the AccelNet teams can utilize to
establish baseline graphs and to assess and report the growth and development of
their networks over time by updating and monitoring their networks using a
common approach. Workshops will be recorded, and materials archived and open for
public use at the conclusion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Accelerating Research
through International Network-to-Network Collaborations (AccelNet) program is
designed to accelerate the process of scientific discovery and prepare the next
generation of U.S. researchers for multiteam international collaborations. The
AccelNet program supports strategic linkages among U.S. research networks and
complementary networks abroad that will leverage research and educational
resources to tackle grand scientific challenges that require significant
coordinated international efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.