* 2233177
* I-Corps: Insect bioremediation and biodegradation for solid waste
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Heather Bischel, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a cheaper alternative waste management strategy reducing
greenhouse gas emissions as required for compliance with rapidly changing
environmental policies. This insect-based treatment process can help waste
managers to address emerging contaminants of concern that would conventionally
require costly treatment additions and/or renovations to meet upcoming
regulatory standards. Processing recovered products from insect biomass can
mineralize bioaccumulative and persistent chemicals, e.g., diesel engine
combustion byproducts. This method of organic waste treatment can be integrated
into mainstream waste treatment trains. While there are direct public benefits,
such as reducing greenhouse gas emissions, this technology may also be used to
test the feasibility of using derived insect lipids as an alternative biofuel
source, resulting in economic benefits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on the development of technology to change the way organic
waste is managed by streamlining biological treatment for decontamination and
byproduct recovery. The treatment train utilizes the Quantitative Structure
Activity Relationship (QSAR) model and nontarget/suspect-screening analysis
techniques to identify contaminant profiles while employing insects to reduce
organic waste, recover nutrients (e.g., protein fractions), and sequester
organic contaminants. Post production treatment for insect tissue ensures
downstream production of high-quality protein feed and renewable biodiesel. This
approach in low-cost waste reduction utilizes insect larvae to efficiently
process organic waste by feeding on it as a substrate. The resulting insect
biomass has been shown to sequester harmful contaminants. The end-products from
these processes are: 1) insect lipids, the input material for renewable diesel
production, and 2) low-chemical risk protein powder, which is enriched with
growth-limiting amino acids for animal feed (i.e., chicken and fish), and 3)
organic contaminant treatment, which can off-set the cost of organic waste
treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.