* 2233087
* Conference: Capacity Building for Research at Minority Serving Institutions: Infrastructure Research Readiness (CyBR-MSI: IRR)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Jacqueline El-Sayed, American Society For Engineering Education
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 09/30/2023
* USD 247,388.00

Conducted by the American Society for Engineering Education (ASEE), this award
seeks to increase the capacity of researchers from Minority-Serving Institutions
(MSIs) to produce competitive proposals to National Science Foundation’s (NSF)
Computer Science and Engineering (CISE) core programs. The purpose of the
Capacity Building for Research at Minority-Serving Institutions: Infrastructure
Research Readiness (CyBR-MSI: IRR) program is threefold: (1) to help
participants assess their campuses’ research infrastructure and prioritize
improvements; (2) to form a community of practice among researchers and research
infrastructure administrators from MSIs focused on capacity building of research
infrastructure; and (3) to co-create, with campus leadership, an action plan for
research ready infrastructure for strong grant proposals for NSF CISE core
programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the same theoretical tenets and based on
formative and summative evaluation data from ASEE’s prior CyBR-MSI efforts, the
CyBR-MSI: IRR program comprises five components: (1) a Request for Proposals
(RFP), (2) a Research Infrastructure Assessment Tool (RIAT), (3) an overarching
Community of Practice (CoP) for up to 12 research teams, (4) a Mentoring Program
(MP) that will provide each research team with coaching to support their
progress throughout the program, and (5) a facilitated Culminating Action
Planning Meeting (CAP) that will guide teams and their campus leadership with
templates and mentoring to create an action plan to launch on their campuses to
improve their infrastructure research readiness (IRR) to increase their capacity
for CISE core research. By supporting MSIs to increase competitiveness for
public research funds, this project will impact high proportions of
nontraditional students and students of color, and their readiness to
participate in the nation’s research enterprise. The overarching goal of the
CyBR-MSI program is to increase the participation and competitiveness of
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs), Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSIs), and Tribal Colleges and Universities (TCUs) for CISE core
programs (e.g., research funding in artificial intelligence, cyber-physical
systems, cybersecurity, and other core research topics) through structured
programs of community building, professional development, guided inquiry,
practice, and mentoring. Leveraging its reach and influence to accelerate
innovation, dissemination, and adoption of best practices in research,
instruction, and DEI, ASEE supports and connects the MSI community to compete
more effectively for NSF funds, activating a larger portion of the nation’s STEM
talent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.