* 2233076
* I-Corps: Non-invasive, touch-based, natural sweat glucose sensor
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2023
* Joseph Wang, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a glucose sensor for diabetes patients. Diabetes mellitus impacts
over 37.3 million people within the United States and 422 million people
worldwide. All type 1 and most type 2 diabetes patients need frequent glucose
testing to prevent life-threatening hyper/hypoglycemia, ketoacidosis, and long-
term complications due to mismanaged glucose levels. Existing glucose sensors
include capillary-blood fingersticks and subdermal continuous glucose monitors
(CGM). Currently, over 95% of diabetes patients still use finger-pricking
glucometers as their main glucose monitoring method, which is painful, messy,
inconvenient, and creates social barriers. This technology provides a pain-free,
convenient, and accessible sensing technology with discreet usage that helps
diabetes patients understand their health status without the physical, social
and financial burdens of CGM and fingersticks. With improved user compliance,
this technology can collect data for personalized lifestyle training and
personalized guiding services for better diet and diabetes management, and
potentially improve the life quality of diabetes patients while reducing their
healthcare costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a completely non-invasive, touch-based glucose sensor for spot
glucose checking for diabetes patients. Unlike previous non-invasive glucose
sensors that rely on unreliable near-infrared light or radio-frequency
dielectric spectroscopy, this technology is based on FDA-approved
electrochemical enzymatic glucose sensing which is highly selective and
accurate. Instead of using fingertip capillary blood as the sensing biofluid,
this sensor design allows the direct measurement of glucose within the
constantly available passive perspiration from the fingertips. The technology
allows users to obtain a sweat glucose reading by placing their fingers directly
onto the sensor surface, where the natural fingertip sweat reacts readily with
the sensor to produce an amperometric signal. With a first-time personalized
calibration, the user is able to convert their sweat glucose signal to their
blood glucose level with high accuracy. Thus, touch-based, non-invasive and
reliable glucose sensing can be achieved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.