* 2233378
* FET: Small: Increasing Robustness, Efficacy, and Capability of CMOS-Compatible Electronic Ising Machines
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Michael Huang, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 01/31/2026
* USD 599,995.00

Optimization problems are prevalent in modern societies. Solving them quickly
and efficiently is a key enabler for continued economic growth and
sustainability. Physics-inspired algorithms have long helped scientists and
engineers solve these problems. More recently, researchers have gone one step
further and used physical processes to directly perform “physical computation”.
When researchers can finally bring such a technology to the marketplace, it is
anticipated that for some optimization problems, specialized hardware can
improve the speed and energy efficiency by thousands or even millions of times.
The project will allow the researchers to provide excellent opportunities for
both graduate and under-graduate students to participate in cutting-edge inter-
disciplinary research and become better prepared to contribute to the future
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Based on the foundation of prior work
leading to this project, the goal of the team is to address a number of
fundamental challenges so as to bring to fruition a physical computing system
that can robustly accelerate a broad class of real-world problems. First, the
funding will enable the team to build physical prototypes to better understand
hardware non-idealities so as to develop cross-layer countermeasures for robust
operation. Second, the project will make the first effort in addressing capacity
limits and semantic gaps that are two major system-level issues confronting
Ising machines. Third, the project will expand Ising machines beyond canonical
problems, which can potentially transform them from a niche solution to a
mainstream platform in critical application areas such as machine
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.