* 2233124
* BRC-BIO: Exploring the genetic basis of adaptation through convergent dietary specialization in mammals
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Wynn Meyer, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 12/31/2025
* USD 478,374.00

Just as humans have many different cuisines, other mammals also have widely
diverse dietary preferences, from antelope grazing the savannahs to polar bears
hunting the fattest seals in the Arctic. We know very little about how and why
these different diets have evolved, particularly about the genetic changes that
allow mammals to eat so many different foods. This research project will first
define mammalian diets using information from many sources. These sources
include observations of mammals in the wild, measurements from museum specimens,
and information about bacteria in animals’ guts. The researchers will then
combine these specific dietary definitions with information about mammals’ DNA
sequences to identify genes that are involved in the evolution of different
diets. Finally, the researchers will use experiments to show how changes in
different mammals’ genes affect cells’ ability to process components of their
diets. This work will identify new genes that are important for mammals to adapt
to their environments. It will show how changes in these genes have allowed
mammals to process different foods. The project will also expand participation
in genomics and bioinformatics research by historically excluded groups at both
the K12 and undergraduate levels. Undergraduates from underrepresented
backgrounds will work together with other scientists to carry out the research.
The PI will also collaborate with K12 teachers in local high-need schools to
develop activities that can bring genomic data into the teachers’
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Connecting genomic and environmental changes is
key to understanding how adaptation proceeds. The investigation of convergent
phenotypes, which provide independent replicates of the same adaptive process,
holds particular promise for identifying genomic changes underlying adaptation.
Observing molecular signatures of adaptation at the same genetic loci in
multiple independent lineages with the same adaptive trait can implicate these
loci as contributing to this trait. This proposal uses such signatures to
identify genomic changes associated with convergent mammalian dietary changes.
Specifically, the research will rigorously define quantitative phenotypes
representing dietary variation across mammals. It will identify genes and gene
families underlying selection on quantitative dietary phenotypes across mammals.
Finally, the work will demonstrate the cellular mechanisms of metabolic genes
involved in dietary adaptation. The PI’s lab will identify associations between
the most variable quantitative dietary dimensions and the evolutionary rates of
genes and gene families across the mammalian phylogeny, using publicly available
data. To determine the functional impacts of observed evolutionary changes in
specific metabolism genes, the lab will test the metabolic effects of different
species’ orthologs in S. cerevisiae. Mammalian dietary adaptation involves
changes in highly conserved intracellular metabolic pathways that are amenable
to these functional assays. The methods, findings, and resources generated
through this work will provide a foundation for future studies on the genomic
basis of environmental adaptation across evolutionary
timescales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.