* 2233912
* SCC-IRG Track 1: Strengthening Resilience of Ojibwe Nations Across Generations (STRONG)
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Josiah Hester, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 07/31/2026
* USD 2,000,000.00

Climate change exacerbates existing threats to the livelihoods and well-being of
many Native American nations across the United States. Additionally, the effects
of invasive species, mining, and development have been increasing on critical
ecosystems that provide food, water, and cultural security for Indigenous
Peoples. Working with tribal partners, this Smart and Connected Communities
Integrative Research Grant (SCC-IRG) seeks to understand how enhanced data
access, availability, and usability can strengthen community resilience. The
project converges social science, data science, environmental science, and
computer engineering through a traditional knowledge framework to identify key
links between resilience and sovereignty of Indigenous communities. Deployment
of cyberinfrastructure with advanced sensing technologies helps demonstrate how
multi-model socio-ecological data can be combined into actionable resilience
frameworks. As the result, new pathways of climate adaptation are created for
culturally significant plants and animals, as well as guiding development plans
to minimize adverse impacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This tribally driven project
adopts a traditional knowledge framework to synthesize traditional and
scientific knowledge to advance innovations in resilience research in three
areas: 1) Environmental Science: the project deploys state-of-the-art Wild Sage
edge-enabled sensing platforms and tiny battery-free energy-harvesting sensors
to continuously measure water and ecosystems conditions, and to assess the
effects of climate change, mining contaminants, and oil/gas pipeline failures on
manoomin (wild rice) and associated wetland ecosystems; 2) Governance: the
project assesses the effects of how scientific knowledge generated through a
traditional knowledge framework impacts tribal planning and governance by co-
producing and evaluating culturally appropriate resilience indicators for
anticipating, responding to, and mitigating acute and chronic socio-ecological
perturbations; and 3) Community Impact: the project co-develops and deploys
Noondawind, a dynamic, integrated cyberinfrastructure platform that connects
diverse end-users with STRONG data and analyses to examine how access to data
strengthens tribal sovereignty and resilience. By making research products more
responsive to community-identified needs and enhancing accessibility of
cyberinfrastructure for diverse end-users, this project aims to demonstrate how
data can play a central role in building governance capacity and strengthening
intertribal coordination on common environmental, economic, political, and
social well-being priorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.