* 2233424
* STTR Phase I:  Hyper Transfer Vehicle Concept Demonstration
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2024
* Edgar Lightsey, VORTEX SPACE SYSTEMS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 03/31/2024
* USD 274,454.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) project is to develop a new, non-rocket based thrust technology
capable of removing debris from space. This project will provide two separate
business models including hardware fabrication and testing, and active orbital
debris removal services. Six Department of Defense (DoD) and National Oceanic
Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) Sun Synchronous Orbits (SSO)SSO spacecraft
have broken up in high-value low earth orbits since 2000, and the US Space Force
tracks over 550 pieces of NOAA-16 and NOAA-17 debris objects (&gt;10cm). This
technology provides solutions to help remove such problematic debris from space.
The technology will be designed for beneficial use by both US Government
agencies and commercial space companies. The proposed vehicle fleet production
is expected to enable efficient deorbit services for removal from
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STTR Phase I project proposes to develop an
innovative method for Earth orbit transfer, called a Hyper Transfer Vehicle
(HTV). HTV is a non-rocket technology that solves performance limitations of in-
space rocket thrusters. HTV offers reusable and economically sustainable orbital
space debris removal solutions across all earth operational orbits. This
proposal addresses the space debris problem not caused by operational
satellites, but from non-maneuverable objects and debris in the highly populated
Sun Synchronous Orbits (SSO). Historically, SSO space objects have contributed
to technical, societal, and scientific advancements. The potential outcome of
HTV research is a viable and reusable technology for cost-effective orbit object
disposal in high value SSO with clean Solar Electric Propulsion (SEP). Instead
of expelling propellant, HTV rotates a working fluid gas inside a toroidal
cavity to generate a usable force. HTV torus structure draws in the gas while
mounted inside an ambient pressure enclosure, which is separate from the vacuum
of space. HTV generates a reactive force by employing the Conservation of
Angular Momentum (CAM). CAM is preserved when HTV fluid angular momentum (H) and
rotational energy (Trot) change. This project will demonstrate with experimental
measurements an external force by using air as the working fluid gas, while
satisfying CAM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.