* 2233814
* EAGER: 3D Printing of Aligned Muscle Fibers for Thick Structured Meat Production
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Yong Huang, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 08/31/2024
* USD 308,000.00

The continued growth of human populations with declined resources has imposed a
significant challenge to affordable and sustainable foods and nutrition. One
resource-efficient solution is cultured meat, which is genuine animal meat
produced by cultivating animal cells directly using a bioreactor. Though
scaffold-based technologies have demonstrated the feasibility of making minced
or unstructured meat products, such technologies are limited and cannot produce
thick structured meat. This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER)
supports fundamental research that aims to establish a scaffold-free 3D embedded
bioprinting technology to enable the production of cultured meat with centimeter
thick and structured features. The study will explore the alignment and fusion
of myoblasts during embedded meat printing in a gelatin composite-based cellular
matrix bath. The results will catalyze future scale-up production of thick
structured cuts of cultured meat and promote cellular agriculture as the future
of complementary food production for the benefits of sustainability, public
health, and animal welfare. The project will also stimulate science-based
bioprinting research to advance cultured-meat manufacture and broaden the
participation of underrepresented students in crosscutting STEM fields via the
bioprinting study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to
understand the effects of extrusion-induced shear force and post-printing
tension on the formation of aligned muscle fibers from myoblasts during embedded
printing of thick multicellular structured meat-like tissues. Specifically,
myoblasts will be printed in an embedded manner, aligned, and stretched for
myoblast fusion to be myotubes and further matured as myofibers in the gelatin
composite-based yield-stress matrix bath. The printed sacrificial bioink will
then be removed to form perfusable channels. While embedded 3D printing of
myoblasts and adipocyte progenitor cells will enable printed tissues to be
structured, the perfusable channels and capillaries self-assembled by
endothelial and adipose-derived stem cells will enable the printed tissues to
grow thick. Theoretically, the effect of shear force on the myoblast alignment
during printing will be computationally modeled using the Eulerian formulation
and myoblasts will be macroscopically treated as a linear elastic solid in the
myoblast bioink. The modeling results will be validated with the orientation of
the printed myoblasts. Next, the cyclic tension-induced effect on myoblast
fusion will be investigated during the culturing of the printed meat-like
tissues in a customized bioreactor, and the printed tissues will be perfused via
the channels. The resulting meat-like tissues will be characterized in terms of
vascularization, myoblast differentiation as well as myotube and myofiber
formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.