* 2233653
* SBIR Phase I:  Point-of-Care Diagnostic Tool for Identifying Extended Spectrum β-Lactamase E. Coli in Urinary Tract Infection
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2024
* Di Kang, EDNA BIOTECH, INC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 01/31/2024
* USD 274,975.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project lies in demonstrating the commercial viability
and clinical benefit of a point-of-care diagnostics device based on novel
technologies for patients with urinary tract infections. There are 10 million
primary care visits for urinary tract infections per year in the United States.
More than 15% of these patients suffer antibiotic-resistant infections. Clinical
studies have shown that accurate identification and early diagnosis of the
antibiotic resistance of the infecting bacteria shorten the treatment period,
eliminate antibiotic misuse, and reduce average patient costs. However, on-site
diagnostic testing that returns molecular information about the bacterial
identity and antibiotic resistance remains a significant challenge. Current
laboratory-based tests are costly, have long turnaround times, and require
skilled technicians and well-equipped laboratories. In most cases, this results
in empirical antibiotic prescriptions before the information is returned from
test results. Developing rapid, on-site, easy-to-implement, and frequently used
antimicrobial resistance screening is essential to combat the ongoing threat of
antimicrobial resistance and antibiotic misuse. This device will be suitable for
outpatient clinics, home healthcare, and inpatient facilities. It will enable a
shift from empirical to evidence-based treatment of bacterial
infections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project will develop a point-of-care device for the on-site
identification of E. coli and associated extended-spectrum β-lactamase (ESBL)
antibiotic resistance genes in urinary tract infections from unprocessed urine
samples. The device uses novel, patent-pending electrochemical nucleic acid
sensing techniques and a loop-mediated isothermal amplification assay to semi-
quantitatively measure target bacterial genes. The device consists of a
disposable microfluidic cartridge and a portable multifunctional reader. The
self-contained microfluidic sensing cartridge supports sample preparation,
isothermal amplification, and sequence-specific electrochemical detection. This
novel combination of sensing technology and highly integrated sample handling
microfluidics will enable the development of critically needed point-of-care
diagnostic solutions. The project will demonstrate the specificity of bacterial
detection, the ability to identify multiple genotypes, the ease of device
operation, and the portability of this point-of-care
device.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.