* 2233509
* Design: Microbiology Leaders Evolving &amp; Accountable to Progress
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2025
* Amy Kullas, American Society For Microbiology
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 02/28/2025
* USD 499,985.00

The American Society for Microbiology’s (ASM’s) Microbiology Leaders Evolving
and Accountable to Progress (mBio LEAP) project is designed to support and
elevate inclusive diversity with equity, access, and accountability (IDEAA).
IDEAA is ASM’s holistic approach to diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI). The
mBio LEAP project is meant to elevate IDEAA within the microbial sciences and
across the broader science, technology, engineering, and mathematics community
(STEM) and will complement ASM’s existing programs, such as the Future Leaders
Mentoring Fellowship (FLMF) and the Annual Biomedical Research Conference for
Minoritized Scientists (ABRCMS). While FLMF and ABRCMS work to empower and
mentor scientists from historically underrepresented groups, mBio LEAP will
empower leaders within the microbial sciences to influence the cultures and
climates of their respective sectors and organizations. The mBio LEAP project
seeks to educate and train leaders in IDEAA, increasing their skills and ability
to drive change. By focusing on leaders, mBio LEAP will increase the potential
for organizational change and the embodiment of IDEAA principles at ASM and
across the microbial sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mBio LEAP project will
work with leaders by (1) promoting deep individual introspection, (2)
facilitating peer group exchanges, and (3) providing a space where participants
can practice knowledge and skills to ensure the training goes beyond awareness
to action. The project goals are to expand intercultural awareness, transform
practices, and encourage and inspire microbiology leaders to embrace and promote
IDEAA. The project will use a training-of-leaders (ToL) model to provide a
structure for long-term sustainability and engagement in IDEAA, connecting with
leaders through an interactive, peer-group format to cultivate knowledge and
understanding. The ToL program will strive to increase participants' awareness
and understanding of IDEAA, develop best practices for integrating IDEAA in
STEM, and promote IDEAA within the microbial sciences. The project’s three
objectives are to (1) design and develop the IDEAA ToL program and curriculum,
(2) recruit participants and pilot the ToL program and curriculum, and (3)
revise the IDEAA ToL program and curriculum resources using a mixed-method
design. The project’s design phase will produce a curriculum and resources for a
comprehensive, data-driven, scalable ToL program that will enable the
participating leaders to serve as IDEAA change agents. The program's resources
will be open source and disseminated within the microbiology and STEM
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.