* 2233444
* SBIR Phase I: Cultivation Assistant Platform
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2023,10/31/2023
* Jennifer Wells, LATERAL.SYSTEMS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 10/31/2023
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to provide indoor farmers with data insights
to reduce risks and improve efficient use of resources to grow nutrient dense
food. The value proposition is a first-to-market, off-the-shelf smart water
quality and atmospheric conditions monitoring platform to support controlled
environment agriculture, currently a $4.6 billion market. The proposed on
premise smart service will focus on precision agriculture controls and advance
state of the art in agriculture technology using a modular approach to enable
plugging in multiple sensors into a unified system to capture water and air
quality data at routine intervals around the clock. The temperature, pH, and
dissolved oxygen measurements will be used to identify healthy conditions,
display trend analyses, predict and diagnose imbalances, and provide alerts,
alarms, and message notifications to guide coordination of efforts to regain
system balance. The target markets are the fast-growing U.S. aquaponics and
hydroponics industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project involves development of an Internet of Things
(IoT) platform service to overcome legacy issues slowing the digital
transformation in indoor agriculture. Existing solutions do not provide an open
platform approach addressing the handling of open data due to proprietary
application interfaces and closed data schemas to fuse disparate dataset
sources. The measured data will be fused (i.e., overlaid and triangulated) to
monitor relationships between measured parameters. The scope of the project is
to develop key features in preparation for field testing. The scientific
approach will leverage inherently heterogenous and complex edge technologies.
Data connectivity with third party vendor modular sensor arrays,
microcontrollers, microservices, and actuators rely on many different
operational technology communication standards â€” the proposal will overcome
these challenges with hardware and software solutions that will integrate
microservices within a container to enable application portability and simplify
application deployment and orchestration. A standard open framework will be used
to facilitate interoperable software applications and value add services
utilizing industry standard protocols and message structure interfaces. This
solution will enable third party module integration to connect into a unified,
contained, store-and-forward platform involving open source and proprietary add-
on modules to enable monitoring and analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.