* 2233416
* BRC-BIO: Emergent dynamics and leadership in collective timing decisions
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Albert Kao, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 03/31/2026
* USD 468,934.00

The ability of individuals in groups to make decisions (“collective decision
making”) is critical to the survival and success of a wide variety of animal
species, as well as many human endeavors, including governing bodies,
corporations, and social media. Understanding what kinds of dynamics can lead to
effective decision-making – and which lead to dysfunctional groups – is
increasingly important as our society faces major, large-scale challenges in the
near future. One area that is particularly understudied, but ecologically and
evolutionary important, is how groups making decisions about timing, such as
when to begin a migration or when to flee from an approaching predator. In this
project, a series of laboratory experiments will be conducted to study
collective timing decisions in a species of schooling fish by leveraging
existing technologies to automatically detect and track moving animals. Guided
by predictions from mathematical models, the project will ask how groups respond
to a variety of timing stimuli; how leadership emerges within the group; and the
rules that the animals follow to reach a consensus. The project will provide
valuable training and mentorship for one Ph.D. student and three undergraduate
students within a transdisciplinary research lab situated in one of the most
diverse universities in the U.S. The results of the project will provide
important information about how vulnerable social animals may respond to
predicted effects of climate change and may inform strategies to protect these
species. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Collective decision-making is a ubiquitous
strategy that biological systems at all scales exploit to improve their fitness.
Most of the research to date has focused on groups deciding amongst options that
are simultaneously available in the environment, such as discrete food patches
or migration directions. However, equally important to an animal’s fitness are
decisions about timing, such as when to initiate a migration or when to begin to
flee from an approaching predator. Timing decisions are fundamentally different
from spatial decisions; for example, the ‘options’ (moments in time) present
themselves sequentially and cannot be selected once that moment has passed.
Because of this and other differences, mathematical models predict markedly
different strategies and outcomes compared to spatial decision-making. To build
research capacity in the lab, this project will develop two general-purpose
tracking kits: one that is simple, fast, and cheap, and which can be further
developed into an educational kit for use in undergraduate and high school
classes; and one that uses peer-reviewed software packages that allow for
markerless tracking of individuals over long time scales. These two kits will be
deployed to understand how social animals learn about one or more relevant
times; how they respond to uncertainty in the timing of events; how leadership
and collective memory forms; and what signaling mechanisms fish use to build
consensus about a timing event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.