* 2233507
* SBIR Phase I: A low-cost, bacterial production platform for the manufacturing of high purity recombinant proteins and growth factors
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Julie Liang, OPERA BIOSCIENCE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 05/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is to introduce a cost-effective way to produce recombinant
proteins and growth factors for the cultivated meat industry. Cultivating animal
cells to create animal tissues, including muscle and fat, allows manufacturers
to create real animal meat as an alternative to animal-farmed meat. Producing
meat in this method may provide a healthier, safer, and more ethical source of
real animal meat. This manufacturing process avoids industrial animal farming
and consequently uses significantly less land and water. It also avoids the
greenhouse gases emitted by industrial animal farming and may emit far fewer
greenhouse gases. Cultivated meat could result in a healthier public as well
since its controlled production will likely result in fewer foodborne illnesses
and avoid the cramped conditions of industrial animal farms that can breed new
illnesses. The ability to grow meat in nearly any location increases the
nation’s food supply chain resilience and reduces dependence on foreign food
imports. Finally, by reducing the amount of industrial animal farms, cultivated
meat reduces the need for animal slaughter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project will demonstrate the ability of the innovation to solve several
challenges in the current production of recombinant proteins and growth factors
in traditional protein manufacturing platforms that prevent manufacturing at
lower costs and with high purity. Cultivated meat has the potential to disrupt
the &gt;$1 trillion meat industry, but the ability to source high purity, cheap
proteins limits the commercial adoption of cultivated meat products. The
innovation could produce proteins at cheaper costs than existing platforms
because it bypasses expensive and time-consuming operational manufacturing steps
while still achieving high purity. The critical technical objectives of this
project include: 1) the establishment and comparison of a production benchmark
for recombinant growth factor production against the current industry standards,
2) the optimization of the growth conditions necessary for the protein
production platform to achieve improved yields, and 3) the creation of a
manufacturing platform optimization toolkit to increase the quality and amount
of usable protein produced. The knowledge gained at the completion of this
project may provide valuable insights into the ability and conditions to promote
high production levels of proteins and growth factors while providing data
illustrating the improvement when compared against current industry
standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.