* 2233233
* BRC-BIO: Investigating Color and Pattern Diversity in Painted Turtles
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Elizabeth Reinke, Northeastern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Carling
* 08/31/2026
* USD 472,469.00

This research explores the function of variation in shell color and pattern in
painted turtles. The work involves experiments and field work focused on
understanding the antioxidant function of pigments in turtle tissues. In doing
so, the work will explore how antioxidants impact survival, and the natural
variation in shell colors and patterns. Understanding the antioxidant function
and survival impacts of pigments is essential for making predictions about how
turtles may respond to environmental change. This research will also provide
students at a Hispanic-serving institution in Chicago the opportunity to conduct
field work and research. Students will be trained in science communication and
will co-author research papers. Students will also be able to participate in a
paid internship with a software company who will develop an open-source platform
for extracting color and pattern data from images.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding biological diversity requires both
identifying the mechanisms and functions that underlie it, and understanding the
fitness consequences of variation. Animal coloration and patterning are great
traits with which to study functions and consequences of variation because these
highly visible phenotypes can impact every aspect of an individualâ€™s life.
Painted turtles are so named because of their yellow skin stripes and their
bright orange ventral shells. Despite their name and widespread range, little is
known about their color or patterns. This research addresses these gaps in
knowledge in three ways. First, by identifying the function of shell coloration
(Objective 1). Second, by assessing how shell coloration impacts fitness
(Objective 2). Third, by characterizing the variation in the shell patterns
(Objective 3). Objective 1 will be investigated by manipulating the pigment
content of turtle eggs in the nest and assessing the impact on antioxidant
capacity. The researchers hypothesize that the carotenoids that are responsible
for the bright orange shell color have a role in mitigating oxidative stress
during recovery from overwintering. This hypothesis and the associated methods
are built on previous work and pilot data. Objective 2 will be investigated by
taking advantage of a natural experiment, by comparing both the population-level
survival trajectories and the individual-level survival of two populations of
painted turtles with similar pigment concentrations but different colorations.
Lastly, Objective 3 will be studied by assessing intra-clutch, intrapopulation,
and interpopulation variance in shell pattern using geometric morphometrics and
neural networks. This latter objective will be done in collaboration with a
software firm that can provide training and internships to
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.