* 2233458
* Belmont Forum Collaborative Research: Stakeholder-supported decision making for sustainable conjunctive management of soil and groundwater (INCLUSIVE)
* GEO,RISE
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2025
* Katrina Jessoe, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Maria Uhle
* 07/31/2025
* USD 235,137.00

This award provides support to U.S. researchers participating in a project
competitively selected by a 9-country initiative on global change research
through the Belmont Forum. The Belmont Forum is a consortium of research funding
organizations representing over 55 countries focused on support for
transdisciplinary approaches to global environmental change challenges and
opportunities. It aims to accelerate delivery of the international research most
urgently needed to remove critical barriers to sustainability by aligning and
mobilizing international resources. Each partner country provides funding for
their researchers within a consortium to alleviate the need for funds to cross
international borders. This approach facilitates effective leveraging of
national resources to support excellent research on topics of global relevance
best tackled through a multinational approach, recognizing that global
challenges need global solutions. This award provides support for the U.S.
researchers to cooperate in consortia that consist of partners from at least
three of the participating countries. The research teams will work to identify
sustainable pathways to help alleviate the increasing and unprecedented pressure
on the natural resources that interact to provide sustainable life support
systems and essential benefits to societies such as food production and water
quality and quantity. The impacts of changes in land management and urbanization
will be evaluated to develop sustainable soils and groundwater management
options that will help create and maintain sustainable terrestrial ecosystems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As groundwater extraction increases worldwide, generating
a range of economic and ecological impacts, many countries are implementing
regulation systems to restrict groundwater use. Implementation of these
restrictions is often problematic resulting in low regulatory compliance. This
project seeks to demonstrate that well-designed stakeholder processes can
deliver socially accepted management rules with higher compliance, thereby
enhancing groundwater long-term sustainability. The project focuses on how
effective stakeholder involvement impacts stakeholder groundwater literacy,
develops capacity to think long-term and capture trade-offs, and contributes to
developing innovative regulations. The research team will investigate whether a
paradigm shift from narrowly defined groundwater management practices of
limiting water abstraction to conjunctive soil and groundwater management which
focuses on managing "net water extraction" accounting for retention and recharge
can improve regulatory compliance. The project will rely on 7 transdisciplinary
case studies in France, the United States and Taiwan to engage in collective
learning and the identification of pre-conditions for successful stakeholder
processes delivering socially accepted groundwater management
schemes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.