* 2233022
* Fast-Track Consensus Study on Foundational Research Gaps and Future Directions for Digital Twins
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Michelle Schwalbe, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 02/29/2024
* USD 95,000.00

The National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine is undertaking a
study to identify needs and opportunities to advance the mathematical,
statistical, and computational foundations of digital twins in applications
across science, medicine, engineering, and society. A digital twin is a computer
model that changes over time to represent the structure or behavior of a unique
physical entity, such as a manufacturing process, piece of equipment, or even a
person. Based on data inputs, the digital twin can be used to gain insight into
present and future states of the physical twin. The exploration and use of
digital twins is growing across domains, but many state-of-the-art digital twins
are largely the result of custom implementations that require considerable
deployment resources and a high level of expertise. Due to the individualized
nature of many digital twin implementations, the relative maturity of digital
twins varies significantly across problem spaces. Moving from one-off digital
twins to digital twin implementations at scale will involve addressing
foundational mathematical, statistical, and computational gaps. This study aims
to highlight these critical research gaps and provide options to address them
with the goal of advancing the use of digital twins across disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed study by the National
Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, will highlight needs and
opportunities to advance the mathematical, statistical, and computational
foundations of digital twins in applications across science, medicine,
engineering, and society. A digital twin assimilates observational data and uses
this information to continually update its internal models so that they reflect
the evolving physical system. The digital twin is therefore continuously
improving and provides a dynamic digital history of the physical entity. These
core functionalities can be augmented with feedback control and artificial
intelligence, combined with ensembles of similar twins, or used in tandem with
other predictive tools to analyze and diagnose operational states and to
optimize performance under real-world conditions. Utilization of digital twins
varies across disciplines. This study will address the following: (1) diverging
definitions of digital twins and domain-inspired use cases; (2) foundational
mathematical, statistical, and computational gaps for the continued development
of digital twins; (3) best practices for digital twin development and use; and
(4) opportunities to move the community and state of practice forward. Three
domain-specific workshops will be held to explore the methods, practices, use
cases, and challenges for the development and use of digital twins—focus areas
include biomedical domains, Earth and environmental systems, and aerospace
engineering. Four reports will be released by the National Academies during the
course of this 18-month study: three short summaries of the domain-specific
workshops and a consensus report focused on the cross-cutting foundational
research gaps and future directions for digital twins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.