* 2233694
* EVALUATION: Improving institutional diversity in professional society participation through virtual and hybrid conferencing
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Adrienne Sponberg, West Chester University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Marenda
* 06/30/2025
* USD 390,382.00

For decades, professional scientific societies and individual scientists have
relied on in-person conferences to share cutting edge research and build
collaborative research networks: conferences are instrumental for developing
individual careers and scientific progress. However, in-person conferences have
significant barriers to access and inclusion, often excluding scientists and
institutions with less financial resources and individuals for whom long-
distance travel is difficult. The shift to virtual conferences during the
COVID-19 pandemic demonstrated these historical barriers, as conferences were
attended by more diverse groups of scientists. This research investigates how
and whether virtual and hybrid conferences in ecology, environmental science,
and allied fields have increased participation by individuals from a diverse set
of institutions, including academic organizations like universities and
organizations outside of academia like government agencies, nonprofit
organizations, and environmental consulting firms. By focusing on increasing
institutional diversity, scientific conferences can improve collaboration and
knowledge exchange between academic and extra-academic scientists, facilitating
evidence-based environmental management. The project will also assess whether
virtual and hybrid conferences are more inclusive of a diverse set of
backgrounds and career stages and assess barriers, attitudes, and preferences
related to conference access, attendance, and participation. Lastly, researchers
will identify future and alternative virtual and hybrid formats and features
likely to best support members from diverse institutions and backgrounds. Short-
term outcomes will include guidance for professional societies to develop
equitable and inclusive conferences and overcome barriers to access; long-term
outcomes will be increased visibility and awareness of a diversity of types of
institutions in ecology and conservation communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In-
person conference formats can exclude many scientists and environmental
practitioners who can contribute to and benefit from the exchange of ideas and
research that takes place at these events, including those from low-to-middle
income countries, early career-researchers, student trainees, caregivers, and
those from non-research-intensive institutions. In particular, limited knowledge
sharing and exchange between academic and extra-academic audiences have stymied
integration of research into management and environmental policies. This project
will provide professional societies and individual scientists with evidence-
based guidance to evaluate tradeoffs in access, participation, and conference
experience, to design more equitable conferences that can increase knowledge
exchange across institutional boundaries. Through a focus on integration of
academic and extra-academic scientists from a diverse range of institutions,
this work will also support student and early-career researchers in their need
and desire for development toward extra-academic career paths. This project
applies quantitative and semi-quantitative approaches to assess if virtual
conferences facilitate access for individuals from more diverse institutions,
logistical and cultural factors that can expand access, and conference features
and formats that are most likely to support inclusion of student and early-
career researchers from those institutions. We will accomplish this through
analysis of conference attendance prior to and during the COVID-19 pandemic,
surveys of current and prospective members of participating professional
societies, and focus groups that iteratively identify approaches for testing as
part of a future project. This project will produce multiple peer-reviewed
publications, presentations, and an educational
webinar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.