* 2233421
* Collaborative Research: Assessing the Causal Influence of Atmospheric Opacity and Sea Ice on Arctic Warming in a Novel Circulation-controlled Framework
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Edward Blanchard-Wrigglesworth, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 07/31/2026
* USD 161,000.00

Over the last 40 years, the Arctic has warmed more than any other region on the
planet. This greater-than-global Arctic warming is projected to continue with
lasting impacts on human populations, ecosystems, and infrastructure. While the
fundamental mechanisms that lead to greater-than-global Arctic warming are
known, the mechanisms controlling the magnitude of Arctic warming are harder to
constrain. This project is a focused effort on what has and will control Arctic
warming from 1980 to 2060. By specifying aspects of the atmospheric conditions
that are relatively well constrained (the winds), we will better understand the
importance of drivers that are harder to constrain observationally (clouds and
sea ice thickness). This work will lead to transformational advances in our
understanding of what does and does not control Arctic
warming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is focused on the following research
question: What is the causal influence of sea ice thickness and atmospheric
opacity (i.e., clouds) on recent and near-future Arctic warming rates? This
research question and associated hypotheses will be assessed in a well-
established NSF-funded earth system model (Community Earth System Model, CESM)
guided by observations including those from a recent year-long field campaign
with substantial in situ observations (Multidisciplinary drifting Observatory
for the Study of Arctic Climate, MOSAiC). The central outcome will be
quantifying the causal influence of two mean state properties (atmospheric
opacity, sea ice thickness) on Arctic warming rates from 1980 to 2060 using a
novel ‘wind-nudging’ methodology that constrains the large-scale atmospheric
circulation. An inquiry-based 2-week middle-high school curriculum will be
developed centered around the driving question: How might weather in your area
be impacted by the Arctic? The curriculum will be reviewed by experts and
disseminated through virtual teacher workshops, enabling hundreds of teachers in
North America to bring current Arctic research into their classrooms. The
project will also actively engage early career scientists in the research
including a Ph.D. student and two summer Research Experience for Undergraduates
(REU) summer students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.