* 2233642
* SBIR Phase I:  Hybrid Computing Techniques for Quantum-inspired Ising Machines
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,10/31/2023
* Chris H Kim, LEVIOSA TECHNOLOGIES LLC
* Standard Grant
* Peter Atherton
* 10/31/2023
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will result from the development of a high-
speed, low-power solver based on standard semiconductor technologies that can
directly solve combinatorial optimization problem (COP) problems. COP problems
have broad applicability across manufacturing optimization, semiconductor wire
routing, logistics planning and execution, and financial portfolio management.
However, COP problems are notoriously difficult or even impossible to solve via
classical computers on a scale suitable for commercial application. Current
state-of-the-art COP solvers need tremendous computing power, are unsuitable for
edge computing, rely on undeveloped technology, or use similar algorithms to
classical computers. The goal of this project is to provide consumers with a
drop-in replacement COP solver that is faster, more precise, more mobile, and
more energy efficient than state-of-the-art classical computers and COP solvers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project seeks to develop a complementary metal–oxide–semiconductor (CMOS) based
parallel combinatorial optimization problem (COP) computing cluster accessible
through a cloud interface. The proposed solution will directly solve COP
problems, increasing the speed, precision, and power efficiency compared to
classical computers or current quantum-based COP solvers. Additionally, the
cluster uses all standard semiconductor technology allowing for near-term
hardware manufacturing, unlike current quantum computing competitors. The device
also works at room temperature, making it the only suitable edge device for
directly solving COP problems. A hybrid computing algorithm combining the custom
and classical methods will parallelize the COP solving across numerous custom
chips. Many custom chips will be combined into a single cluster to maximize the
speed and efficiency of the hybrid algorithms. An introductory cloud service
interface will be incorporated with the custom computer cluster to facilitate
outside access. The end goal of this project is to create a state-of-the-art
scalable, accessible, and economical COP solver that overcomes the inherent
disadvantages of quantum and classical computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.