* 2233182
* Collaborative Research: Diagnosing the Impacts of Blowing Snow in the Northern Great Plains Using Novel Instrumentation and Coupled Models
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* David Bromwich, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 02/28/2026
* USD 400,000.00

Blowing snow is a common wintertime hazard in the Northern Great Plains. While
the general conditions responsible for the process are understood, recent
observations have demonstrated that blowing snow and blizzard conditions can
vary significantly in time and space. Forecasting these events is difficult;
weather models do not include the process, meaning that forecasters are reliant
on imperfect techniques to predict the hazard. Further, it is believed that
blowing snow can modify the lower atmosphere suggesting that additional
downstream errors in forecasts are possible. Besides these immediate impacts on
society, blowing snow is a critical process in open, cold regions of the globe
by impacting the distribution of water and energy at the Earthâ€™s surface.
Innovative observations are needed to better understand blowing snow and provide
the ground truth needed to advance efforts to model the process.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project seeks to understand the
physical mechanisms and impacts of blowing snow in the Northern Great Plains.
The project will investigate the microphysical structure of blowing snow layers
and the roles that terrain, atmospheric state, and sublimation have on the
evolution of these events. Innovative observations will be made in and around
eastern North Dakota/northwestern Minnesota, a region prone to blizzards and
blowing snow events. The project will continue development of affordable,
ground-based and balloon-borne microphysical imagers. Collectively with
traditional radiosondes and vertically pointing lidars, observations will be
used to evaluate and improve a fully coupled blowing snow parameterization
within the Weather Research and Forecasting (WRF) model, and the improved model
will be applied to identify the key aspects determining blowing snow behavior.
Multiple graduate students and numerous undergraduate students will be impacted
through field work, analysis of data, numerical modeling, and deployment of
hydrometeor imagers to other academic institutions. The project will promote
other public outreach efforts and includes partners such as state tribal
colleges and the National Weather Service, ensuring dissemination of knowledge
to diverse groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.