* 2233707
* Implementation: Implementation of the BIMS Tidal Wave Program
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Camille Gaynus, BLACK IN MARINE SCIENCE
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Marenda
* 03/31/2028
* USD 1,997,452.00

Scientific societies play a significant role in the dissemination of research,
and the creation of collaborative groups; however the lack of diversity at
scientific meetings serves as a major crux to the advancement of ocean science
and conservation. Systematic barriers increase the difficulty for researchers of
color to attend and successfully maneuver these conferences. Often, those
researchers who do attend are one of a handful and their experiences can be
riddled with isolation, making it hard to truly engage in meeting sessions and
activities. To increase diversity and engagement of scientists of color at ocean
science conferences and reduce negative experiences stemming from seclusion, the
non-profit Black in Marine Science (BIMS) introduces The BIMS Tidal Wave. The
goals of this project are to 1) provide a cohort of scientists the networking
and technical skills needed to successfully present at a conference, 2)
incorporate contributions of researchers of color in ocean science conferences
including a conference hosted by the BIMS Institute and 3) increase cohesion
among allies and Black professionals who focus on ocean conservation and
research. Each year, a cohort of Black marine scientists at varied educational
levels (undergrad to graduate) and professions (academic, government, private
sector) will be selected to attend one ocean science conference. Prior to each
conference participants will partake in a series of workshops focused on
presenting research, networking, and successful mentor-mentee interactions.
After each conference, cohorts will receive post-conference training that will
assist participants in publishing their research and forming collaborative bonds
for future research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a means of improving the diversity
and experience of Black marine scientists at scientific conferences, the
nonprofit organization Black in Marine Science introduces The BIMS Tidal Wave.
This program aims to expand the diversity of marine science conference
participation and society membership in a stepwise fashion, supporting 40
students, and both early &amp; late career professionals in presenting research
at two marine science meetings each year. Moving past the experience of being
isolated and excluded at conferences, the goal is that participants in The Tidal
Wave Program feel a boost in confidence and in a sense of belonging by having
new skills, resources, and cohort support. These fundamental changes will alter
the experience of both Black scientists and other attendees at the conference.
Prior to the meetings, the program will provide hands-on networking and
professional development workshops including the resources, support, and skills
needed to navigate a conference successfully. These workshops will strengthen
relationships and mutual support among participants, thereby increasing the
sense of comfort and ease of attending. Pertinent scientific meetings have been
selected to represent an array of sub-disciplines within ocean policy and
research, ensuring that Black peoplesâ€™ research contributions are heard and have
a seat at the table. At the conferences, we will facilitate opportunities for
participants to network with one another, as well as with members and leadership
of the host society. In the final year of the grant, the BIMS institute will
host a culminating conference, exclusive to Black marine science professionals
and allies. The BIMS Tidal Wave will ultimately change the face of scientific
conferences and enrich the experiences of Black marine scientists who attend
these conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.