* 2233986
* Predicting flood-induced flow and sediment dynamics using data-driven physics-informed models
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2027
* Ali Khosronejad, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 06/30/2027
* USD 550,000.00

It is vital to understand the physics of flood flow in rivers. Such
understanding can help practicing engineers, researchers, and stakeholders (a)
appropriately design infrastructures along and across rivers and (b) better
protect the river environment. To understand the flood flow in rivers, this
project will develop and utilize artificial intelligence to produce mean flow
characteristics of the flood flow and riverbed topography. The developed
artificial intelligence algorithms will enable reliable flood flow prediction at
a small fraction of the computational cost of existing models. Thus, this
research will benefit society by providing practicing engineers and stakeholders
with modeling tools to (a) predict flood impacts on the stability of
infrastructure in natural waterways and (b) evaluate the efficiency of flood
mitigation strategies. The project will support two graduate students for four
years and engage 12 undergraduates in summer research activities relevant to
machine learning and flood prediction. As a part of this project, underserved
adolescents in a non-secure detention center in New York will be trained in
computer programing and simple machine learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research goals of this project include (a) improving the existing capabilities
of high-fidelity numerical modeling tools to enable physics-based simulations of
floods in natural waterways, (b) applying the high-fidelity model to evaluate
flood impacts on the stability of infrastructure installed in large-scale
waterways, and (c) employing the high-fidelity flood simulation results of
large-scale rivers to inform and develop machine learning algorithms for
efficient and affordable prediction of flood impacts on infrastructure and
potentially transform the field of flood prediction research. This project will
involve a group of practitioners from private, local, and federal agencies to
learn how to use the developed tools. The research and educational objectives of
this proposal will result in (a) advancement of knowledge regarding the complex
interactions among flood flow, waterway, vegetation, and infrastructure; (b)
promotion of educational performance by (i) engaging underserved adolescents of
a non-secure detention center in STEM, (ii) encouraging the participation of
underrepresented groups in research, (iii) involving graduate and undergraduate
students in multidisciplinary research, and (iv) developing a new
interdisciplinary graduate course; and (c) broad dissemination of high-fidelity
models and machine learning through online repositories and journal publications
for free access by practitioners and the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.