* 2233521
* STTR Phase I:  Self-healing Power Electronics for Urban Air Mobility Applications
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Ali Bazzi, VALCON LABS, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 07/31/2024
* USD 274,944.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is to increase safety and reduce weight and redundancies for
many vehicular systems and electronic devices. This project will also enhance
autonomous systems integration in terms of diagnostics and enable
reconfiguration for a variety of safety-critical applications. The proposed
self-healing, fault-tolerant, power electronics have a large market beyond Urban
Air Mobility (UAM) applications and can be implemented in a wide range of
markets from transportation, to space/aerospace, biomedical devices, and
microgrids. The ability of power electronics to self-diagnose faults, engage
redundancy, reconfigure, and maintain operation will be fundamental in such
safety-critical applications. This project will initially be applied to the
safest and most sustainable Urban Air Mobility vehicles of the future offering
best-in-class user experiences that can drastically improve the lives of U.S.
citizens by reducing travel time with improved safety. Potential applications
and use cases include on-demand air taxis, airport shuttles, personal air
vehicles, last-mile delivery, air ambulance, military applications, and rescue
missions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed effort is to create
self-healing, high-power-density, reconfigurable, and modular power electronic
converters (dc/ac inverters, dc/dc converters, and ac/dc battery chargers) and
architectures for Urban Air Mobility (UAM) applications. The main technical
objective of this project is to improve fault tolerance in the event of battery
module or motor failure in the presence of several other healthy batteries and
propulsion motors. The second objective is to explore machine learning
techniques in dc/ac inverter and ac/dc charger applications. The third and final
objective for this project is to study the impact of the proposed self-healing
modular power electronics architecture on battery state-of-charge, life, and
propulsion system performance in a safety-critical UAM application. Reliability
models that consider healthy and various reconfigured system architectures will
be established.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.