* 2233897
* AF: Small: Low-Degree Methods for Optimization in Random Structures. Power and Limitations
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* David Gamarnik, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 04/30/2026
* USD 531,494.00

Optimization tasks for problems involving uncertainty and randomness arise in
many areas of applications, including models of network structures and social
networks, finance and economics, theoretical computer science, operations
research and operations management, statistics and machine learning, statistical
physics and material science. The nature and the sources of randomness
underlying these optimization tasks vary and are mostly domain specific. Yet a
remarkable and fairly generic theme has emerged recently across many of these
application areas, dubbed the Statistics-to-Computation gap. This gap refers to
the discovery that for many optimization problems the state-of-the-art tractable
algorithms (those which can be run in a reasonable time) significantly
underperform when compared to algorithms without any computational limits. How
fundamental is this gap and what classes of algorithms achieve the best
performance within reasonable computational time limits? These are two
fundamental questions to be addressed in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent research activity in this area led to the
discovery that tractable algorithms achieving state-of-the-art performance,
while on surface are different and problem specific, can be coded as variants of
the same algorithm, one based on computing low degree polynomials of the input
data. We call this class of algorithms the Low Degree Method (LDM). The first
research goal of this project is to investigate this discovery systematically.
Specifically, the work will be conducted on (a) Verifying whether LDM-based
methods achieve state-of-the-art performance for a broad spectrum of problems,
beyond those already known, and identifying candidate problems for which LDM can
in fact provide algorithms improving the state-of-the-art, (b) Identifying the
potential computational advantage of the LDM based methods, including the speed
and parallelism, and finally (c) Establishing the limits of what is achievable
by the LDM, and specifically verifying that LDM-based methods provably cannot
overcome the Statistics-to-Computation barrier. A concrete, but not exhaustive,
class of problems to be considered within the goal (a) includes the problem of
finding a largest clique in an Erdos-Renyi random graph, the sparse linear
regression problem and the problem of finding a satisfying assignment of a
random constraint satisfaction problem, known as random K-SAT problem. The goal
(c) is also a segue into the second research goal of this project: establishing
a barrier for the LDM-based methods for the problems of high dimensional
statistical inference by means of the so-called Overlap Gap Property (OGP)
methodology. OGP has been established already as an algorithmic barrier for a
wide class of problems of optimization in random structures. Broad classes of
algorithms have been ruled out by the OGP-based methods, including local
algorithms, various iterative schemes, online algorithms and Boolean circuits.
At the same time, OGP-based methodology does not extend to models involving
noisy signal, which is unfortunate, since these models arise in a broad variety
of important modern statistical and machine learning applications. The second
goal of the project is establishing the presence of OGP in high dimensional
statistical inference models exhibiting the Statistics-to-Computation gap and
establishing that it is a barrier for the same classes of algorithms that have
been ruled out in prior models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.