* 2233774
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Physically Unclonable Wireless Systems (PUWS) for RF Fingerprinting and Physical Layer Security
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2027
* Yasin Yilmaz, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 01/31/2027
* USD 1,200,000.00

The goal of this project is to investigate wireless communication systems
utilizing a new chaotic antenna array that includes intentional but unclonable
randomizations in its geometry. Due to these randomizations, the wireless
signals transmitted by the chaotic antenna arrays exhibit unique and strongly
distinct fingerprints that can be utilized by the wireless communication systems
to ensure security in emerging applications such as the Internet of Things. The
enhanced fingerprints of chaotic antenna arrays will be harnessed for two
purposes: authenticating wireless devices for joining a wireless network, and
reducing the eavesdroppers’ capability to understand/interpret wireless signals
transmitted between a legitimate user and an access point. The authentication
and security methods proposed in this project are hardware-based and complement
the existing software-based methods such as passwords and cryptography to
achieve stronger security measures in wireless systems. The project will develop
various configurations of chaotic antenna arrays, investigate their performance
for authentication, wireless communication security, and data rate. Machine
learning will be employed to achieve accurate and resilient authentication.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chaotic antenna arrays are proposed to introduce antenna
element specific phase errors with spatial variation, leveraging the
flexibilities of the mask-free laser-enhanced direct print additive
manufacturing technique. The proposed array architecture, without knowledge of
its own errors, will provide dual support for radio-frequency fingerprinting
based authentication and physical layer security. Machine learning methods, in
particular deep neural networks, will be used to perform authentication using
the enhanced radio-frequency fingerprints, which should yield significantly
greater accuracy compared to using radio frequency fingerprints of regular
antenna arrays. To mathematically analyze the improvement in the authentication
capacity, information theoretic bounds for authentication success probability
and attack success probability will be studied. Possible adversarial machine
learning attacks to chaotic antenna arrays and defense strategies will be also
investigated. Finally, from the wireless communications perspective, the
achievable data rate and the security improvements against eavesdroppers will be
analyzed considering the enhanced wireless channel diversity and more
challenging channel estimation conditions for eavesdroppers,
respectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.