* 2233069
* SBIR Phase II:  Ultrasoft Thermal Interface Elastomer for Microelectronics
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2025
* Navid Kazem, Arieca Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rajesh Mehta
* 03/31/2025
* USD 858,714.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project is in improving the efficiency and performance of electronic
devices. Modern devices, including cell phones, laptops, and electric vehicles
contain high-powered semiconductor components which generate unwanted heat that,
in turn, reduces their efficiency. If left unchecked, this heat may destroy the
devices and even injure users or cause damage to the environment. This project
addresses excessing heating in electronic devices by introducing new high-
performance thermal interface materials based upon embedding liquid metal
droplets inside of stretchable polymers. These so-called liquid metal embedded
elastomer (LMEE) materials can be applied to computer processors, graphics
cards, advanced artificial intelligence (AI) chips, and even power modules in
electric vehicles, to help keep electronic devices operating at peak performance
at all times. The growing prevalence of the Internet of Things, 5G network
infrastructure, and electric cars all necessitate better thermal solutions so
that devices can function properly. This project could contribute to the
semiconductor, automotive, and healthcare industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project’s goal is to develop and commercialize a thermal interface material
(TIM) for packaged microelectronics, building upon the LMEE composite
architecture. The technology will outperform existing TTIMs by combining the
superior thermal resistance of metal-based solid TIMs (S-TIMs) with the
mechanical reliability of polymer-based TIMs and the high-volume manufacturing
compatibility of thermal greases. Specifically, LMEEs possess a unique
combination of metal-like thermal resistance, rubber-like elasticity, and liquid
emulsion-like rheology prior to curing, thereby solving two main challenges
present with existing S-TIMs: (i) poor mechanical reliability over long
durations and (ii) incompatibility with syringe-based dispensing for high volume
manufacturing. The strategy proposed in this project is to synthesize an LMEE-
based TIM that forms a robust bond between the surfaces of the semiconductor
chip and surrounding enclosure, maintains a controlled thickness between the
chip and enclosure, and ensures the necessary rheology for syringe-based
dispensing. Specific project tasks build around a comprehensive technical plan
that includes materials synthesis, performance characterization, and in-package
evaluation. In parallel, the project will examine methods for storage, shipment,
and dispensing to ensure a product that is ready for integrated device
manufacturers and semiconductor assembly and testing industry by the end of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.