* 2233057
* Transforming Equilibrium Analysis Paradigm for Modeling Transportation Networks with Intelligent Traveling Agents
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Yafeng Yin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 04/30/2026
* USD 391,800.00

This project will transform transportation network equilibrium modeling paradigm
that metropolitan planning organizations use to plan emerging connected and
automated mobility systems for our nation. Considering that future traveling
agents (connected drivers or automated vehicles) will possess strong learning
and computation capability, and their travel decisions can be algorithmic,
strategic and adaptive, this project will first investigate the day-to-day
evolution of network traffic dynamics with these intelligent traveling agents,
and examine whether the notion of equilibrium remains relevant for modeling and
planning future mobility systems. Leveraging massive empirical data made
available by connectivity, this project will then develop an end-to-end learning
framework that directly learns relevant modeling components and the equilibrium
state from empirical data. The planned modeling paradigm, if successful, has a
great potential for widespread market adoption, and will save time and resources
for metropolitan planning organizations to build and maintain their planning
models. It can potentially help them better plan and manage their transportation
networks to reduce traffic congestion and vehicle emissions, without requiring
much new investment on expanding the existing infrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will consist of two thrusts. The first thrust
develops dynamical systems by explicitly modeling day-to-day travel choices of
intelligent traveling agents and then examines the convergence and stability
properties of the dynamical systems. By demonstrating that Wardropian user
equilibrium can still emerge in the day-to-day evolution of network traffic
dynamics, this project intends to establish a behavioral basis for the
equilibrium modeling paradigm. The second thrust aims to integrate implicit deep
learning with network equilibrium analysis to develop an end-to-end framework
that directly learns the behaviors of traveling agents, the equilibrium state,
and other modeling components, if needed, from empirical data. This research, if
successful, makes fundamental contributions to advance transportation network
science. First, it innovates the methodology of modeling day-to-day traffic
dynamics by explicitly capturing the decision-making process of day-to-day
choices of travelling agents. Second, the end-to-end learning and optimization
framework represents a paradigm shift for modeling and planning transportation
networks. The framework melds the data-decisions pipeline by integrating
learning and decision/optimization into a single end-to-end system. Lastly, the
research enriches the literature of game theory by offering novel application
and further development of mean-field game theory, and presenting a new way of
integrating machine learning with game theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.