* 2233738
* EAGER: Curating and representing mental health data to support therapists in personalized care
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Elena Agapie, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 12/31/2023
* USD 188,498.00

This research addresses the growing need to support mental health therapists in
managing their workload and client support through technology. Every year, 20%
of the US adult population experiences depression and anxiety, these numbers
increased during COVID-19 to over 40% of the population. As practices of mental
health providers have moved online during COVID-19 through telehealth, providers
took on more care responsibilities related to clients. A key aspect of mental
health treatment is managing care outside of therapy, which is achieved through
personalized care plans. This relies on the therapist developing deep
understanding of the client’s personal data and context, which is cognitively
challenging, and difficult to achieve due to limited tools to support
therapists’ data gathering. The proposed research investigates the role of
visual curation in supporting reflection and tailoring of care plans. This
research contributes novel representations of care plans and client data for
supporting reflection. It investigates how visual curation and synthesis, data
organization, and annotation can support therapists in representing subjective
goals, behaviors, and thoughts over time, to gain insights and identify future
plans of action. The research has the potential to make clinical care more
effective by supporting therapists in better understanding their clients and
managing client care, providing more tailored care, and building stronger
relationships with clients. This is expected to help therapists better manage
their caseloads, maintain client engagement, and provide successful care. By
supporting therapists, it has the potential to enable citizens at large to
receive better mental health care, addressing the immediate mental health crisis
and the nation’s long-term needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The exploratory research
grant will contribute to the fields of human-computer interaction and psychology
by investigating new techniques for how technology can facilitate therapists in
capturing, representing, and comprehending evolving, multifaceted, and complex
goals and experiences related to mental health. The research involves two phases
to develop and evaluate approaches for personalizing care through reflection on
visual data. In Phase 1, the research team establishes visual representations
beneficial for reflection and future planning in mental health. This phase
outlines data representation techniques for mental health data and establishes
design principles for visual data curation of multifaceted, subjective, and
difficult to quantify data. In Phase 2, the research team develops and evaluates
a prototype for visual curation and representation of longitudinal mental health
data to support reflection. This phase establishes initial contributions of
approaching therapy data curation using visual representations of mental health
data, which include longitudinal information about client multiple goals,
behaviors, thoughts, and progress, to support clients and therapists in
reflective activities, and inform personalization of mental health care plans.
This exploratory research contributes design guidelines and frameworks
addressing how visual forms can be used to represent psychological and
environmental client data and support mental health therapists reflecting on the
data while providing personalized care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.