* 2233629
* SBIR Phase II:  A Wearable Non-Invasive Deep Tissue Thermometer
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2025
* James Pollock, LUMENASTRA
* Cooperative Agreement
* Henry Ahn
* 02/28/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project begins with a wearable, non-invasive device
providing vital brain and internal organ temperature measurements in a clinical
setting that can dramatically reduce mortality and the risk of permanent brain
damage for tens of thousands of patients experiencing cardiac and aortic repair
surgery. This impact extends to protecting the brain from additional permanent
brain injury and lifelong disability for the 4.8 million people hospitalized
annually in the US after stroke, cardiac arrest or traumatic brain injury and 1
million infants born with impaired blood-oxygen flow needing constant brain
temperature management in their first hours of life. Finally, this technology
offers a more consistent and meaningful internal body temperature measurement
for millions of consumers through next generation handheld and wearable
thermometers monitoring general wellness and providing advanced notice of
changes in health conditions. True internal body temperature will be a powerful
complement to the inevitable next generation wearable sensors that integrate
many health indicators into a comprehensive and actionable snapshot of personal
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project fulfills the more than 30-year expectation that true internal
body temperatures providing a meaningful metric of wellness. Such technologies
measure extremely small electromagnetic thermal noise radiated from within the
body. Through the intersection of disparate microwave technologies and
biological science, this novel wearable sensor became possible. Research
challenges include the development of a design methodology for an ultra-low
noise receiver utilizing a near-field wearable probe, the discovery of efficient
interference mitigation techniques, and the development of an algorithm for
accurate and fast temperature estimation, all within a low-power wearable
package. This project will develop the needed sensitivity, spatial resolution,
and mitigation of the significant microwave noise from GPS, Wi-Fi, cellular and
other common electronic sources. After leveraging off-the-shelf components in
Phase I, the company is moving to miniaturized and specialized chips to meet the
application need.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.