* 2233770
* Conference: SICB 2023 Symposium: Large-scale phenomena arising from small-scale biophysical processes
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Kit Yu Karen Chan, Swarthmore College
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 09/30/2023
* USD 10,000.00

This award partially supports expenses for participants in a symposium and a
workshop at the January 2023 annual meeting of the Society for Integrative and
Comparative Biology (SICB). The symposium brings together biologists and
engineers studying questions about emerging large-scale influences of single
cells in different study systems. Single cells, despite their small size, can
organize and behave in ways that have unexpected and wide-reaching consequences.
For instance, the physical forces that exist between cells drive tissue
formation and pave the way for the evolution of complex, multicellular
organisms. Another very different example in which large-scale patterns emerge
from individual-cell behavior lies in the swimming of single-celled algae;
swimming helps them navigate the ocean environment and form vast communities
visible from space. Of the eleven speakers and two symposium organizers, six are
from groups underrepresented in science and nine are early-career investigators;
the speakers will present and discuss the latest findings and techniques,
marrying state-of-the-art field, laboratory, and mathematical approaches. The
symposium topic integrates across scales and types of organisms, and addresses
both physiological and biomechanical questions through experiments and modeling.
There will also be a complementary workshop to discuss strategies for engaging
in successful cross-disciplinary research to promote the use of mathematics,
physics and engineering tools to address biological problems. Results from the
meeting and workshop will be published in the Society’s journal, Integrative and
Comparative Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The emergence of large-scale patterns
from small-scale behavior and physiology of single cells is a broad theme of
research interest across multiple biological fields. Aiming to facilitate the
exchange of expertise and to promote cross-disciplinary research, this symposium
will bring together researchers working on biophysical processes across
cellular, organismal, and evolutionary scales in both aquatic and terrestrial
systems. The three main themes of the symposium are 1) how small-scale
biomechanics shape tissue formation; 2) how small-scale biophysics shape
ecological interactions; and 3) how physical forces shape the evolution of early
life. As a part of the annual meeting of the Society for Integrative and
Comparative Biology in Austin, TX, in January 2023, this symposium highlights
the work of early-career researchers from diverse backgrounds. In addition to
research presentations, the organizers will host a workshop on best practices in
cross-disciplinary research. Results from the symposium and workshop will be
disseminated via publication in an issue of the journal Integrative and
Comparative Biology, and the participants will produce a position paper about
future directions in this interdisciplinary field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.