* 2233902
* Magnetic Phase Boundary Mapping for the Discovery of Emergent Properties in Intermetallic Magnets
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Mykhailo Shatruk, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 02/28/2026
* USD 338,357.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Itinerant (metallic) magnets are a
unique class of magnetic materials used in societally important information and
clean-energy technologies, including spin valves, novel electronic devices,
electric vehicles, wind turbines, and magnetic refrigerators. Early studies
offered understanding of magnetism in simple metals – iron, cobalt, and nickel.
The present state of knowledge and advanced experimental and theoretical tools
available to materials scientists afford insight into magnetic behavior of more
complex intermetallic systems. Moreover, these tools allow not only
investigation but also prediction of desired electronic and magnetic properties.
With this project, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program
in NSF’s Division of Materials Research, Professor Michael Shatruk at the
Florida State University will leverage the advanced theoretical methods and
extensive experimental studies to fine-tune materials’ crystal and electronic
structures in order to find states in which magnetic moments attain exotic
configurations, such as helices, spirals, and vortices. The outcome of these
studies will be rational design of materials with novel magnetic properties,
paving the way to new properties that can be implemented in novel devices. The
diversity of theoretical and experimental tools employed in this project will
provide unique research training for graduate and undergraduate students, who
will become proficient in solid state chemistry, materials synthesis and
characterization, and quantum-chemical calculations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnets with
collinear arrangement of magnetic moments, such as canonical ferro-, ferri-, and
antiferromagnets, have long been an area of active studies and innovations in
solid state chemistry and condensed matter physics. Modern solid-state sciences
provide powerful tools to explore the design of materials with competing
magnetic interactions that can result in non-collinear magnetic structures, such
as helical, spiral, or skyrmionics spin textures. This project aims to develop
rational pathways to such materials by implementing a concept of magnetic phase
boundary mapping. The phase space between two collinear magnetic structures
(e.g., ferro- and antiferromagnetic) will be probed by a range of structural,
magnetic, and spectroscopic techniques, as well as by electronic structure
calculations, to uncover the region of non-collinear spin textures that are
highly sensitive both to chemical substitutions and to applied magnetic fields
or pressure. The project will make active use of advanced large-scale research
facilities at national labs for determination of magnetic structures and
detailed structure-property correlations. The proposed research activities will
provide versatile training to graduate and undergraduate students in materials
synthesis, investigation of structural and magnetic properties, the use of
neutron scattering methods, and studies of the electronic band structure. The
students will be involved in active collaborations with researchers at neutron
and X-ray scattering facilities. The PI and his research group will contribute
to broadening participation by involving students from underrepresented groups
through a transitional master-to-PhD bridge program in chemistry, organization
of undergraduate summer schools in magnetism and magnetic materials, and
implementation of the unique MINDLab research experiences aimed at high-school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.