* 2233118
* BRC-BIO: Understanding the Role of Species Interactions in Evolutionary Radiations Through the Evolution of Non-flying Mammal Pollination in the Iconic Plant Genus Protea
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Nora Mitchell, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Standard Grant
* Judy Stone
* 01/31/2026
* USD 294,395.00

Interactions between plants and pollinators influence many ways in which flowers
are shaped. Insects are the most common living pollinators, but many plants rely
on other animals like birds and bats. In rare cases rodents or other non-flying
mammals serve as pollinators to plants. The South African proteas, or
sugarbushes, use many different pollinators, including non-flying mammals.
Sugarbush species pollinated by rodents are different from sugarbush species
pollinated by birds in important ways. They have different scents, different
microbial associations, and different flower positioning. This project will
sample sugarbushes in South Africa to determine the evolutionary relationships
among species and to examine the traits and environmental circumstances that
allowed non-flying mammal pollination to evolve. The work will engage
undergraduate researchers in international field experiences and cross-cultural
exchange of scientific ideas. Further, students will participate in cross-
disciplinary sharing of ideas between biology and social work in a region that
is rich in both plant and human diversity. Results from this project will
provide a deeper understanding of how species interactions contribute to
biodiversity and can help to predict how these complex systems may respond to
undergoing global change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Little is known about the role
of species interactions in contributing to evolutionary radiations. This project
will help to understand the conditions that led to the evolution of non-flying
mammal pollination in Protea and its role as a potential driver of
diversification in this radiation. First, the work will increase the taxonomic
breadth of sampled Protea species and enable the reconstruction of a more robust
understanding of species relationships. Second, the improved understanding of
species relationships will allow researchers to estimate how often pollination
states changed over evolutionary time. Researchers will also reconstruct the
ancestral pollination states of subclades and estimate the rate at which
pollinator shifts have occurred. Finally, data on floral and whole-plant traits
will be combined with environmental data to assess overall patterns of shifts to
non-flying mammal pollination. This work will use a fascinating adaptation in an
iconic radiation to understand the role of species interactions in generating
diversity in one of the most biodiverse regions on
Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.