* 2233205
* RCN-UBE Summit: A New Landscape for Undergraduate Biology Education
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Gillian Bowser, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 08/31/2024
* USD 100,000.00

Broadening participation by increasing student diversity in academic science
disciplines has shown limited progress over the last decade and recruitment and
retention issues persist for those students historically underrepresented in
science. In the RCN-UBE (Research Coordination Networks in Undergraduate Biology
Education) program, over 50 collaborative networks of academic institutions work
together to address undergraduate biology education and broadening participation
in the sciences. The conference, RCN-UBE Summit: Creating New Landscapes in
Undergraduate Biology Education, will bring together RCN-UBE network
participants to explore how networks of institutions can work together to change
the demographics of the science disciplines. The conference will convene science
practitioners, educators, and university faculty to evaluate the role of
networks in shifting the science enterprise towards a more inclusive approach by
reaching across multiple institutional types from minority serving institutions,
Historically Black Colleges and Universities, and larger research institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the Summit, RCN-UBE network participants will present
best practices and engage in facilitated workshop sessions to discuss topics in
undergraduate education and broadening participation in the sciences. Each
workshop session will also explore opportunities for new networks, especially
those led by smaller and minority institutions, to form within a supportive
environment of existing networks. Case studies and other materials will be
presented to generate ideas and potential solutions to engage diverse students
as participants in the production of scientific knowledge, and to develop
innovative ways to increase the use of this knowledge in formal and informal
science educational settings. This project is being jointly funded by the
Directorate for Biological Sciences, Division of Biological Infrastructure, and
the Directorate for Education and Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate
Education as part of their efforts to address the challenges posed in Vision and
Change in Undergraduate Biology Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.