* 2233659
* SBIR Phase I:  Class Bucks Engagement and Gamified Learning System
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Justin MacDonald, CLASS BUCKS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 03/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is in the positive effect it will have in the classroom, and
ultimately, on school dropouts. Dropouts face bleak economic futures, are more
likely to commit a crime and be incarcerated, suffer poor health, and exact a
financial toll on society. Since dropping out of school is a gradual process of
a student becoming disengaged in the classroom, the proposed project will
address school dropout at the most elemental level. At the end of this project,
the development team will have an innovative, web-based game that will transform
the classroom dynamic, in any school, and give teachers meaningful analytics so
they can better meet their student’s needs, keep them engaged in the learning
process, and reduce the number of kids dropping out of school. The innovative
platform has the potential raise the learning opportunities for marginalized
learners and stimulate positive societal
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project
is in the quantitative measurement and tracking of student engagement and
production of a longitudinal analysis for each student, so teachers can track
engagement throughout an entire quarter, semester, or year. The solution will
empower instructors to make more well-informed decisions for their classrooms.
The research will focus on converting the original composite, laborious, pen,
paper, and spreadsheet version of the tool into a web-based version that
integrates with teacher lessons while accommodating diverse content areas and a
multitude of teaching styles. As students interact with the web-based, gamified
lesson delivery platform, they can earn or lose virtual dollars while learning
valuable soft skills such as such as responsibility, critical thinking, and work
ethics, including financial literacy skills such as online banking, investing,
using credit, and budgeting. This project will harness the game platform quality
to capture students' attention and generate motivation to invest time and energy
into learning. In the process, the game will collect valuable learning metrics
and provide reports and analytics for teachers so they can learn more about
their students. The goal of the proposed project is to develop the minimum
viable product and test pilot its efficacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.