* 2233366
* BRC-BIO: Trade-offs in locomotor performance: comparing hoppers and jumpers in variable environments
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Crystal Reynaga, Dickinson College
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 02/28/2026
* USD 456,522.00

The way an organism navigates an environment or habitat can be influenced by an
individual’s physiology and the physical properties of its environment. More
specifically, the substrate an organism interacts with can pose various
challenges during locomotor movements that can impact performance. Adaptations
in movement require a dynamic interplay between an organisms’ nervous system,
anatomy, and muscle physiology, which together drive whole-body movements.
However, the physiological strategies that one animal uses may not be ideally
suited for a different habitat or substrate type. This research aims to
understand how specialized ways of movement, more specifically, how hopping and
jumping may constrain how an organism responds to instantaneous changes in the
environment. Frogs and toads provide a unique model to understand variation in
movement strategies. This project will investigate whole-body movement and
nervous system control of muscle recruitment in response to changes in substrate
stiffness. In addition, the project will investigate the mechanics and
organization of tendon tissue to better understand the role of tendon stiffness
in specialized forms of movement. Such unique adaptations in muscle and tendon
physiology can inform the impacts of changing environments across habitats on
locomotion, as well as design parameters in engineered systems dealing with
environmental disturbance. The broader impacts of this research will increase
research opportunities and mentorship of undergraduate students historically
underrepresented in STEM, as well as enable the development of educational
workshop-based trainings and resources to increase access to STEM research
opportunities across the home institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Throughout
history the emergence of new modes of locomotion has played a crucial role in an
animal’s ability to navigate new habitats. For example, behavioral transitions
between microhabitats may result in more subtle shifts in an animal’s locomotor
strategy. In some cases, the locomotor system may be flexible enough to
accommodate changes in the physical properties of the environment. The proposed
work aims to understand how specialized ways of movement have uniquely
constrained motor control strategies and muscle-tendon properties. To address
this, the first aim will quantify and compare interspecific kinematic variation
between the long distance, endurance hopping of Cane toads, and the fast,
powerful jumps of Cuban tree frogs, in response to environmental perturbations
in substrate stiffness. The second aim measures in vivo hindlimb muscle length
and motor patterns in response to substrate stiffness to characterize the motor
control mechanisms used by long distance endurance hoppers. The third aim seeks
to characterize tendon ultrastructure by quantifying collagen fibril
organization using techniques in transmission electron microscopy and serial
block-face scanning electron microscopy. Lastly, tendon material properties will
be quantified using in vitro tendon tissue stress and strain tests to determine
the role of tissue stiffness across species specialized for differing modes of
locomotion and power output. The proposed research will advance understanding of
how specialization in different locomotor modes can provide robust benefits or
limitations at various levels of physiological
organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.