* 2233675
* SBIR Phase I: Scalable Manufacturing Technology for Mobile Signal Penetrating Energy-Efficient Low-Emissivity Windows
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Guowen Ding, LABFORINVENTION CORP
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 12/31/2023
* USD 273,985.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project will be low-emissivity windows capable of
allowing wireless signals to pass through. Presently, almost all commercial low-
emissivity windows severely block mobile signals from entering buildings - a
serious problem in today's world that demands fast and uninterrupted mobile
connectivity. The proposed low-emissivity windows can be manufactured cost-
competitively and significantly reduce the costs of installing indoor cellular
aids such as routers and antennas. This technology will accelerate the further
adoption of low-emissivity windows to reduce greenhouse gas emissions as well as
support the further deployment of 5G technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
SBIR Phase I project proposes to investigate scalable manufacturing of mobile,
signal transmissive, low-emissivity windows by using lithographic deposition of
photoresist structures on the glass substrate prior to low-emissivity vacuum
coating. The project proposes to deposit photoresist structures with non-
conductive spacers on glass substrate, reducing the low-emissivity coatingâ€™s
electric conductivity that prevents wireless signal passthrough. Dielectric
layers will be deposited over the sidewalls to form protective layers over the
low-emissivity coatings to protect against oxidative corrosion. The width of the
photoresist structures will range between 2 to 5 micrometers to minimize the
degradation of low-emissivity coatings to less than 2%, to maintain thermal
performance. After low-emissivity coating deposition, the non-planar spacers
will subsequently collapse into the photoresist layer restoring low-emissivity
coatings to their original planar position thereby rendering the photoresist
structure invisible to the eye. Furthermore, the team will explore additional
photoresist designs to address potential lighting diffractions that may form on
the finished window.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.