* 2233197
* SBIR Phase I:  Tackling Healthcare’s Paradoxes: Quality Patient Care, Provider Workflow, and Data Security
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Omar Mohtar, PARADOCS HEALTH INC.
* Standard Grant
* Alastair Monk
* 04/30/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact /commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is to provide a new tool for physicians to
potentially automate the preparation of insurance documentation and facilitate
claim building which may help to lower provider costs and increase patient
access to and quality of care. Physicians can spend up to 50% of their time
performing non-clinical tasks which have also been associated with physician
burnout, a psychological condition known to result in medical errors, lower
quality of care, higher costs, and overall poorer patient outcomes. The proposed
innovation is a proprietary algorithm that leverages data to automate the
completion of insurance form documentation. This new technology aims to resolve
workflow bottlenecks and complement existing clinical workflows by delivering a
simpler provider experience by streamlining the preparation of medical form
documentation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research
(SBIR) Phase I project aims to develop a machine learning-enabled electronic
medical record access toolset designed to automate and streamline the
preparation of insurance form documentation. A major issue in the US healthcare
system is the process through which healthcare providers seek reimbursement
through health insurance companies. Filing claims and seeking prior
authorizations on procedures or tests from insurance companies is a manual
process that is slow and error prone, often resulting in delays in treatment or
even rejection, jeopardizing patient health, and resulting in higher costs.
Designed for physicians, the proposed technology will facilitate claim building
using pre-trained natural language models to extract medical text and
relationships from various inputs including patient and provider demographic
information as well as payer information, clinical taxonomy, functional
features, and relations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.