* 2233610
* BRC-BIO: Evolution and ecology across the mutualism-parasitism transition in leafflower plants (Phyllanthaceae) and leafflower moths (Lepidoptera: Gracillariidae: Epicephala)
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* David Hembry, University of Texas of the Permian Basin
* Standard Grant
* Matt Carling
* 03/31/2026
* USD 502,998.00

Relationships among species in nature may vary from mutually beneficial
(mutualism) to those in which individuals from one species benefits and
individuals from the other species are harmed (antagonism, including
parasitism). Transitions between mutualism and parasitism have evolved often.
However, little is known about the biology of organisms that have undergone
these transitions. Understanding this important evolutionary transition has
important ramifications for medicine, agriculture, and epidemiology. This
project supports research by four master’s students studying the biology of one
group of insects (leafflower moths) that have evolved from mutualistic to
parasitic relationships with their host plants. Student projects will study the
genetics of these moths in Texas and the southeastern United States. They will
also explore the diversity of bacteria associated with these moths’
caterpillars, and the biology of moths in this genus that were just discovered
in Puerto Rico. Students will also train with external collaborators, and travel
to a scientific conference to present their findings. The University of Texas
Permian Basin (UTPB) is a Hispanic-Serving Institution and the largest
university in the Permian Basin of West Texas, with a student population that is
majority-first generation college students. This project will also fund summer
research experiences for five undergraduates (four from UTPB, one from the
University of Puerto Rico, Río Piedras Campus), and for a group of UTPB
undergraduates to attend a national scientific meeting in summer
2023.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transitions between mutualism and parasitism have
occurred frequently throughout the Tree of Life. This proposal outlines research
on the evolution and ecology of a brood pollination mutualism between leafflower
plants in the family Phyllanthaceae and leafflower moths in the genus
Epicephala. Interestingly, this mutualism has repeatedly broken down into
parasitism. This research will gather the first data on the ways in which these
parasites’ population structure evolves in response to their host diversity. It
will also study the macroevolution of mutualism gain and loss in an unstudied
tropical North American radiation of these plants and insects. Finally, the work
will provide data on the way in which third party associates (larval
microbiomes) vary with the mutualism-parasitism transition and shifts among host
plant lineages. Results from this research will be readily interpreted in the
context of previous work on the biology of the mutualistic congeners of these
parasites in Asia and the Pacific. In doing so, this proposal will generate new
data for future work on this system and develop this emerging model system in
evolutionary ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.