* 2233370
* EAGER: CRYO: Actively-Controlled Fast-Switching Thermal Switch for Sub-Kelvin Cooling with Low He3 Usage
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Stephen Boyd, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 12/31/2024
* USD 286,675.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) will fund research
supporting the development of ultra-low temperature refrigeration with low He3
usage. Helium and its even rarer isotope He3, which has a crustal abundance of
only 0.00014 percent of helium on Earth, are currently in short supply and the
situation is projected to get worse. There is an urgent need to drastically
reduce the usage of helium in ultra-low refrigeration applications needed for
the national capability for the advancement of quantum-enabled devices and their
many applications in computing, sensing, and communications. The project will
thus promote the progress of science, advance the national prosperity, and help
secure the national defense utilizing these unique technologies. Currently,
refrigeration at temperatures below 1° Kelvin is largely limited to He3-dilution
refrigerators, none of which are manufactured in the United States. Magnetic
refrigeration is a low- He3 sub-Kelvin approach that has been developed for
spaceflight experiments by NASA. This award supports fundamental research to
remove a key technical obstacle to the commercial development of magnetic
refrigeration as a low- He3 replacement for dilution refrigeration. This project
has the opportunity to recruit and train students from an exceptionally diverse
pool at the University of New Mexico is a Hispanic Serving Institution into an
area needing an increased workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sub-Kelvin magnetic
refrigeration has been developed for spaceflight experiments by NASA. However,
commercial development has proven difficult because of the overall complexity of
these systems and the lack of simple design rules to engineer the subsystems,
particularly the thermal switches. A further challenge is the difficulty of
incorporating the fixed-temperature stages needed to support heat-sinking and
thermal radiation shields. This award will perform fundamental research to
develop a new thermal switch for the 0.5K-4K temperature range. The new switch’s
features include rapid active control, high switching ratio, and a clear and
simple set of design rules. Research objectives are to design; develop
manufacturing techniques for; demonstrate; and characterize the new thermal
switch, and then to demonstrate a single stage of magnetic refrigeration using
the new switch, operating between two constant-temperature stages. Detailed
modeling and experiment will be closely coupled. The project will use an
existing research cryostat for measurements and will build on an extensive base
of magnetic refrigeration simulation and modeling tools in the PI’s laboratory.
Comparison of modeling and experiment will increase knowledge of magnetic
refrigeration parameters and performance, and of static and dynamic heat flow in
complex heat switch geometries containing materials with widely varying thermal
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.