* 2233193
* BRC-BIO: Interrogating Extracellular Vesicle Biogenesis Through Substrate-Associated Signals
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Steven Santana, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 08/31/2026
* USD 503,000.00

Cell communication is necessary for the healthy function of living organisms.
Cells communicate by directly touching or by sending materials out to other
cells. One of the ways that cells send materials is via extracellular vesicles.
Extracellular vesicles are collections of nucleic acids, proteins, and lipids
that are held together by a protective envelope. When cells receive these
extracellular vesicles and unpack the vesicle’s contents, they change their
behavior. Even though this form of communication is important, the nature of
vesicle formation and selection of their contents is not well understood. The
goal of this project is to enhance understanding by determining the factors that
cause cells to produce vesicles and the factors that influence what materials
are packaged inside of them. Understanding extracellular vesicle formation and
packaging has the potential to result in new medical interventions. This work
will be undertaken with secondary students and undergraduates. The research
experience will equip them with the training and professional development
necessary to create knowledge for this project. The outcomes of student
engagement in this research will also expand understanding, by generating
outcomes and new research questions in vesicle
biogenesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific knowledge that will be enhanced by
this project is the role played by integrin-substrate interactions on
extracellular vesicle biogenesis, subpopulation production, and selective cargo
packaging. In this work, engineered hydrogel substrates will be deployed to
engage integrins expressed by astrocytes, which represent a compelling system
for studying extracellular vesicle biogenesis. Because their function is coupled
to environmental cues, the ability of these astrocytes to respond to
extracellular signals is necessary for the fitness, survival, and healthy
function of the nervous system. This project seeks to determine how cell
engagement with integrin-specific peptides influences the extracellular vesicle
production and to provide an experimental platform that can be modified to
decipher the signals and mechanisms that promote extracellular vesicle
production. An understanding of the mechanisms underlying extracellular vesicle
biogenesis will afford new insights into the fundamentals of cell-cell
communication and provide new avenues for creating vesicle-based
therapeutics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.