* 2233805
* Conference: Conference on Bioinformatics, Computational Biology, and Health Informatics 2022
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Dongmei Wang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 07/31/2023
* USD 15,000.00

As the annual flagship conference of ACM SIGBio (Special Interest Group in
Bioinformatics, Computational Biology, and Health Informatics), the ACM
International Conference on Bioinformatics, Computational Biology, and Health
Informatics (ACMBCB) is aimed to provide an interactive forum that bridges
computer science, mathematics, statistics, with biology and health. Its mission
is to support&lt;br/&gt;advanced research, training, and outreach. It brings
together top researchers, practitioners, and students around the world to share
innovative discovery, advanced development and delivery of informatics solutions
to promote computational science, engineering for national health and biological
advancement for societal impact. The ACMBCB2022 will be in Chicago IL during
Aug. 7th-Sept. 01, 2023. This NSF grant will provide travel and registration
support for up to 10 students (graduate, undergraduate, and high school) to
attend the conference. The students will need to submit a short description
about their on-going academic study and motivation for attending ACMBCB2022
(suggested to follow NSF Intellectual Merit, Broad Impact summary), plus
supporting information such as a biosketch, a photo, and a letter of support
from their advisor/mentor for selection. In addition, this NSF grant will
broaden the diversity of participation from underrepresented groups (women,
minority, and disabled) to enhance the community-building beyond the
conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 21st century is witnessing many
transformations enabled by innovations happening at the interface of molecular
biology, medicine, health, with statistics, computer science, data science,
informatics, cloud computing, and AI. Thus, it is critical to cultivate the new
culture when training younger generations. ACMBCB2022 will provide
systematically organized activities such as workshops, tutorials, oral sessions,
and poster sessions for researchers and practitioners from different disciplines
to interact, to discuss, and to collaborate. NSF support will maximize both
learning and research outcomes of students. Not only they will learn novel
advancements in bioinformatics, computational biology, and health informatics
from the conference and improve their knowledge, but also they will share their
own research ideas in Student Forum to gain visibility and feedback. In
addition, because underrepresented minority groups (women, minority, and
students with disabilities) have relatively low participation, ACMBCB2022 will
continually promote diversity in participation through both Student Forum and
“Women in Bioinformatics” organization. Senior researchers will be invited to
provide feedback , and to share experience and wisdom in career development to
continually build the community throughout the year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.