* 2233973
* Discovering the Biomechanics of Filamentous Fungi and their Hyphae
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* STEVEN NALEWAY, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 04/30/2026
* USD 509,143.00

There has been a recent explosion of interest in fungi-based and fungi-inspired
materials for a variety of applications, such as environmentally friendly
packaging and structural materials, textiles and leather alternatives, and
advanced filtration materials. This has, in large part, been driven by the
combination of the impressive mechanical and structural properties that
filamentous fungi possess and the potential for them to be produced. Despite
this interest, there is a significant lack of understanding on the fundamental
structures and mechanics that allow filamentous fungi to provide their
mechanical properties. This award supports the fundamental research into the
biomechanics of filamentous fungi and their cellular building blocks, hyphae,
using combined experimental and theoretical approaches. This knowledge base will
provide a foundation for future scientific research and commercial ventures into
mycology, fungi-inspired materials, and environmentally friendly fungi-derived
materials. In addition, this award will train two graduate students and numerous
undergraduate student researchers who will gain valuable interdisciplinary
research experience. This award will also directly fund educational and research
opportunities for women in STEM to produce science and mycology-focused
educational videos with the goal of inspiring the next generation of women
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this award is to conduct basic
research on the biomechanics of filamentous fungi from the cellular- to macro-
scales. Genetically similar filamentous fungi will be tested in both a harvested
(i.e., sourced from their natural environment) and in-vitro cultured states.
These hierarchical studies will focus on both macroscopic sporocarps (i.e.,
mushrooms) and microscopic hyphae (the cellular building blocks of filamentous
fungi). At both length scales, microstructural analysis through light and
electron microscopy, micro-computed tomography, and focused ion beam sectioning
will be combined with chemical analysis via energy-dispersive X-ray
spectroscopy, mass spectrometry, and thermogravimetric analysis to understand
the filamentous fungal structure. Further mechanical loading tests will be
conducted to understand the structure-property relationships of filamentous
fungi. These experimental results will be theoretically analyzed to understand
the constitutive biomechanical equations that govern the structure-mechanical
property relationships in filamentous fungi. The multiscale biomechanics
understanding of the filamentous fungi will bridge the current knowledge gap in
the future design of fungi-based and fungi-inspired
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.