* 2233863
* I-Corps:  Artificial Intelligence (AI)-enabled point-of-care diagnostic ultrasound for injured children
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2022,01/31/2024
* Aaron Kornblith, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an Artificial Intelligence (AI)-enabled, ultrasound diagnostic
technology to safely diagnose internal bleeding in injured children. The current
standard of care is to use a computerized tomography (CT) scan to diagnose
internal bleeding, however, 4,000 of these children will develop cancer directly
caused by the ionizing radiation each year. In addition, from the time the
emergency provider orders the CT scan to the radiologistâ€™s final report may be
up to 24 hours. The proposed AI-guided ultrasound diagnostic technology may be
able to diagnose internal bleeding in childrenwithout cancer-causing radiation
and within minutes of arrival. The proposed technology also may give access to
expert-level emergency care to those who do not live near a trauma center.
Currently, 30 million people in the US do not live within an hour of a trauma
center, and do not have access to CT. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project
is based on the development of an Artificial Intelligence (AI)-enabled software
to use with existing ultrasound technology to safely diagnose internal bleeding
in injured children. The proposed software may guide the acquisition of the
correct images of the focused assessment with sonography during the trauma exam
and may help interpret the results by identifying free fluid, indicating
internal bleeding. A view classification model has been developed that
accurately identifies the correct images for the pediatric trauma exam (accuracy
of ~98%), and a novel machine learning algorithm to detect internal bleeding is
currently in development. These models will be integrated into a software
platform that may guide the ultrasound image acquisition, assist in the
diagnosis of internal bleeding, and automate documentation
workflow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.