* 2233656
* SBIR Phase II:  Novel, injectable, long-acting, local anesthetic for postoperative pain management
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Brett Davis, REBEL MEDICINE INC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Henry Ahn
* 03/31/2025
* USD 999,979.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is a novel therapeutic for surgical pain that
can eliminate the need for opioids after surgery. This project will yield a
novel, long-acting local anesthetic drug product that can provide substantial
value to customers as an affordable, safe, and effective, non-opioid, acute pain
management solution. The technology can provide significant value to hospital
systems, physicians, and patients alike by reducing healthcare costs associated
with opioid-related adverse events and preventing opioid addiction by
eliminating their use after surgery. In 2021, there was a historic rise in
opioid overdose deaths to over 80,000 individuals. Opioid use disorder-related
Medicaid spending has more than tripled in the last 15 years and the opioid
crisis has been estimated to cost $72.4 billion during that time period.
Preventing opioid addiction by reducing exposure of opioids to surgical patients
can have a significant impact on reducing financial costs to society as a whole.
In 2017, there were an estimated 48 million major surgical procedures requiring
postoperative pain management in the United States, representing a $17 billion
total addressable US market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project seeks to perform Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) required manufacturing characterization and animal studies to demonstrate
the novel, injectable, long-acting local anesthetic technology is safe for
initial human use. The solution involves a novel oleogel-based injectable drug
delivery system that can provide local sustained delivery of lipophilic small
molecule drugs. In Phase I, the team optimized the technology for rheological
properties, drug release kinetics, and stability to create an injectable gel
that provides 96 hours of sustained bupivacaine
delivery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.