* 2233781
* CAREER: Nucleosynthesis in Degenerate Stars
* MPS,AST
* 07/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Evan Kirby, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Sarah Higdon
* 08/31/2024
* USD 610,363.00

Dense stars cause some of the most powerful explosions in the Universe. For
example, white dwarf stars explode at the end of their lives as Supernovae, when
they ignite a runaway nuclear reaction. These explosions can be seen at great
distances and are important for measuring the expansion of the Universe. These
hot explosions expel ionized iron, nickel and other metals into space, leaving
behind dense neutron stars. Neutron stars can also explode by merger of two
neutron stars. This explosion is very different, and creates very heavy
elements, like gold and barium. Neutron star mergers have recently been
discovered with the NSF-funded Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave
Observatory (LIGO). The investigator will estimate the rate of neutron star
mergers by sensitive observations of the amounts of barium, iron and other
metals in nearby galaxies. The investigator's goal is to understand which types
of explosions have created the elements found on Earth and throughout the
Universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High school students will participate in this
research during the summer. The investigator will encourage the inclusion of new
groups of students by offering stipends. The investigator also plans to
implement tiers of mentoring. Faculty will mentor postdocs, who will mentor
graduate students. The graduate students will mentor undergraduate students, who
will mentor high school students. This strategy has been shown to encourage
younger students to pursue research careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.