* 2233670
* BRC-BIO: Harnessing sequence features to understand and manipulate the function of reflectin proteins in iridescence
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Robert Levenson, Soka University of America
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 06/30/2026
* USD 292,310.00

Reflectin proteins are key components of light-scattering nanostructures in
cephalopods such as squid and octopuses. A prominent example of these types of
structures is the tunable and reversibly iridescent reflectors. These proteins
are found within specialized cells, called iridocytes, present in the skin of
certain squid species. Iridescence in these cells is driven by reversible
phosphorylation of reflectins. Due to their fascinating properties, reflectins
and the light-manipulating assemblies that contain them have served as
bioinspiration for a range of work aiming to develop next-generation active
biophotonic biomaterials and nanotechnologies. However, the molecular details of
reflectin assembly, as well as the mechanisms and evolution of tunability,
remains poorly understood. Reflectin proteins have a unique amino acid sequence
that is likely critical in enabling them to serve their biophotonic functions.
This project seeks to disentangle the effects of multiple features within
reflectin's unique amino acid to its assembly properties and biophotonic
function. Soka University of America undergraduates will receive scientific
training and research experience as they work with the PI and contribute to this
project. The PI will also engage a broader group of undergraduates in research
by offering a Course-based Undergraduate Research Experience that enables
students to participate in an authentic semester-long research project involving
reflectins.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Reflectins proteins are intrinsically
disordered block copolymers. Recent work suggests that reflectin proteins
undergo liquid-liquid phase separation to form biomolecular condensates. While
condensate formation by many proteins has been linked to a range of cellular
processes, reflectins are unique in their biological role as drivers of tunable
biophotonics and in their observed ability to assemble into dynamically arrested
spherical assemblies of predictable size. The PI and undergraduate coworkers
will characterize reflectin proteins using a range of techniques including
microscopy, light scattering, and more, to elucidate the hidden design
principles that link reflectin's sequence to its assembly properties. These
discovered design principles will then be applied to rationally re-engineer
reflectin to improve its capability as a tunable biomaterial. The PI will extend
the characterization of single- and multi-component reflectin condensates to
within eukaryotic cells, elucidating how these proteins behave within more
complex cellular environments. This project will offer insight into possible
mechanisms for the evolution of tunable iridescence in loliginid squids and will
also produce a deeper understanding of the molecular mechanisms that drive
reflectin tunable assembly and dynamic arrest, providing knowledge that may be
potentially applied towards the development of future biophotonic technologies
and biomaterials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.