* 2233591
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Medium-scale farming systems and agricultural entrepreneuership
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2024
* James Murphy, Clark University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 01/31/2024
* USD 19,689.00

This doctoral dissertation research investigates the role and emergence of
medium-scale farms (3-50 hectares in size) in agricultural transformation. In
particular this project examines the emergence and influence of investor
farmers. Investor farmers are actors that do not reside on-farm and for whom
farming is a financial investment rather than an occupation or mode of
subsistence. This disconnect between farm and residence may result in different
farm management strategies compared to farms where the owner resides on-farm.
Using a combination of interviews and archival research this research project
investigates how and whether investor farmers are influencing the development of
commercial agriculture in places where more traditional farming systems persist.
The project advances the understanding of changing rural-urban relationships,
the role of investor farmers in shaping farming systems, and the development of
rural areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates how urban-based,
medium-scale investor farmers are influencing processes of agrarian change. The
amount of land occupied by medium-scale farms has been increasing in many
regions of the world, a process that is commonly driven by urban residents
seeking financial returns through agricultural investments that they manage from
afar. While investor farmers are often recognized as drivers of innovation and
entrepreneurship, their actual role in transforming farming systems and
advancing agricultural commercialization is unclear. A mixed methods approach is
applied including semi-structured interviews with investor farmers, farm
managers, landowners and government officials. Oral life histories of investor
farmers are employed to understand the pathways by which investor farmers become
central actors in land acquisition and agricultural transformation. Archival
research of NGO reports, government reports and newspaper articles is used to
identify how the process of agricultural transformations are represented by
different actors and in varying outlets. All data are coded for semantic
analysis using NVIVO. Given global population growth trends and the continued
reliance on agriculture as a vehicle of economic development, the increasing
control of rural agricultural land by investor farmers has significant
implications for the future of agricultural production. This research project
contributes to an understanding of the role of medium-scale farm investors and
their contribution to food security, rural-urban inequalities, and economic
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.