* 2233665
* SBIR Phase I:  A novel clot removal system for improved Venous Thromboembolism (VTE) thrombectomy outcomes
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Michael Schaller, XTRACT MEDICAL, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 05/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is a novel system for treating Venous
Thromboembolism (VTE), a clot in the patient’s deep veins or pulmonary arteries
which blocks blood flow, in a more effective manner. Each year 1.2 million
Americans are affected by VTE resulting in 100,000 deaths, $10 billion of direct
medical costs, and $69 billion of economic impact. Despite modern treatments and
procedures over half of all patients diagnosed with VTE will suffer long-term
complications including Post-Thrombotic Syndrome, resulting in functional
disabilities and the inability to return to work within 10 years of diagnosis.
The proposed system aims to improve the clinical effectiveness of mechanical
thrombectomy procedures by removing clots and restoring circulation, thereby
improving patient outcomes and reducing long term patient care
costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase
I project aims to demonstrate the feasibility of a novel catheter-based system
for securing and removing clots during mechanical thrombectomies. The technology
aims to effectively remove clots while being both atraumatic to the vessel with
minimal blood loss, in order to significantly improve upon existing clot
entrapment or removal approaches. The scope of activities includes developing a
first-generation prototype and demonstrating the prototype enables the ingestion
of large clot volumes without clogging nor causing damage to other vascular
structures. The device will be designed and prototyped within the dimensions
needed to fit within a clinically accepted catheter size and validated using
preclinical bench-top and animal models across a wide variety of clot sizes,
shapes and mechanical properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.