* 2233867
* Conference: Developing Skills for Advanced Careers in Biology for NSF Postdoctoral Fellows in the PRFB Broadening Participation 2022 Cohort
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Eben Lindsey, Society for Advancement of Chicanos & Native Americans in Sci
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 07/31/2024
* USD 99,996.00

This project supports a workshop for Postdoctoral Research Fellows in Biology,
supported by the Broadening Participation of Groups Underrepresented in Biology
track. The workshop is designed to serve fellows from the 2022 cohort by
providing support for 24 fellows to attend a workshop facilitated by SACNAS
(Society for the Advancement of Chicanos/Hispanics and Native Americans in
Science). The purpose of the workshop is to provide a forum for promoting best
practices and assessment of broadening participation activities, professional
and career development, and to catalyze formation of a virtual
cohort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Postdoctoral Fellows conduct research across all
fields of biology supported by the Directorate for Biological Sciences. The
Fellows in this track also increase participation at the postdoctoral level
through training for advanced careers and engagement with other postdoctoral
scientists from groups underrepresented in science. The workshop will allow
Fellows to exchange ideas and learn from experts about best practices and
assessment of activities to broaden participation. To promote professional
development, senior scientists will share effective strategies and information
for different career paths. The venue for the workshop is 2022 SACNAS – The
National Diversity in STEM Conference. The activities will occur in a day-long
workshop prior to SACNAS followed by meetings throughout the three-day
conference. Common interests and interactions during the workshop will make
possible the formation of collaborations that persist as the Fellows disperse to
their home research institutions across the US. Overall the workshop will
contribute to the national goal of increasing STEM diversity by supporting
leadership in broadening participation and the career success of the Fellows,
who themselves comprise a diverse group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.