* 2233539
* BRC-BIO: Interplay Between Intestinal Barrier Function, Aging, and Neurodegeneration
* BIO,DBI
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Anna Salazar, Christopher Newport University
* Standard Grant
* Anna Allen
* 07/31/2026
* USD 484,314.00

The world population is aging, with the number of people over 65 more than
doubling to 1.57 billion by 2050, making a concomitant elevation in numerous
age-related pathologies, including neurodegenerative diseases such as
Alzheimerâ€™s Disease, highly likely. Because of this, a clearer understanding of
the pathophysiological changes accompanying aging, and the discovery of novel
therapeutics to assist in aging phenotypes, are essential. Recent advances have
implicated perturbations in the gut as being closely linked to aging and
mortality, with intestinal barrier dysfunction associated with age-related
health decline in numerous organisms, including humans. This research will
investigate the microbiota-gut-brain axis, the term used to describe
communication between commensal bacteria in the gut, gut health, and neurons, to
understand if the intestinal barrier dysfunction associated with aging may play
a role in the aging pathologies observed in the brain and other tissues, such as
muscle. Fundamental details about how communication from the gut may impact
aging in tissue outside the gut are poorly understood. Insight into the cellular
and molecular changes accompanying the aging gut, how these changes may impact
and accelerate aging in the brain and muscle, and whether strengthening the
intestinal barrier can reverse or delay aging phenotypes, are, therefore,
crucial emerging areas of research. This research will be conducted by a diverse
group of undergraduate students, thereby increasing the number of students
participating in robust research and gaining experiences leading to more
effective scientific communication and the possible pursuit of biological
research in future careers. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Aging is a process marked by
a continuous decline in multiple physiological functions, including the
intestinal barrier function, which is tightly linked to longevity in Drosophila
melanogaster and other organisms. Previous experiments have revealed that
altered expression of occluding junctions in the guts of fruit flies can lead to
various hallmarks of aging, including modulation of intestinal homeostasis,
variations in microbial dynamics, changes in immune activity, and alterations in
lifespan. Loss of a specific occluding junction, Snakeskin (Ssk), leads to rapid
and reversible intestinal barrier dysfunction, altered gut morphology,
dysbiosis, and a dramatically reduced lifespan. Remarkably, restoration of Ssk
expression in flies showing intestinal barrier dysfunction rescues each of these
phenotypes previously linked to aging. Intestinal up-regulation of Ssk protects
against microbial translocation, improves intestinal barrier function during
aging, limits dysbiosis, and extends lifespan. These findings indicate that
intestinal occluding junctions may represent prolongevity targets in mammals, in
addition to their possible roles in intestinal dysfunction, aging, and disease.
This project will investigate the impact of the gut on tissue outside of the gut
and address communication between the gut and the brain and muscles in disease
models. Current work utilizes cellular and molecular biological methodologies to
build upon current knowledge to address crucial questions at the intersection
between microbial dysbiosis, epithelial integrity, inflammation, protein
aggregation, neurodegeneration, and disease, with the ultimate goal of
discovering novel therapies that may enhance barrier function, healthspan, and
lifespan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.