* 2233149
* EAGER: CRYO: New Quantum Elastocaloric Demagnetization Refrigeration for the Millikelvin Range
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2024
* Menka Jain, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 12/31/2024
* USD 237,367.00

This project is jointly supported by the Division of Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental and Transport Systems and the Division of Materials
Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a growing demand to develop alternative
refrigeration technology that can cool below 1 Kelvin for supporting emerging
applications, such as quantum sensors and quantum computers. Currently, liquid
helium refrigerators are mostly used to reach temperatures below 1 Kelvin. Due
to the increasing scarcity of helium and lack of portability or scalability of
the current technologies, alternative cooling methods are of great interest.
Solid-state refrigeration technology, such as the one in which magnetic solid
materials are cooled via cycles of decreasing and increasing magnetic field has
been somewhat successful in partly replacing helium technology. However, it has
significant drawbacks, including high magnetic field requirement of several
Tesla. This project puts forward a low-field cooling technology based on
mechanically strained solid-state magnetic materials. This approach is projected
to be sustainable, portable, and deployed at the electronic chip level,
providing a route to scalability. During this project, a diverse group of
students will be trained in thermal, material and quantum sciences. This
training will be provided through the development of a new curriculum focusing
on low temperature cooling in advanced undergraduate teaching laboratory, in
research projects through the McNair program for underrepresented undergraduate
students and through graduate-level research projects. Summer research
opportunities will be provided for local high school teachers to develop
educational demos in modern thermal science as a quantum-supporting area of
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the high-risk high-reward
work propose here, which is jointly supported by the Division of Chemical,
Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Systems and the Division of
Materials Research, is to realize a new solid-state millikelvin Quantum
Elastocaloric Adiabatic Refrigeration technology in which a cooling cycle will
be achieved via periodic application of elastic strain/stress, without or with
small magnetic field. In this project, elastic stress/strain tuning will be used
to induce near-zero temperature phase transitions in a special type of magnetic
materials called frustrated magnets. Thus, this new method is expected to
provide cooling well below 1 Kelvin with high efficiency. To evaluate thin
films, single crystals and bulk ceramics of frustrated magnets, an array of
uniquely adapted characterization tools for materials under strain will be
employed: superconducting quantum interference device microscopy, thermal
imaging, ac heat capacity, magnetization etc. The proposed strain-driven cooling
technology is expected to provide superior cooling power and lower temperature
in comparison to some other solid-state cooling technologies. The Quantum
Elastocaloric Adiabatic Refrigeration approach has the potential to materialize
into a groundbreaking discovery replacing other platforms, in particular in low
magnetic field and on-chip scalable applications and may have transformational
impact on energy-efficient electronics, quantum computing and
sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.