* 2233425
* Collaborative Research: Testing endmember hypotheses for the source of mineralizing fluid(s) in iron oxide - copper - gold (IOCG) deposits
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Adam Simon, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2026
* USD 444,296.00

Societal demand for critical minerals like copper will only expand as our use of
technology such as battery electric vehicles, solar panels and wind turbines
increases. It is important to understand how elements such as copper concentrate
in ore deposits. One major obstacle facing the growing demand for copper is how
to explore for and find copper ore deposits. This project focuses on improving
our understanding of how two types of copper ore deposits form and developing
methods to find undiscovered deposits. It will also support a graduate student
and several undergraduates who will be trained in mapping, logging, sampling,
and laboratory methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be the first to
constrain the multi-element isotopic signature of rocks in a large iron oxide -
copper - gold (IOCG) mineral system (Humboldt) that serves as the end-member
type locale for the sedimentary basin derived evaporitic brine genetic model and
compare those data with a purely magmatic-hydrothermal porphyry-copper mineral
system (Yerington), and a seemingly mixed basinal brine and magmatic-
hydrothermal system IOCG system (Ernest Henry). The integrated isotopic analysis
should reveal end-member chemical signatures that can be used to define these
systems as well as potentially be used as a geochemical vector to find unknown
mineralization systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.