* 2233559
* Conference: Mid-scale RI-EW: Nano Systems Innovation (NanoSI)
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2022,02/28/2023
* Matteo Rinaldi, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 02/28/2023
* USD 49,361.00

The significant gap between cutting-edge piezoelectric and hetero-integrated
fabrication facilities and university-owned infrastructures in the United States
limits experimental scientific research at the system level and educational
capabilities for future workforce development nationwide. The proposed Nano
Systems Innovation (NanoSI) Mid-scale RI-EW workshop will conduct a deep dive
into infrastructure requirements to enable a unique national infrastructure for
piezoelectric and hetero-integrated nanosystems. The workshop will concentrate
on planning for infrastructure that can better align local research and
prototyping capabilities of the universities with advanced semiconductor
manufacturing activities. This meeting will enable the solicitation of
community-rendered inputs to develop a unique national infrastructure and the
required capabilities to address current and future needs. The proposed workshop
will enable nationwide community engagement and broad discussion on the required
infrastructure to address the aligned needs of all stakeholders in academia,
government, and industry. In addition to faculty, industry and government
laboratory attendees, the workshop team will intentionally target students and
postdocs for attendance. The conference will specifically include invited talks
and panels to discuss educational needs of the proposed infrastructure, such as
new courses to address required skills in the future of manufacturing of
integrated nanosystems and advanced semiconductors. The conference will have an
invited talk on lessons learned from early-stage outreach in nanotechnology to
explore effective pathways for extension of outreach programs to high school
students. The conference, in addition to dedicated student/postdoc engagement
personnel, will ensure the engagement and participation of groups
underrepresented in science and engineering (e.g., underrepresented minorities,
women, and persons with disabilities). The program will include a Women in
Engineering (WIE) breakout session anticipated to provide insights toward
development of a diverse future workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Considering
high-impact scientific research needs for state-of-the-art manufacturing
facilities and the limits of standard research grants to address such needs,
Northeastern University will organize a community-wide NanoSI workshop to
explore a pathway to close the gap through a unique infrastructure. The workshop
will focus on identifying the emerging needs for adaptable infrastructure that
can address national research priorities in advanced hetero integration to post-
COMS and more than Moore devices. The NanoSI virtual workshop will gather a
diverse, multidisciplinary group of experts and leaders across academia,
industry, and government to develop a broad vision to support advanced
piezoelectric and hetero-integrated nanosystems manufacturing. The gathered
thought leaders and field expert speakers will present ideas on all aspects of
infrastructure development that will enable the community to address current and
future national needs. The discussion panels will focus on thoroughly defining
the priorities for all aspects of the infrastructure. The outputs of this broad
community engagement on the proposed NanoSI infrastructure will allow the
Northeastern team to build a concrete plan with comprehensive community support
for future submissions to NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.