* 2233788
* Collaborative Research: IMPLEMENTATION: EVOLVED - Embedding a Vision to Operationalize, Lift up, and Value Equity and Diversity in the Consortium of Aquatic Science Societies
* BIO,DBI
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2027
* Kiyoko Yokota, SUNY College at Oneonta
* Standard Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 06/30/2027
* USD 88,281.00

EVOLVED (Embed a Vision to Operationalize, Lift up, and Value Equity and
Diversity) is a comprehensive and integrated set of activities that embeds the
principles of diversity, equity, inclusion, access, and justice into the
backbone of the Consortium of Aquatic Sciences Societies (CASS). CASS membership
includes 20,000+ aquatic scientists from all career stages working across
academic, government, and industry sectors. CASS initiated transformative
diversity, equity, and inclusion work through a 2021 BIO-LEAPS planning grant,
which laid the groundwork for EVOLVED. In that process, CASS leadership
demonstrated a collective commitment to equity and inclusion and a desire to
elevate this work to one of CASS’s primary priorities. The EVOLVED program will
focus its work in 3 areas: (1) developing programming to serve members of
underrepresented groups (broadly used to refer to individuals from communities
that are historically underrepresented in STEM (Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics), (2) re-envisioning CASS’s values, exploring
biases and assumptions, and reexamining culture, to transform the CASS climate
into a welcoming and open forum for diverse peoples and perspectives, and (3)
building organizational infrastructure to support and sustain CASS's cultural
evolution. The project includes a comprehensive mixed-method evaluation of all
major initiatives. Together, the EVOLVED activities will catalyze cultural
change at multiple levels: across CASS as a collective, in single societies, and
by individual members within societies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The EVOLVED
program will embed diversity, equity, inclusion, access, and justice into the
cultural fabric of environmental, ecological, and organismal biology-focused
aquatic sciences. This program will develop, implement, and assess activities
that scale-up equity driven advancement across three levels of action:
individual members, societies, and the CASS collective. EVOLVED will
mechanistically link structural and cultural change aimed at breaking down major
barriers to building diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) within a consortium
of professional, scientific societies and serve as a model for transformative
culture change at the collective consortium level. To operationalize this,
EVOLVED will: (1) build programming to serve members of underrepresented groups
(broadly used in this proposal to refer to individuals from communities that are
historically underrepresented in STEM), (2) re-envision values and mental models
within CASS to transform its culture into a welcoming and open forum for diverse
peoples and perspectives, and (3) build organizational infrastructure to support
and sustain CASS's cultural evolution. Broader impacts of this work include
increased engagement with minority-serving institutions within CASS, integration
of DEI-focused values within individual CASS societies, and adoption of DEI-
centric policy, management, and conservation work across the CASS collective.
The proposed activities broaden participation of underrepresented groups in
environmental biology disciplines; ensure more diverse voices are involved in
biology-focused policy, conservation, and planning; and ultimately foster
disciplinary excellence and environmental justice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.