* 2233166
* Travel: Student Travel Support for IEEE/ACM International Conferences on Utility and Cloud Computing (UCC 2022) and Big Data Computing, Applications and Technologies (BDCAT 2022)
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Jianwu Wang, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 08/31/2023
* USD 32,000.00

The UCC 2022 and BDCAT 2022 conferences will provide a premier international
platform for researchers in both academic and industry to present new
discoveries, developments, research results, as well as the latest trends and
new challenges in cloud/edge computing, and big-data computing and technologies.
The conferences, to be held at the Marriott-Portland Downtown Waterfront in
Portland, Oregon, in December 6-9, 2022, is organized by a leading group of
experts in cloud computing and big data technologies and will bring together
researchers, developers and users from academia, industry, laboratories, and
commerce to discuss recent advances and trends in cloud computing and big data
technologies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a proposal to fund studentsâ€™
traveling to participate in the conference to engage deeply with the UCC/BDCAT
research community. The UCC/BDCAT student participation program provides a
comprehensive means for students to improve their overall research skills and
planning, beyond presenting posters and papers. The conference will run specific
student-centric sessions during the conference, mainly scheduled in parallel or
after the end of the regular sessions, including a Doctoral Symposium, and an
NSF REU Symposium, which will provide rich opportunities for student attendees
to interact with peers and senior researchers. This year for the first time,
UCC/BDCAT welcomes the student-focused program, Symposium for Undergraduate
Research in Data Science, Systems, and Security (NSF REU Symposium), which will
greatly enrich the UCC/BDCAT student programs, bringing undergraduate
researchers to the event to present their research work in cloud computing and
big data science and technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.