* 2233584
* SBIR Phase I:  Low-Cost, High-Performance, Vacuum Insulated Glass Window
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Ratnesh Tiwari, NEXTGLASS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Anna Brady
* 04/30/2024
* USD 256,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is technology to improve the efficiency of
building energy consumption. Windows account for about 30% of building energy
losses and 7% of US carbon emissions. Vacuum insulated glass (VIG) windows are
4-5 times more insulating than a typical double-pane glass windows and are
almost as insulating as the surrounding walls. A low-temperature production
method will make vacuum insulated glass much more affordable. Such highly
efficient and low-cost vacuum insulated glass will enable replacement of widely
used double pane windows thus reducing the building carbon footprint. This
decrease in pollution is especially significant given the push for net zero
energy buildings and net zero greenhouse gas emissions by 2050. Major sectors
that will benefit from such window developments are residential buildings,
commercial buildings, and supermarkets (freezer/cooler doors). Market research
indicates the VIG market is more than $25 billion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
SBIR Phase I project will develop low temperature, vacuum insulated, glass
windows that dramatically reduce the production cost of the currently available
vacuum insulated glass (VIG). Although vacuum insulated glass products are
highly efficient and have been produced for more than 30 years, they have not
found market acceptance due to very high cost and poor seal reliability. Current
high temperature, VIG manufacturing processes are slow and require expensive
vacuum furnaces resulting in high costs. The proposed flexible seal VIG
manufacturing process is a low-temperature production method that is much
faster, thus requiring much lower capital investment, bringing VIG costs much
closer to that of double pane windows. The novel flexible seal design of the
proposed VIG also improves long-term seal reliability by eliminating thermal
expansion stresses experienced by current rigid VIG seals. The performance and
long-term durability of small VIG samples made using the low-temperature seal
were validated. However, scale-up must be demonstrated before successful VIG
development. The current project aims to scale up the proposed VIG manufacturing
process and subject full-scale samples to rigorous accelerated weather,
temperature, impact testing. A secondary seal will also be developed to prevent
it from weather and gas permeation to ensure 50+ years of window
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.