* 2233387
* SBIR Phase II:  Sub-Decadal Weather and Climate Forecast System to Mitigate Risk for Energy and Natural Resource Applications
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Benjamin Toms, INTERSPHERE, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Rajesh Mehta
* 04/30/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project is in potentially reducing the detrimental impacts of weather
and climate on the United States energy and insurance markets. To help the
American economy prepare further in advance for impactful weather and climate
events, this project will develop a forecast system that can translate climate
forecasts into likelihoods of impactful weather events. This information will be
used to inform the energy and insurance markets of financial risk, particularly
within the renewable energy sector where weather and climate control the amount
of energy produced. Renewable energy is produced locally within the United
States, which means this project will improve the nation’s energy security by
informing when and where renewable energy will be most available. Conservative
estimates of the technology’s potential include a $2.5 million per year benefit
to the renewable energy industry, with a similar multi-million dollar impact to
the more general parametric insurance market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will enhance a climate forecast system developed during the company's NSF SBIR
Phase I award that issues climate forecasts up to a decade into the future. The
enhancements include increased forecast accuracy through automated machine
learning model parameter tuning, forecast post-processing, and the translation
of the climate forecasts into realistic weather patterns. The technology uses
machine learning to identify patterns in the land, atmosphere, and ocean that
help determine how the climate system will evolve on timescales of one month to
one decade. These climate forecasts will then be translated into realistic
possibilities of future weather patterns on daily timescales. These daily
weather patterns can then be used to inform renewable energy power production
forecasts and extreme weather event risk for numerous industries, including the
energy sector and the general insurance industry. A key technical benefit to the
proposed forecast system is its high computational scalability, which enables
the rapid creation of climate forecasts that are typically produced using
supercomputers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.