* 2233592
* EAGER/Collaborative Research: CRYO: Engineering Atomically Thin Magnetic Materials for Efficient Solid-State Cooling at Cryogenic Temperatures
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Cheng Gong, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 12/31/2023
* USD 120,000.00

Solid-state cooling schemes can potentially circumvent the use of increasingly
expensive and scarce He3 in cryogenic refrigeration below 1K. He3 is required in
almost all current commercial ultralow refrigeration approaches used in the
operation of quantum computers, sensors and other new technologies. This EArly-
concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project will advance the
fundamental understanding of the heat-release process in ultrathin magnetic
materials and thus provide the guidance to manufacture magnetic quantum
materials for next-generation solid-state refrigeration, promoting the
fundamental physics of heat transport and cooling on the nanoscale and aid in
the development of new classes of cooling technologies. When certain magnetic
materials are magnetized at low temperatures, the removal of the magnetic field
leads to the randomization of once magnetically ordered domains within material.
During the formation or ordering of these of multiple magnetic domains, thermal
energy in the material is absorbed by domains to reorient their magnetizations,
thereby leading to temperature drop (i.e., cooling). Atomically thin magnetic
materials can be engineered to control and enhance these processes and thus
could open up unexplored opportunities for emerging cooling devices. This effort
will support the fundamental research to understand the modifications to these
magnetic quantum materials to enable efficient solid-state cooling, particularly
at cryogenic temperatures such as below 1K. The technology to be developed can
mitigate the existing challenges associated with the worldwide shortage of
helium. High-school students and students of traditionally underrepresented
groups will be exposed to the comprehensive training including quantum materials
fabrication, materials modelling and simulation, cryogenic hardware engineering,
and low-temperature experiments. This research will help to equip these students
with necessary knowledge and expertise as the workforce for the future quantum
science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The magnetocaloric effect holds a
great potential for solid-state refrigeration. However, the magnetocaloric
effect in traditional materials is not strong, but it can be enhanced if a
structural phase change can be concomitant with the magnetic phase transition.
However, inducing these first-order phase transitions have conventionally relied
on the compositional modification of the material through scarce and expensive
rare-earth-elements based compounds. This research proposes to overcome the
knowledge gap in the understanding and control of two-dimensional magnetic
materials for an enhanced magnetocaloric effect. The research team will apply
first-principles materials simulations to understand the magnetism-structure
relationship in two-dimensional magnets, employ experimental synthesis and
processing to engineer two-dimensional magnets, and apply magnetoelectric and
magneto-optical characterizations to quantify the resultant magnetic properties.
The research will elucidate the fundamental relationship between local atomic
structures, crystalline structures and magnetic properties of emerging two-
dimensional magnets, which could provide useful guidance for the design and
optimization of low-dimensional magnetic structures for clean cooling
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.