* 2233286
* SBIR Phase II:  Formulation of a mRNA-Based Therapy for CTLN1 by Inverse Flash NanoPrecipitation
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2025
* Robert Pagels, Optimeos Life Sciences, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Erik Pierstorff
* 06/30/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will be to enhance American and global
healthcare through new technologies enabling clinical translation of gene
therapies. One of the major unmet needs within biotechnology is a delivery
technology that enables gene therapies to reach the desired organ within the
body without raising an immune response. Recent advances have unlocked many
potential treatments for genetic diseases, but their use in the clinic is
hampered by a lack of delivery technologies. This project will validate a new
non-viral platform for this purpose and apply it to commercial use in a rare
disease indication. The project provides a gene replacement therapy for Urea
Cycle Disorder patients, who are currently treated using a combination of drugs
and diet that shows limited effectiveness. Their regimens require up to 40 pills
per day in combination with incredibly strict dietary control to avoid consuming
too much protein. Even still, elevated blood ammonia results in neurological
damage and high neonatal mortality. Caregivers face significant burdens of care
to monitor diet, supplements, and medications. A gene replacement therapy that
provides true disease correction would be transformational for patients and
caregivers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will result in the
development of a gene replacement therapy that can be safely and repeatedly
dosed to patients suffering from the class of rare diseases known as Urea Cycle
Disorders. These patients lack an enzyme of the urea cycle that cannot be
delivered exogenously. An alternative therapeutic approach is to deliver
instructions, in the form of nucleic acids such as mRNA, for cells in the body
to make the missing enzyme. The commercially proven methods of doing this –
lipid nanoparticles and viral vectors – fail in this indication due to toxicity,
immunogenicity, and dosing challenges. The platform developed in this project
provides a means to overcome these limitations using a non-viral, polymer-lipid
hybrid formulation. The scope of the project includes both pharmacology and
toxicology studies in rodent models of the Urea Cycle Disorder Citrullinemia
Type I, that will produce a pre-clinical data package supporting further
development. Successful project execution will include formulation optimization
and pre-clinical demonstration of disease correction (reduced blood ammonia
levels) with a strong safety profile.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.