* 2233320
* SBIR Phase I:  Simulating Demand and Competition for Emerging Transportation Modes
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Alan Walker, ATLANTA ANALYTICS LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 12/31/2023
* USD 268,580.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to advance the state-of-the-art for demand modeling for electric
aircraft by developing a decision support tool that assesses the broad economic,
environmental, and equity impacts that these new modes of transportation will
have on society. The project is motivated by recent advancements in battery
technologies, autonomy, and distributed propulsion that are transforming air
transportation through the development of a new class of electric vertical
takeoff and landing (eVTOL) aircraft. The development of electric aircraft for
longer distances is also in progress and could revitalize and support new
service out of regional airports. The decision support tool can be used by
government agencies, aircraft manufacturers, and other stakeholders to guide
policy and multi-million dollar public and private infrastructure investments in
a way that achieves a balance between economic, environmental, and equity
impacts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project will push the frontiers
in modeling demand for new transportation modes, simultaneously addressing
competition with ground modes, competitive pricing, and stimulated demand. The
project focuses on examining how to model competition between air and ground
transportation for distances between 50 and 350 miles where air travel has not
been economically feasible in the past. This project focuses on three unproven,
high-impact innovations. The first is the design of a scalable, demand
simulation platform for air travel that includes distances in which the new
aircraft are expected to operate. The second is the development of algorithms
that use location-based data to identify the movement of current passengers
between airport pairs and to predict demand stimulation. The third is the use of
machine learning to calibrate air transportation networks for competitive
marketplaces that have hundreds of inputs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.