* 2233023
* SBIR Phase II:  An innovative calibration software to suppress torque ripple and improve performance of electric motors.
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2025
* Matthew Piccoli, IQInetics Technologies Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ela Mirowski
* 03/31/2025
* USD 989,878.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project will improve the electric motor market and provide the
competitive advantage to the US in mobile robotic applications. Electromagnetic
flaws in brushless direct current (DC) motors and sensorless controllers have
severely limited the performance of mobile robots and stymied the potential
growth of the industry. High performance servo motors and motor controllers do
exist, but they are too heavy, large, and expensive to be incorporated into many
robotic applications, particularly mobile robots. By combining a unique hardware
design with a software solution to eliminate intrinsic hardware problems, this
project will result in an ultra-compact, high performance, and low-cost electric
servomotor. The drone industry is expected to be the first to benefit from the
proposed solution, as many commercial and defense drone companies are in need of
industrial-grade propulsion components. A superior propulsion solution will
accelerate the mass adoption of drones and other mobile
robots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project seeks to create the next generation of drone propulsion
technology: an innovative drone motor and controller. Currently, drone companies
are forced to use hobby-grade, sensorless motors and controllers, which suffer
from poor performance and reliability issues. The Phase II project is rooted in
the results obtained during Phase I activities, which led to the development of
a calibration suite and a novel motor design. Phase I laid the foundation for
creating an ultra-compact, high-performance motor and controller solution that
is ideal for drone propulsion. The novel hardware design minimizes mass and
production costs and, when combined with the calibration suite and angle
compensation algorithm, the solution offers a substantial enhancement in
propulsion efficiency, controllability, and reliability. The team will test its
product with industrial drone manufacturers to verify its ability to increase
vehicle flight time, enhance maneuverability, and minimize critical vehicle
failures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.