* 2233415
* BRC-BIO: Investigating ecophysiological strategies and drought tolerance of temperate lianas
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Dianne Pater, Vassar College
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 05/31/2026
* USD 464,700.00

The concept of global change encompasses not only the direct alteration of the
Earth’s climate and atmosphere, but also other human-driven mechanisms which
alter the biosphere. Land transformation, overexploitation of natural
populations, and exotic species invasions are driving global changes that impact
biodiversity and quality of life. Woody vines, known as lianas, are structural
parasites that use the structure of nearby trees to gain access to the sunlit
canopy and can cause damage or death to the underlying trees. Understanding how
these plants access resources such as light and water can inform strategies to
control their spread. This project will compare physiological processes, such as
photosynthesis and hydraulics, of invasive and native woody vines to
characterize traits that contribute to their successful establishment in
forested areas. This research will enhance the research skills of undergraduate
students via its integration into a plant physiology class and independent
research projects at Vassar College, a primarily undergraduate institution.
Students involved in the project will do scientific communication outreach to
local schools, allowing the students to improve communication skills and
improving access to science and its applications at the K-12 level. Research
sites will include identified urban forests of Poughkeepsie, NY to inform
restoration and conservation plans in large city and town parks. This project
will include presentations to local community groups, as well as city parks and
planning departments, to encourage community involvement with invasive species
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global ecosystems are under pressure from many
factors including climate change, habitat loss and fragmentation, and biological
invasion. As non-native plant species compete with native species for resources,
understanding their physiology can improve predictions of competition and
environmental responses to inform conservation decisions. Introduced temperate
lianas, such as Ampelopsis brevipedunculata (porcelain berry) and Celastrus
orbiculatus (Asiatic bittersweet), have been identified as invasive species of
concern in the eastern United States. Since they require proximity to trees in
order to access the canopy, lianas often germinate in the lower light
intensities of the forest understory and must respond quickly to available light
to maximize growth. Understory light occurs in patches of intermittent duration
and varied size, so maintaining photosynthetic assimilation rates and water use
efficiency during these sunflecks is essential for success. The objectives of
this proposal are three-fold: 1) to compare photosynthetic and morphological
characteristics of competing native and non-native lianas under varied light
conditions, 2) quantify the growth traits, biomass allocation, anatomy, and
hydraulics of the study species, and 3) investigate light acquisition and
hydraulic strategies of these plants under water deficit to simulate climate
change scenarios. Complementary measurements of photosynthetic assimilation,
alongside rapid chlorophyll fluorescence and stomatal conductance measurements,
will allow the researchers to characterize several traits, including maximum
rates of electron transport and carbon assimilation, conductance of CO2 through
the stomata and into the leaf, and non-photochemical quenching. Studies of the
plants’ anatomy and hydraulics will improve understanding of the different
species’ responses to variable environmental
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.