* 2233272
* STTR Phase I:  Manufacturing nickel and cobalt-free cathodes for high-energy and low-cost lithium-ion batteries
* TIP,TI
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Feng Lin, FERMI ENERGY, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 02/29/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
Phase I project is to facilitate the adoption of battery electric vehicles in
the US by securing the supply chain, reducing battery cathode cost, and
enhancing US-innovated battery manufacturing. This project will address the
several challenges facing the US battery industry. First, the state-of-the-art
lithium-ion battery cathode materials use scarce and expensive elements, such as
cobalt and nickel. Second, the US battery manufacturing capability needs to be
improved in order to meet the rapidly growing demand, cathode materials
production is especially important. Third, current lithium-ion battery cathode
manufacturing involves costly liquid and gaseous waste management. The proposed
technology will create fundamentally new ways to produce next-generation
cathodes for American electric vehicles. This project can significantly impact
the battery field since the proposed new cathode technology is expected to
result in a major cost reduction per electric vehicle battery pack. Advances in
novel cathode chemistries and manufacturing processes offer new opportunities
for the US to establish the leadership in cathode innovation and manufacturing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a fundamentally disruptive
technology to enable the use of low-cost, cobalt- and nickel-free oxide cathodes
in high-energy lithium-ion batteries. The dry manufacturing technology will be
uniquely combined with new materials development to enable stable battery
cycling with a 700 Wh/kg specific energy at the cathode materials level. The
technology is compatible with mainstream lithium-ion electrolytes and anodes,
which makes full-cell integration feasible and practical at the commercial
scale. The research and development objectives include: (1) design,
manufacturing, and characterization of new cobalt- and nickel-free oxide cathode
chemistries with abundant and low-cost elements, (2) develop cathode electrodes
with controllable physical properties based on an all-dry electrode preparation
process, and (3) integrate the graphite anode and electrochemical measurements
under various practical testing conditions. This project proposes to combine
materials synthesis and electrode powder mixing and to avoid the costly
materials storage and handling between cathode powder production and cathode
electrode manufacturing. The successful development of the technology will
enable low-cost, high-energy, dry-processed, and US-manufactured battery
cathodes for more affordable and reliable electric vehicle
batteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.