* 2233136
* RAPID: Low-cost, Lightweight Instrument for In Situ Measurements of Water Vapor on High-Altitude Balloons
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Darin Toohey, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 07/31/2024
* USD 189,543.00

This award supports development of a hygrometer, or water vapor sensor, for use
in the tropical tropopause layer (TTL), the transition zone between the
troposphere (the domain of clouds and precipitation) and the stratosphere (the
cold and dry region above it which contains the ozone layer). TTL water vapor is
of interest for several reasons including its role in the formation of cirrus
clouds, which have a strong effect on earth's radiative energy balance, and the
fact that much of the water vapor in the stratosphere enters through the TTL.
The hygrometer developed under this award is intended for use in an instrument
package previously developed under AGS-1643022 called RACHuTS, for Reel-down
Aerosol Cloud Humidity and Temperature Sensor. RACHuTS is a shoebox-size package
weighing less than 2kg which is raised and lowered on a 2km nylon cable attached
to the gondola of a research balloon. RACHuTS is intended to study the formation
of cirrus clouds, collecting the temperature, humidity, and cloud particle
observations needed to observe the formation of cirrus clouds due to the
supersaturation of ambient air. The hygrometer replaces the FLASH-B hygrometer
originally used for RACHuTS, which is no longer
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The requirements for the hygrometer are quite
challenging as it has to measure water vapor over a range of 2 to 500 parts per
million with a resolution less than 5% over the whole range and a response time
of one second. It also has to operate unattended in the TTL environment for 2-3
months. In order to fit the RACHuTS package it has to weigh less than 700 grams
and have an average power consumption less than 3 watts. The hygrometer
developed in this project uses wavelength modulation spectroscopy to meet these
challenges, taking advantage of a distributed feedback infrared laser developed
for telecommunications, an open multi-pass Herriott cell, and low-cost
microcontrollers marketed to hobbiests. The hygrometer can be developed quickly
because it is similar to existing hygrometers including the University of
Colorado Second Generation Laser Hygrometer (CLH-2). The project includes a test
flight on a balloon launched in 2023, and the hygrometer should be available in
time for use in the 2024 deployment of the Strateole-2 long-duration ballooning
campaign.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has scientific broader impacts due to
the value of RACHuTS observations for addressing a variety of questions
regarding TTL processes. In addition, work under this award fosters the
development of a new class of low-cost, lightweight instruments that can be used
in a variety of configurations and applications. Potential applications include
specialized "dropsondes" released from "hurricane hunter" aircraft and smaller,
lower sensitivity versions for use in citizen science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.