* 2233350
* Conference: The Role of Mechanosensation in Robust Movement Control
* BIO,IOS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Hilary Katz, Western Kentucky University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 09/30/2023
* USD 9,286.00

This award funds a symposium at the January 2023 annual meeting of the Society
for Integrative and Comparative Biology (SICB) that explores how mechanical
sensors are integrated into movement control systems and impact behavioral
performance. Many animals exhibit extraordinarily predictable behaviors even in
the face of extreme external disruptions. What sensory signals do these
organisms receive that allow them to consistently coordinate their motor
responses in spite of these disturbances? The symposium will examine a variety
of ideas regarding the role of mechanosensation in animal behavior and encourage
researchers working across organisms to synthesize ideas and develop a shared
research agenda for the field. The symposium features a diverse array of
speakers from different types of institutions that represent multiple career
stages, and their talks and published articles will collectively cover
mechanosensation in vertebrate and invertebrate animals, as well as robotic
“organisms.” In addition to the main symposium talks, a scheduled complementary
session will feature student speakers, who will join discussions with symposium
participants during a working lunch meeting. The symposium speakers will
contribute articles for a special issue of the SICB journal, Integrative and
Comparative Biology. The symposium organizers are arranging a lightning talk
series in collaboration with Longhorn TIES (Transition, Inclusion, Empower,
Success), a program at The University of Texas at Austin (UT Austin) dedicated
to supporting students who identify as being on the autism spectrum or
neurodiverse. The goal of this outreach event is to introduce the students to a
diverse group of scientists studying a range of scientific questions related to
the Biological Sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on mechanosensation has
recently progressed rapidly, and this timely symposium brings together
researchers to compare and contrast their different systems, share experimental
advice and methods, and inspire collaborative, cross-species approaches to
understanding the role of mechanosensation in movement control systems. The
major goals of the symposium are to encourage a comparative approach to
understanding how mechanosensors are incorporated in organismal control systems,
and to develop an evolutionary approach to understanding the basic biology of
mechanosensors, especially considering the potential for analogous (or
homologous) sensor structure and function across taxa. It is hoped that the
symposium participants will develop a shared research agenda for the field and
that participation in the symposium will collectively inspire researchers to
take on collaborative projects that include species outside of their chosen
model system and that cross biological scales. Symposium results will be
disseminated through publication in the SICB journal, Integrative and
Comparative Biology, and the outreach event to students at the University of
Texas Austin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.