* 2233542
* SBIR Phase II:  Enhanced Lithium Isotope Separation
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Gordon Jarvinen, MOLTEN SALT SOLUTIONS, LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ela Mirowski
* 04/30/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project is a new domestic commercial source of enriched lithium
isotopes. The U.S. nuclear power industry requires enriched lithium-7 hydroxide
to prevent corrosion in its present fleet of pressurized water reactors.
Currently, this strategic material is supplied outside the U.S. and recent
supply disruptions jeopardize 20% of the U.S. electrical generation capability.
Longer term, the development of safer, lower-impact, new technologies for
nuclear power generation is critical to meet the U.S. and global goals of
reducing carbon emissions. One of the most promising technologies, molten salt
reactors, will require commercial production of large quantities of enriched
lithium-7. Even longer term, many of the fusion energy technologies in
development will require enriched lithium-6. The planned production of lithium
isotopes will enable the development and commercialization of safer, lower-
impact nuclear energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovative
Research Phase II project proposes the implementation of a liquid/liquid
extraction method for lithium enrichment in a pilot-scale production system. To
date, this type of extraction has not been employed for commercial lithium
isotope enrichment. The Phase II work will result in the design of the first
commercial-scale production process. The innovative approach to lithium isotope
enrichment will also have applicability in the purification of other stable
isotopes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.