* 2233133
* SBIR Phase I:  Computer Aided Design and Simulation Software for Origami
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Amanda Ghassaei, FORM FINDING STUDIO LLC
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 06/30/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to enable widespread adoption of origami design principles in
industry to create manufacturing efficiencies and promote technological
innovation. Origami-inspired engineering has applications across virtually all
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) fields, yet existing
computer-aided design (CAD) tools are extremely limited in their ability to
model folded geometries. This Phase I project and subsequent commercialization
effort will fill a gap in the market by creating powerful and user-friendly
software to model folding, with target customers spanning a broad range of
industries: product design, architecture, packaging, papercraft, education,
manufacturing, and materials engineering. Academic publications resulting from
the research and development conducted during this project will advance
fundamental knowledge of the mathematics of folding. Furthermore, this work
seeks to create positive educational impacts through ongoing collaborations with
K-12 STEM educators to create engaging curricula in geometry, digital design,
and manufacturing through papercraft.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I
project will create an intelligent software system that facilitates the design
and simulation of folded geometries via powerful origami editing techniques
grounded in fundamental research. The Phase I research and development builds on
the teamâ€™s prior work on origami design algorithms and efficient origami
simulation methods to establish a novel design framework that supports intuitive
editing of folded geometry by novice users. A particular focus of the project is
the under-explored domain of curved crease origami, which promises new
opportunities for high-performance materials engineering and expressive design.
Phase I research studies will investigate key open research problems
underpinning the CAD system; this work will establish efficient methods and
mathematical bounds for critical origami design algorithms to be implemented by
the software system. Primary technical hurdles of the Phase I project include:
architecting a novel constraint management system to support interactive editing
of origami designs, establishing novel computational design algorithms for
curved crease origami, and developing core data structures and geometry
processing methods to be used by the CAD system. Throughout Phase I, the team
will work with customers and strategic partners to identify specific use cases
of folding in key vertical markets, develop a Minimum Viable Product (MVP)
software application, and evaluate technical progress in terms of its commercial
potential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.