* 2233887
* A scalable integrated multi-modal single cell analysis framework for gene regulatory and cell-cell interaction networks
* BIO,DBI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Srinivas Aluru, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Gao
* 07/31/2026
* USD 345,819.00

Advances in single cell technologies for high-throughput measurement of
biological molecules is revolutionizing the study of biology and medicine. While
computational tools for various tasks arising in single cell analysis have been
developed, they often lack the ability to handle hundreds of datasets and/or
millions of cells due to both computer memory and run-time constraints. This
project addresses the compelling need for the development of computational
methods and software for large scale data analysis, arising due to the rapid
accumulation of single cell datasets in public repositories, and the need for
analyzing them to fully unravel the complexity of biological systems. The
project will lead to novel methods for integrated analysis of multiple types of
single cell data, using such data for building biological networks and
understanding inter-cellular communication, and development of multiple software
products for broader adoption. The project team will include students who will
gain valuable experience in interdisciplinary research. Use of software tools
developed under the project will be taught at training workshops under the
Atlanta Single Cell Omics and Analytics Initiative (https://ascomai.org/), which
serves the single cell research communities of Georgia Tech, Emory University,
and the Morehouse School of Medicine. The project will include significant
involvement of underrepresented individuals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will lead to the development of scalable, memory-efficient algorithms and high-
performance parallel implementations for large-scale single cell analysis
leveraging the inherent parallelism in a multi-socket, multi-core
server/workstation that is now commonplace. The problems targeted include 1)
single- and multi-modal integration, 2) clustering of single cell RNA-sequencing
and single cell ATAC-sequencing data from disparate sources, 3) construction of
gene regulatory networks from large-scale integrated multi-modal single cell
data, and 4) joint inference of intra-cell gene regulatory networks and cell-
cell interaction networks. The research will be validated using several case
studies, simulated and real-world benchmark data, and known gold standard
benchmarks. The research products will be made available as standalone software
tools that will be able to run seamlessly from laptops to workstations to high-
end shared memory servers, efficiently exploiting all available resources to
push the scale of datasets that can be analyzed. Results of the project will be
made available at https://faculty.cc.gatech.edu/~saluru/single-cell and software
products will be released as open source on Github at
https://github.com/AluruLab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.