* 2233892
* Theoretical Spectroscopy and Thermodynamics of Correlated Electron Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Kristjan Haule, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 06/30/2026
* USD 270,001.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research aimed at
developing new computational tools and applying them to understand and predict
properties of complex materials which show prominent competition of quantum
effects such as magnetism, superconductivity, and "electronic correlation".
While much progress has been made in understanding and accurately predicting
properties of simple materials such as silicon or aluminum, in which electrons
can be described as nearly free and independent of other electrons, materials
exhibiting correlated electronic behavior, where the behavior of one electron is
strongly dependent on the behavior of other electrons, are much harder to
describe using existing computational tools. This project focuses on the
development of new algorithms and software packages for such materials. In
particular, the PI and his team will model and predict electronic properties of
a class of superconductors, in which electricity can flow without any energy
loss below a certain temperature, and which exhibit correlated electronic
behavior and complex magnetic properties. The tools and codes developed in this
project can allow computational materials scientists to theoretically
characterize other quantum materials that are fundamental to the development of
many modern technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports the
training and mentorship of junior researchers by contributing to their career
advancement and to the scientific workforce development. In addition, the
algorithms and computer codes developed during the project will be freely shared
with the materials science community through an existing open-source software
package and enable theory-assisted materials design and
discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports theoretical research aimed at developing new ab-initio
computational tools and applying them to understand and predict properties of
complex materials which show prominent competition of quantum effects such as
electron correlation, magnetism, and superconductivity. One of the goals of this
project is to develop the next generation cluster-Dynamical Mean Field Theory
methods, which are expected to show less severe fermionic sign problem, and
hence enable prediction of trends in correlated superconducting cuprates and
nickelates. A second goal of the project is to extend the recently developed
Variational Diagrammatic Monte Carlo method, which can be solved numerically
exactly for the uniform electron gas problem, to an ab-initio setting and apply
it to investigate electronic properties of conventional superconductors such as
Li, Al, and solid hydrogen under extreme pressure, without the need for
phenomenological parameters. The tools and codes developed in this project will
allow one to theoretically characterize complex materials, which will give
improved scientific understanding of quantum many-body phenomena and will
provide a basis for harnessing many-body effects to develop functional materials
including strong magnets and novel superconductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award also supports the training and mentorship of junior researchers by
contributing to their career advancement and to the scientific workforce
development. In addition, the algorithms and computer codes developed during the
project will be freely shared with the materials science community through an
existing open-source software package and enable theory-assisted materials
design and discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.