* 2233808
* CCF Core: Small: Hardware/Software Co-Design for Sustainability at the Edge
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Hai Li, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 10/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

Due to the wide proliferation of cloud and now edge servers, the development of
sustainable acceleration methods for edge and cloud computing and artificial
intelligence (AI) acceleration is beneficial to society broadly and the computer
science community, in particular. Reducing carbon and methane emissions is
important to reaching environmental goals for reducing warming for which targets
of 2030 and 2050 have been set. This project tackles the broader implications of
the growing popularity of edge and cloud computing for executing AI to establish
a sustainable computing system design methodology beyond pure energy efficiency.
Unlike solely energy-efficient designs that focus on reducing power consumption
and carbon emissions as a by-product, this project will build a
hardware/software co-design framework to generate the optimal hardware and
algorithm designs that meet specific constraints of functionality, performance,
sustainability, and other system requirements. The framework will guide future
sustainable hardware design. Towards this goal, the proposed framework engages
holistic co-design efforts across four levels - modeling, algorithm, scheduling,
and hardware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By introducing new synergies between
computing paradigms and emerging AI applications, the outcomes of this research
will benefit the entire AI industry, from hardware development to algorithm
design and the applications for the end-users. The proposed co-design framework
will be the first research in the community to build holistically sustainable AI
systems which are recently recognized as emerging in importance. The success of
this project will pave the road for future sustainable computing system design.
The educational efforts aim at cultivating students' interests in the study of
sustainable computing, contemporary computer architecture, and artificial
intelligence. The existing curricula of computer organization, algorithms, and
computing systems will be enhanced by the interdisciplinary research topics on
sustainable computing, edge computing, and machine learning, as well as the
hands-on experiences in building the simulation prototypes. Special attention
will be given to recruiting underrepresented groups and enriching students√≠
study experiences through new education forums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is funded by funds allocated to Design for Sustainable Computing (NSF
22-060)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.