* 2233251
* BRC-BIO: Analyzing the role of Drosophila variant Polycomb Repressive Complexes in  developmental gene transcription
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Janel Cabrera, Emmanuel College
* Standard Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 05/31/2026
* USD 447,650.00

Multicellular organisms are composed of individual cells that function
distinctly, due to the regulation of gene expression during development.
Developmental gene regulation is largely made possible by many protein complexes
that turn genes on or off at appropriate developmental windows. An important
example is the Polycomb Repressive Complex, which turns off a specific set of
developmental genes. How this complex selects the correct genes to silence
during early development is still unknown. This project will utilize the fruit
fly as model organism to study the role of this silencing complex in
orchestrating developmental gene expression. Discovering the mechanism by which
Polycomb Repressive Complexes silence genes in the fruit fly will inform our
understanding of development in mammals. Another significant goal of this
project is to increase the participation of persons traditionally excluded
because of their ethnicity or race (PEERs) in undergraduate research experiences
at Emmanuel College. Student researchers will use genetic, molecular, and
biochemical techniques to address the aims of this project. Collaborations with
researchers from Harvard Medical School and Brandeis University will facilitate
engagement of PEER undergraduate students with the broader scientific community.
The goal is to inspire larger numbers of PEER students to pursue careers in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multicellular development is governed by the
deployment of cell-type specific transcriptional programming, in which a single
genome is utilized distinctly over time and space as cells multiply and
specialize. This phenomenon is achieved by the precise coordination of gene
expression that initiates the differentiation of the different cell types of an
organism. Chromatin regulatory factors have been found to be essential for
regulation of developmental transcriptional programming however the mechanism
behind how these factors coordinate gene expression during embryonic development
remains unclear. One highly conserved chromatin regulatory system that plays a
central role in developmental patterning and cell differentiation includes the
Polycomb Group (PcG) proteins. These proteins are typically found in two
distinct types of Polycomb Repressive Complexes (PRCs): PRC1 and PRC2. The PI's
lab recently identified variant PRC1 (vPRC1) complexes in Drosophila that have
strong modular conservation with mammalian complexes, suggesting an ancient
functional diversity. The goal of this work is to understand the role of vPRC1
complexes in coordinating the cell-type specific transcription critical for
normal development. In this project, undergraduate student scientists will
functionally characterize one of the vPRC1 complexes using a variety of methods,
including crosslinking, tandem affinity purification, and integrated analysis of
protein partners and DNA binding sites, in parallel with functional genetic
approaches to dissect the changes in protein complexes during normal development
in Drosophila. Successful completion of this proposal will provide mechanistic
details for function of a variant PRC1 complex in developmental gene regulation.
Resulting insights will prove useful for future analyses in mammalian
cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.