* 2233135
* SBIR Phase I:  Comfortable, Easy-to-Insert Hearing Protection Earplug
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2024
* Marc Ramsey, RAPA TECHNOLOGIES LLC
* Standard Grant
* Edward Chinchoy
* 06/30/2024
* USD 274,976.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is a novel hearing protection device which
reduces the societal cost of noise induced hearing loss. Noise induced hearing
loss is the one of the most prevalent occupational injuries in both US industry
and the military, affecting more than 10 million workers at a total preventable
economic cost exceeding $100 billion. Most employers rely primarily on personal
hearing protection devices to limit exposure on a sustained basis. However,
issues limit their real-world performance and leave a majority of wearers with
sub optimal protection. Up to 80% of workers wear hearing protection in an
inconsistent manner which significantly reduces their effectiveness. This
project aims to develop a novel passive hearing protection device which
significantly increases hearing protection by incorporating a pass-through
communications channel in a form factor that enables proper insertion, comfort,
and convenience, and is suitable for long term use and compliance. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I project will
develop an earplug that incorporates a novel geometric design and materials to
provide unique, tailored physical and acoustic properties. The design
significantly increases sound reduction while preserving frequency balance and
speech intelligibility to accommodate pass-through communications, in a form
factor that enables greater comfort and convenience than traditional devices.
Theoretical modelling of sound attenuation will be translated into prototypes
that demonstrate performance measures in laboratory test fixtures, followed by a
patient validation study. The project aims to demonstrate that the companyâ€™s new
ear plug provides superior sound protection of up to 40 dB suppression while
enabling improved communication. Incorporation of attributes preferred by users
enables greater adoption compared to existing designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.