* 2233481
* STTR Phase II:  Development of Autocalibration Techniques to Enable Commercial Scale-up of Software-based Vibration Compensation for 3D Printers
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Chinedum Okwudire, S2A TECHNOLOGIES LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ela Mirowski
* 03/31/2025
* USD 999,676.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
Phase II project is to increase the productivity of manufacturing machines at
low cost through software improvements, without sacrificing quality. The project
is specifically motivated by 3D printing, an $11 billion and rapidly growing
industry within advanced manufacturing that is critical to national security,
supply chain resiliency, and economic prosperity. The adoption of 3D printing
for mainstream manufacturing is often hindered by the low speed of 3D printers.
A major hindrance to high-speed 3D printing is vibration, which causes loss of
quality at high-speed operation. This project seeks to develop a low-cost,
software-based approach for mitigating the vibration of 3D printers. A major
impediment to the effectiveness of the proposed software solution is the need
for accurate calibration of the changing vibration behavior of 3D printers under
varying operating conditions. This project will develop a set of automatic
calibration techniques to address this impediment. The software algorithms
developed through this project will not only benefit 3D printing but would also
apply to a wide range of advanced manufacturing machines, like machine tools and
robots, whose speed and accuracy are often limited by vibration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer Phase II project
seeks to develop a suite of automatic calibration techniques to enable a
proprietary vibration compensation algorithm to adapt to frequent changes in
vibration behavior of 3D printers that occur in the field. To achieve this goal,
three technical objectives will be pursued. The first technical objective will
involve the development of a sensor-less auto calibration technique that
continuously updates the calibration of 3D printers whose moving mass and
vibration behavior changes as material is being deposited on the print bed. The
second technical objective will focus on the development of a sensor-based,
autocalibration technique that uses shallow machine learning to continuously
fine-tune the calibration maps of 3D printers with onboard accelerometers. The
third technical objective will involve the development of a sensor-based
autocalibration-as-a-service technique primarily for 3D printers that do not
have onboard accelerometers. To achieve these objectives, research is needed to
overcome technical hurdles that hinder the accuracy and computational efficiency
of the proposed auto-calibration approaches. The intellectual merit of this
project is in developing science-based approaches that overcome the technical
hurdles and their associated risks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.