* 2233680
* SBIR Phase II:  High-Resolution Image Segmentation for Natural Resource Management
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2025
* Ross Davison, COMON SOLUTIONS LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Ela Mirowski
* 03/31/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

The commercial/broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project is to provide economic benefits, health advantages, and
improved natural disaster response readiness to the USA. Historically, natural
resource and conservation organizations have had difficulties mapping their
targeted ecosystems, whether due to high costs of manual surveys or poor
resolution of imaging technologies. Annually, organizations spend more than $27
billion on geospatial monitoring and analysis. This Phase II project will
decrease the cost of ecosystem mapping while increasing resolution, allowing for
the best quality vegetation health tracking available. Additionally, this
project will result in a 50-90% reduction in work hours for natural resource
mapping. By saving time, stakeholders can allocate effort to other aspects of
natural resource management. By mapping land use over time, managers and
conservationists can track land changes and determine if currently-implemented
programs are having intended impacts on the ecosystem. This project will also
improve monitoring and managing of vegetation across watersheds that provide
roughly 80% of US drinking water - systems where water quality relies on healthy
and biodiverse vegetation to filter pollutants. Lastly, this project will
improve the ability of government agencies to rapidly monitor environmental
impacts of natural disasters and inform responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research Phase II project will develop a comprehensive
software system that can provide unparalleled spectral and spatial detail on
diverse landscape scenes. Compared to current labor-intensive field testing,
this project’s outputs will offer scene characterization at comparable, or
better, levels of detail, while surmounting the time, cost, and accessibility
constraints that have historically precluded comprehensive and repetitive
monitoring. Accomplishment of these Phase II goals will yield a user-friendly
land cover mapping system that will enable high-resolution environmental
monitoring. System outputs on population dynamics, climate change-induced
vegetation shifts, and disease assessments can facilitate data-driven decision-
making for precision ecosystem management and climate action. The framework of
the innovation consists of three main components: 1) image pre-processing and
alteration, 2) image segmentation, and 3) resolution recovery. This approach
provides rapid replicability between ecosystem types and versatile scalability
due to processing efficiency, while providing currently unavailable ecosystem
health indicators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.