* 2233560
* SBIR Phase I:  Consolidated platform to engineer and produce novel biopolymers for improved biologics
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Kamesh Narasimhan, PEARL BIO, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 01/31/2024
* USD 274,462.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase I project is the development of a next generation
biomanufacturing platform that could redefine the nature of protein building
blocks and become a major driver of US innovation and economic growth. By
engineering new microbial organisms and their associated cellular machinery,
this technology may enable the incorporation of diverse, non-native components
into proteins, creating a new class of biological materials for applications in
therapeutic development, biomaterial development, and other areas of biomedical
research. These newly designed proteins can be specifically engineered to add
desired functionalities, leading to intelligent design of novel products in the
biomedical field. This Phase I project seeks to address the limitations of
current approaches in this field, creating a consolidated platform able to
incorporate synthetic starting materials, and characterizing how these
modifications impact microbial cell growth and fitness. These advances may
establish a new paradigm for design and production of next-generation products
with enhanced efficacy and functionalities, driving the development of new
therapeutics and materials for transformative societal, medical, and economic
benefit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will address major
feasibility challenges in the development of a consolidated platform for
synthesis of synthetic biopolymers containing multiple, distinct synthetic
chemistries endowing novel chemical and biophysical functionality. Efforts to
expand the genetic code have shown that the natural translation system is
capable of selectively incorporating a wide range of synthetic amino acids
(sAAs). However, several roadblocks have substantially limited the field to only
one or a few instances of site-specific incorporation of sAAs. These include:
biological restrictions to altering ribosome sequence, poor efficiencies of
orthogonal translation systems for sAA incorporation, and unavailable open
codons that have constrained biopolymer synthesis to tag-and-modify approaches
or simple protein decorations. This project seeks to address these challenges in
bringing this innovation to market by combining a genomically recoded organism
containing engineered translation machinery with Ribo-T to enable the production
of synthetic biopolymers with synthetic monomers. Additionally, this project
aims to establish the technical capabilities of encoding two distinct sAAs into
a single polymer. Together, these Phase I goals will advance a biomaterials
platform to produce synthetic biopolymers with multiple synthetic chemistries to
de-risk a path toward novel polymer biologics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.