* 2233768
* EAGER: Strengthening Traineeships and Research Opportunities for Next Generation Geoscientists at MSIs (STRONG at MSIs)
* GEO,RISE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Samuel Moore, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,958.00

The Strengthening Traineeships and Research Opportunities for Next Generation
Geoscientists (STRONG) project will provide training for BIPOC (Black,
Indigenous, and People of Color) and allied early career faculty on how to
strengthen traineeship and research opportunities for next generation
geoscientists from Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs). Ten BIPOC and allied
Geoscience Faculty of the Future (GEOFFs) will participate in training in
preparation to mentor and train MSI STEM (science, technology, engineering,
mathematics) students to thrive in geoscience graduate programs at research-
intensive universities. MSI STEM students thriving and not just being retained
in graduate programs will lead to more of these students having healthy mindsets
about pursuing research careers in support of the national interest of a diverse
geoscience workforce. The project seeks to address the issues of equitable
pathways to graduate geoscience programs for MSI STEM students, the mindset of
faculty regarding the quality of MSI STEM students for research assistantships,
and the well-being and preparedness of BIPOC and allied early career faculty to
persist in the academy to mentor and train MSI STEM
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to close the knowledge
gap of how to have MSI STEM students and BIPOC and allied early career
geoscience faculty and researchers thrive in geoscience departments at research
intensive universities. The method will involve training of early career faculty
in how to be inclusive and intentional in their identification of MSI STEM
students for graduate research work, how to be intentional in their training of
the students to be collaborators on their research, and how to present inclusive
curriculum in associated classroom activities. Geoscience faculty of the future
(GEOFF) will be trained by experienced geoscience faculty who serve as trainers
with the National Association of Geoscience Teachers. A summer research training
experience (RTX) prepared by and implemented by the early career faculty for the
ten MSI STEM students will serve as a field experience for the early career
faculty to practice their research collaboration training and mentoring. Each
GEOFF participant will contribute their expertise to the development and
delivery of training modules. GEOFF will support each other up to, during, and
after the practicum via participation in a research coordination network and
participation on a committee for lessons on equitable admissions and retention
in graduate programs. Training BIPOC and allied early career faculty to be
inclusive geoscience leaders has the potential to imbed inclusive geoscience
leadership into departments across the country and to make inclusion business-
as-usual over the 20 to 30 years of the careers of the inclusive leaders. We
expect that other faculty in the departments of the GEOFFs observing the success
of MSI STEM students in contributing to research will develop more favorable
mindsets of the ability of MSI STEM majors to contribute to their lab and
complete a rigorous graduate program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.