* 2233467
* BRC-BIO: Flexible traits and functional trade-offs: an integrated analysis of gastrointestinal plasticity in mammals
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Bryan McLean, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 02/28/2026
* USD 502,203.00

Information on the phenotypic traits of organisms (their morphological,
physiological, and behavioral properties) informs understanding of ecological
processes, evolutionary diversification, and responses of species to
environmental change. However, existing trait databases are not representative
of the geographic and functional diversity within most taxonomic groups. This is
especially true for soft tissue structures related to diet and energy balance in
mammals. This BRC-BIO project takes a field- and laboratory-based approach to
advance knowledge of gastrointestinal (GI) tract variation in small-bodied
mammals inhabiting seasonal environments of the Appalachian Mountains of eastern
North America. The award funds seasonal field collections of small mammals at
three National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) sites, generation of a
comprehensive suite of phenotypic measurements from the GI tract, and new
dietary analyses that will establish understanding of how these species optimize
nutrient acquisition from food resources that vary seasonally, in support of
survival and reproduction. The project will build important research and
training capacity for the PI, and achieve broader impact by creating unique
training opportunities in fieldwork and biodiversity data analysis for a
racially and culturally diverse group of undergraduate students, as well as by
facilitating new GI-themed community outreach events.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organismal responses to global change are mediated by
interactions between phenotypic traits and the environments in which populations
occur. Accurately predicting these responses requires individual level
measurements of traits whose form-function relationships are well-understood.
The purpose of this BRC-BIO project is to advance knowledge of gastrointestinal
(GI) tract form, function, and plasticity in small mammals inhabiting seasonal
environments. The GI tract is a key organ system tasked with optimizing
energetic balance around seasonally-dynamic resource bases. However, knowledge
of how and why GI morphology varies in wild populations and in relation to diet
and energy requirements remains fragmentary. This project will generate new,
high-resolution data on small mammal diet and link these with macro- and
microscopic GI proxies to establish robust form-function relationships and
illuminate pathways of mammalian response to changing resource availability.
These relationships will be explored within and among three species over space
(multiple NEON sites in the Appalachian Mountains) and time (3 years and all
seasons). The project will allow the PI to build critical research capacity by
expanding inquiry of soft tissue functional traits and integrating museum
specimens with multiple NEON data streams. It will also establish a biodiversity
data literacy course and lab training opportunities that will engage diverse
undergraduates in authentic research and field experiences and expedite their
recruitment into STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.