* 2233508
* SBIR Phase II:  Authoring Assistance via Contextual Semantic Labeling
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2025
* Gregory Senay, DOCUGAMI, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Parvathi Chundi
* 05/31/2025
* USD 998,314.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project comes from extracting meaningful, useful,
specific information from “dark data.” Dark data are the countless documents
companies produce and receive, which contain unused information – usually
because they are in formats that computers do not understand. Many of these
documents do not even contain accessible text: only pictures of text. Word-
processing documents and emails do have text, but no information about what the
text is. Computers can easily tell that “10/05/2022” is a date, but knowing it
is the date a particular agreement starts or ends (or something else) is needed
to make it useful. This project uses a range of artificial intelligence (AI)
techniques that work in real time while people are writing new documents or
extracting data from old documents. The AI learns quickly from examples, finds
patterns across similar documents, and uses that learning to save the user from
having to search for items again and again in varying contexts. This saves a lot
of tedious work and reduces errors. The extracted information helps companies
understand, analyze, and make business decisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase II project identifies and
extracts useful information items from long natural language documents,
especially contracts and agreements. The technology identifies items much more
specifically than typical extraction methods; for example, not only as person,
organization, or place names, but as to what role each plays. Likewise,
addresses, dates, money amounts, and other data items only become useful when
you know what they’re for. This is a valuable focus for advancing Natural
Language Understanding. The team combine and extend Machine Learning
technologies such as few-shot learning, fine-tuning, and semantic parsing to
achieve these stronger, more “semantic” results. This solution allows companies
to generate value from huge troves of information they already collect but
cannot yet automate or leverage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.