* 2233873
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Towards a Design Methodology for Software-Driven Sustainability
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Pooyan Jamshidi Dermani, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Varun Chandola
* 08/31/2024
* USD 100,001.00

With the proliferation of computing technologies in our society, software plays
an increasingly prominent role in contributing to and solving sustainability
challenges. Despite its importance, however, sustainability remains a poorly
understood concept among developers, with a general lack of tools, knowledge,
and techniques that can be used to design and validate software systems that
account for sustainability. This project aims to elevate sustainability as a
first-class quality attribute of software that can be explicitly analyzed and
designed for and to empower developers with methods for building sustainability
into their systems. In addition, this project contributes novel design
strategies and patterns that can influence the behavior of users towards
sustainable use of computing products. The outcome of this project lays a
foundation for further research in software engineering techniques and
methodologies for sustainable computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To develop an in-
depth understanding of sustainability challenges in software engineering, the
first step in this project involves an empirical investigation of software
applications in emerging, sustainability-relevant domains such as cyber-physical
systems, IoT and mobile systems. Next, based on the outcome of this study, the
project employs well-established requirements engineering methods to define
sustainability as a collection of quality attributes, scenarios, and metrics.
Finally, building on this definition, the project develops a catalog of design
strategies and patterns that developers can use to build sustainability into
their system as an explicit goal. This project also aims to establish a
community of researchers in software engineering and other disciplines to
encourage increased future activities in sustainability
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.