* 2233343
* Collaborative Research: DESIGN: Co-creation of affinity groups to facilitate diverse &amp; inclusive ornithological societies
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Ashley Dayer, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Marenda
* 04/30/2025
* USD 288,563.00

Professional societies serve as major hubs for networking, professional
development, financial support, recognition of leadership, and dissemination of
science. Diversity initiatives can increase access to the field associated with
the society, but they may have limited success in improving the inclusion of
marginalized members who lack a sense of community or feel their voices are not
heard. One way to instigate cultural change from the ground up is to develop
affinity groups where members of historically excluded communities can develop
support networks based on common experiences and identities. Such affinity
groups can go beyond “one-shot” social events at conferences to build long-
lasting communities and connection. This project will develop a mechanism to co-
create affinity groups within ornithology that can serve to support members of
historically excluded communities, amplify their voices, and empower them to
help change the culture of ornithology. This project involves close
collaboration between three major US ornithological societies (American
Ornithological Society, Wilson Ornithological Society, and Association for Field
Ornithologists) to jointly support and elevate marginalized members in
ornithology. The ultimate goal is to transform ornithology into an inclusive
discipline that leverages the talents of the diverse communities of learners,
scientists and practitioners to solve urgent problems in ecology, conservation
and environmental justice. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A recent diversity assessment
conducted by the American Ornithological Society revealed that many members from
historically excluded groups feel a weaker sense of belonging, feel that their
voices are not heard, and that they are not valued. These components comprise
key elements of transformative resilience: a framework for not only increasing
the persistence of individuals from marginalized groups, but to create paths for
institutional transformation. This project aims to design a process for co-
creating affinity groups—i.e., identity-based groups created by and for members
from historically excluded communities—that facilitate transformative
resilience. The co-creation process engages marginalized members to imagine an
ornithological community where they belong and are valued, and then creates
affinity groups based on those visions through a series of workshops with
emerging leaders of the communities. The project sets up vast potential for
implementing activities that broadens support to historically excluded
communities, including targeted professional development, leadership
development, improved communication, and social support. The project will have
four other categories of broader impacts: (1) fostering stakeholder engagement
among three ornithological societies, non-profit organizations, governmental
agencies, and minority-serving institutions and societies; (2) providing
educational and training opportunities in diversity, equity, inclusion, and
justice (DEIJ) for a postdoctoral scholar and summer Multicultural Academic
Opportunities Program undergraduate scholars; (3) disseminating findings of the
project beyond academia; and (4) broadening the diversity of scholars who are
engaged in DEIJ research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.