* 2233333
* BRC-BIO: Effects of insecticides on survival and metamorphosis of the upside-down jellyfish, Cassiopea xamachana, and its symbiotic community
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Allison Kerwin, McDaniel College
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 05/31/2026
* USD 437,393.00

Coral reefs are of tremendous ecological importance and also provide economic
and social value through coastal protection, tourism, and as a source of food
and pharmaceuticals. Further, they are complex organisms that have a diverse
bacterial community living on and in their cells (comprising a holobiont, the
organism and its symbionts). However, there are significant limitations to the
study of these holobionts. In this project, the closely-related upside-down
jellyfish (Cassiopea xamachana) is developed as a model for understanding
environmental effects on nearshore corals. These jellyfish contain a similar but
less complex bacterial community, are abundant, uncomplicated to collect, and
easy to study under laboratory conditions. Using insecticide exposure
(associated with mosquito control) as a common near shore stressor, the project
will quantify the effects of exposure on survival and changes in growth of all
members of the holobiont, as well as changes in the function and interactions of
the jellyfish bacterial microbiome. In addition to the potential to learn more
about processes that will affect the coral community in the Florida Keys, this
project will allow more undergraduate students to access scientific research and
the field of biology, giving them an opportunity to consider research-based
careers. By expanding undergraduate research at an institution with a high
proportion of first-generation students and students of color, the voices
involved in biology research can be broadened, while also bringing new ways of
thinking and approaching problems to the scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching theme of this project is to
advance the C. xamachana photosymbiotic holobiont as an experimental system for
studies on cnidarian associated individual microbes, the photosymbiont, and the
polyp holobiont as well as the impact of insecticide exposure on these systems.
The diverse cnidarian holobiont with its complex life cycle offers many
potential targets also allows for the diverse ways insecticides that reach
coastal waters. However, little work has been done to investigate the effects of
insecticide exposure on coral survival, nor on the photosymbiotic
Symbiodiniaceae or bacterial/archaeal microbiome which are integral to cnidarian
health. C. xamachana is the ideal system to begin to discriminate the roles each
microbial member plays in the response of a photosymbiotic cnidarian life cycle
to insecticide exposure. C. xamachana exhibits an asexual polyp life stage that
is only terminated after the establishment of photosymbiosis, an event
accompanied by a distinct developmental transition from sessile polyp to
juvenile medusa. Changes in bacterial gene expression in response to insecticide
exposure during that developmental transition will be interrogated using next-
generation sequencing. High-resolution microscopy and fluorescence in situ
hybridization will localize bacteria of interest in the jellyfish. By combining
these approaches with an examination of polyp nerve net function and growth of
individual Symbiodiniaceae and bacterial cultures we can understand how exposure
to the three insecticides used for mosquito control in the Florida Keys affects
the diverse cnidarian holobiont. These results can inform conservation decisions
on the Florida reef tract, threatened by a severe disease outbreak that may more
strongly impact stressed corals, such as those exposed to
insecticides.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.