* 2233622
* Conference: Expanding the agenda for inclusive policy, practices, and research regarding gender and computer science
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Stacey Sexton, SageFox Consulting Group, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 07/31/2023
* USD 49,954.00

While many efforts have begun to increase the diversity of learners in computing
fields, more inclusive approaches are needed to support learners with
intersectional identities across gender, race, ethnicity, and ability. This
workshop aims to catalyze conversation and collaboration around gender identity
and intersectionality in broadening participation in computing efforts. The
workshop will be led by SageFox Consulting, a woman-owned research and
evaluation firm specializing in equity in STEM and computing education, and will
bring together experts from a range of computing and social science disciplines.
The outputs from this workshop have the potential to improve the collective
capacity to weave intersectionality into research, policy, and practice agendas
across the Computing Education Research community.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
workshop will bring together experts across a range of computing and related
technical and data-based disciplines as well as experts from other fields in the
social sciences including education and the learning sciences to build an
intersectional policy, practices, and research agenda that is inclusive of
gender identity in broadening participation in computing (BPC) efforts. The
workshop will be guided by the principles of intersectionality to engage in a
set of curated learning and working activities to accomplish the following
objectives: (1) Define near and long term agenda items for intersectional
research about the inclusion of gender identity in the Computing Education
Research community; (2) Advance collective understanding of and ability to
implement principles of intersectionality in future work; (3) Highlight existing
work, researchers, and thought leaders on the inclusion of gender identity in
BPC/RPP initiatives; (4) Create a community where gender expansive work is
valued and valuable for those doing, receiving, and being represented by this
work; (5) Provide participants with the opportunity to conceptualize how to
expand and refine the inclusion of gender identity as part of their current and
future BPC initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.