* 2233237
* STTR Phase I:  Rapid Characterization of Wood-based Materials
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2024
* Allix Coon, SANGALI, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 01/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project will enable the wood industry to certify
materials along its entire supply chain, achieving reproducibility and reducing
delays in the movement of goods, and supporting the economic competitiveness of
American wood companies. The technology being developed by this project entails
rapid and accurate wood species identification, which will bring transparency to
the wood industry, helping to enable proper forest management that follows
social, economic, and government standards. The technology will also promote
quality control of products and characterization of residues leftover from wood
processing, which in turn would facilitate their recovery and reutilization. By
allowing manufacturers to achieve reproducibility in composite material
manufacturing, the technology will encourage the recycling of wood waste and
byproducts, supporting efforts to increase the sustainability and reduce the
environmental impact of the wood industry. Lastly, this technology will empower
organizations combating illegal logging by providing a new and powerful forensic
tool, thus addressing deforestation and forest depletion with significant
economic, societal, and ecological benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is
applying state-of-the-art chemical analysis methods to develop a novel wood
identification technology capable of determining with accuracy the species, age,
and geographical origin of uniform or composite products. With the increase in
demand for transparency in the wood industry and more stringent regulations
comes a demand for new technologies that support compliance. Despite being a
critical step in this process, current methods for species identification are
time consuming, require highly specialized training, and provide little
information on age and origin. By combining a highly sensitive type of
spectroscopy with advanced statistical approaches (i.e., machine learning), this
project is developing a method that can reliably identify chemical fingerprints
that inform about wood species, age, and origin when compared against a
database. This Phase I project will develop and demonstrate this approach when
applied to U.S. woods, including the creation of a wood species database, with
these key objectives: 1) analyze domestic woods to develop statistical methods
to identify the species; 2) test the method’s ability identify species within
composite materials; 3) test the method’s ability to identify the geographical
origin of samples; and 4) test the method’s ability to determine wood
age.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.