* 2233879
* EAGER: CNS: RobSenCom: A Middleware to Improve the Connectivity between Heterogeneous Robots and IoT
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Nirmalya Roy, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,926.00

Internet-of-Things (IoT) networks span an increasingly diverse set of stationary
and robotic devices (e.g., aerial drones, autonomous ground vehicles). Achieving
communication synchrony, reliability, and fault tolerance among these devices is
a key challenge due to the complex dynamics of mobile, heterogeneous devices
deployed in real-world environments. This project will begin to address that
challenge in the context of IoT networks operating across multiple mobile
agents. The project will take a “ground up” approach, beginning with addressing
fundamental differences in simulation mechanics between multi-agent robotics
simulators and network simulators. Three main objectives will be pursued: (1)
The project will explore integration challenges associated with combining
physics-based simulators and discrete event-based simulators. A new network
coordinator will be developed to synchronize the simulation timelines between
these systems. (2) Using this integrated framework, the project will study the
propagation of errors arising from within the constituent platforms under a
range of scenarios (e.g., varying agent speeds, varying networking protocols).
(3) Finally, the project will integrate the simulation framework with physical
devices to enable hybrid experimentation, reducing the "simulation-to-reality"
gap.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As IoT networks increasingly expand across multi-agent
robotic environments, their utility in realizing mission-critical services will
grow. Potential applications already being explored include search and rescue
services, wildfire monitoring, and flood impact assessment. This project will
begin to provide the computer and network systems foundations necessary to
construct these systems in a manner that ensures communication synchrony,
reliability, and fault tolerance. More generally, this project will catalyze
innovation in the design and validation of large-scale IoT networks built upon
stationary devices and mobile robots. The impact on future mission-critical IoT
systems --and the resulting economic and societal benefits-- could be
significant. The project will also contribute to workforce development through
the involvement of undergraduate researchers, high school students, and a
postdoctoral researcher. The PI is committed to broadening participation and
will actively recruit students from groups underrepresented in
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.