* 2233637
* SBIR Phase I:  Autonomous Inspection Robot for Seal Inspection of Floating Roof Storage Tanks
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Connor Crawford, PIKE ROBOTICS INC.
* Standard Grant
* Ela Mirowski
* 04/30/2024
* USD 274,703.00

he broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is to develop an autonomous, robotic inspection system to
eliminate manual inspection methods in confined and dangerous spaces. The
innovation will use a robot to provide quantitative condition and emissions data
for an estimated 150,000 floating roof tanks in the nation’s aging
infrastructure. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and similar agencies
across the globe, require tanks to be routinely inspected, but companies also
want to remove personnel from confined spaces and avoid exposure to poisonous
gasses, asphyxiation, heat exhaustion, falling accidents, etc. Confined space
entries caused 1,300 U.S. deaths between 2011 and 2018. The autonomous robot
reduces expenses related to maintenance and repair and allows better
quantitative assessment of the seal integrity, which allows companies to perform
maintenance based on the asset condition and not frequency-based schedules. An
industry trend in recent years is to recreate the state of their assets
digitally - both visually and quantitatively. The high-resolution data provided
through this effort supports these 'digital twins.' Also, once the robot is
certified for explosive environments, design features can be reused to produce
other robots which further improve development cost and safety.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This SBIR Phase I project will create an autonomous
robotic inspection system which eliminates manual, confined-space inspection
methods and requires only one technician to deploy the robot from the top of the
tank wall. The wall-climbing robot is capable of inspecting both the floating-
roof storage tank’s upper (weather) and lower (primary) seals using a bifurcated
(inverse periscope) geometry which places sensors in the gap between the seals
while prime movers, adhesion elements, and a controller are above the seals. The
bifurcated design simplifies safety feature design by minimizing the size and
complexity of device components between the seals. The bifurcated design enables
the continuous use of a tether for isolating the power source and provides a
positive pressure surge system. After insertion, the robot proceeds to
circumnavigate the inner tank shell in a stable manner, overcoming the large
frictional forces that exist between the tank wall and the upper seal. The
robotic system gathers real-time, high-resolution, and continuous data about the
state of the seals. High-resolution visual data characterizes the top of the
seal, and a proprietary physical “feeler” mechanism characterizes the seal gap.
This information results in a fast, safe, and accurate inspection of the tank’s
seal.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.