* 2233187
* Planning: Formulating and Sustaining a System-Level Understanding of a Large Marine Ecosystem in the Ross Sea Region Marine Protected Area to Better Conserve and Guide Policy
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2022,01/31/2024
* Cassandra Brooks, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* William Ambrose
* 01/31/2024
* USD 99,999.00

The Ross Sea Region Marine Protected Area (RSRMPA), one of the world’s largest
MPAs, encompasses one of the healthiest marine ecosystems remaining on this
planet; however, it is exposed to increasing stress from ongoing climate change
and fishing pressure. Numerous gaps in our understanding of the highly coupled
nature of the Ross Sea marine ecosystem need to be addressed to support
conservation efforts in the Ross Sea region, including informing the efficacy
and management of the RSRMPA into the coming decades. The overarching goal of
this research is to formulate an innovative and sustainable world-class research
program aimed at better understanding, conserving, and managing the RSRMPA
through the coordination of multi-faceted system-level approaches. There will be
a coordinated effort to facilitate international collaboration; create
education, outreach, and Diverse Equitable and Inclusive (DEI) opportunities;
and increase conservation awareness. Coordinating Ross Sea marine ecosystem
research will contribute to enhancing system-level global research, sustainable
data networks, DEI, and climate equity. This program will also provide
opportunity to develop similar frameworks for other large-scale, globally
important systems. The trans-disciplinary aspiration can also serve to guide the
NSF in sustaining or initiating new funding opportunities while addressing
several of the 10 NSF BIG IDEAS and engaging multiple NSF Directorates. The
project will help maintain NSF’s mission of scientific leadership by networking
the Antarctic community by providing science-based conservation plans to help
mitigate environmental changes in this pristine region of the Southern
Ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will convene a workshop to
strategize the implementation of an internationally networked, world class
program that is based on inter- and trans-disciplinary approaches (including
bridging science, cyberinfrastructure, policy, management, and conservation),
while also providing opportunities for STEM education, early career development,
and core DEI principles. To effectively facilitate the prioritization of
research related to the regional and global interconnectedness of the Ross Sea
marine ecosystem, the workshop will involve leading experts in Ross Sea marine
research and other researchers, stakeholders, and policy experts involved in the
greater oceanographic, climate and ecosystem/food web modeling communities. The
workshop will determine a long-term decadal plan comprising the following
phases: (1) initial data synthesis and ecosystem/food web model development; (2)
field observations and modeling, networked through an internationally
coordinated Ross Sea Observing System; and (3) data synthesis and modeling,
including a “sunset” plan to support ongoing RSRMPA management and preservation
of the Ross Sea marine ecosystem. Outcomes will include a workshop report
detailing the long-term research plan, a peer-reviewed article, educational and
outreach materials, and a list of proposed research topics for implementing a
world class research program and Principal Investigators who will help
coordinate the multiple efforts aimed at addressing major gaps in our knowledge
of the Ross Sea system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.