* 2233080
* Theoretical and Practical Development of Aragonite Li/Mg as a Deep Sea Paleotemperature Proxy
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Thomas Marchitto, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 04/30/2026
* USD 458,232.00

The field of paleoceanography seeks to understand the ocean’s role in past
climate changes. One of the primary goals is to improve projections of future
climate change. An important factor to reconstruct is the temperature of the
deep ocean. Today ocean temperature is related to deep ocean circulation and the
ocean’s storage of the greenhouse gas carbon dioxide away from the atmosphere.
However, existing tools or ‘proxies’ for deep ocean temperature have relatively
large uncertainties that hinder the understanding of past climates. This
research will further develop a promising new proxy, based on the amounts of the
elements lithium and magnesium in the microscopic shells of seafloor organisms
called benthic foraminifera. The study will include laboratory experiments,
calibration with seafloor samples, and a test application to the last ice age.
Support will be provided for graduate and undergraduate students to participate
in the research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Past changes in the ocean’s meridional
overturning circulation are reflected in the temperature and salinity (i.e.,
density) structure of the deep ocean, with important consequences for carbon
storage and for regional and global climates. Elemental ratios in biogenic
calcium carbonates are widely applied as paleotemperature proxies, but precision
and accuracy are often limited by secondary influences related to
biomineralization. This project will develop and apply a nascent tool for
reconstructing the past temperature of the deep ocean. Previous work has shown
that the ratio between lithium and magnesium (Li/Mg) in biogenic aragonite is
almost entirely explained by temperature (r2 &gt; 0.9), with minimal influence
from the so-called ‘vital effects’ that hamper most elemental proxies. Broader
application of this tool will benefit from stronger theoretical grounding,
improved field calibration, and application to an important paleoceanographic
problem. To those ends, four hypotheses will be tested: (1) At a given
temperature, the slope of the biogenic aragonite Li/Ca vs. Mg/Ca isotherm (i.e.,
the Li/Mg value) depends only on the temperature-dependent abiotic partition
coefficients KLi/Ca and KMg/Ca. (2) Abiotic aragonite Li and Mg partition
coefficients are rate-dependent, but biogenic Li/Mg is minimally affected by
kinetics. (3) In cold waters, the response of the cosmopolitan benthic
foraminifer Hoeglundina elegans Li/Mg to temperature is slightly steeper than
the exponential fit that characterizes corals. (4) During the Last Glacial
Maximum (LGM, 19-23 ka), near-freezing (-2 to -1 °C) Antarctic Bottom Water
occupied the Atlantic below ~2-2.5 km depth, and was overlain by warmer (0 to 1
°C) Glacial North Atlantic Intermediate Water. Testing of Hypotheses (1) and (2)
will be through laboratory precipitation experiments, Hypothesis (3) through
core top calibration, and Hypothesis (4) through LGM depth transects in the
Atlantic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.