* 2233775
* Equipment: Helium Recovery Equipment: Securing Rhode Island and Southern New England NMR structural biology infrastructure
* BIO,DBI
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2025
* Nicolas Fawzi, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 08/31/2025
* USD 322,300.00

An award is made to Brown University to support the acquisition of helium
recovery equipment to recycle the helium used by the three nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) spectrometers in the Structural Biology Core Facility at Brown
University. Used by researchers at Brown, in Rhode Island, and across
southeastern New England, the NMR spectrometers at Brown University employ
extremely high magnetic fields to see the structure, motions, and interactions
of proteins and biomolecules involved in essential biological processes with
atomic resolution. The Brown structural biology facility is also an important
component of efforts by researchers in the region to make broad and sustained
educational impacts, encouraging underserved Rhode Island school students into
the STEM pipeline – including classroom teaching, training of students from
groups under-represented in science, and collecting data and serving as training
platform as part of a sustained interactions with local underserved public
schools. These NMR spectrometers use superconducting magnets cooled by liquid
helium to a few degrees above absolute zero to maintain superconductivity needed
for these high magnetic fields. As a result, helium constantly boils off NMR
systems and escapes to the atmosphere. Hence, a constant supply of helium is
needed for the maintenance and operation of the instruments. Helium is an
expensive and non-renewable resource, so it is fiscally and environmentally
responsible to recycle helium. The global supply of helium is currently in an
extreme shortage due to manufacturing and supply chain conditions. The liquid
helium recycling systems acquired with support from this award will capture and
re-liquefy the helium released from NMR spectrometers and offer high efficiency
recovery of all helium used for NMR operation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
enables acquisition of the helium liquification and collection equipment
necessary for recycling approximately 2200 liters of liquid helium per year for
three magnet systems. The 850 MHz NMR (highest magnetic field in Rhode Island
and second highest in New England) requires refills every few weeks – hence the
facility is severely endangered by short-term supply outages. This project
stabilizes helium supply, providing the important added benefit of lengthening
time between 850 MHz system fills, enabling more usage time per year. The work
enabled by the spectrometers served by these helium recovery efforts provides
atomic-level insight into 1) the function of essential glutamine-rich domains of
nucleic-acid interacting proteins across all eukaryotes and the mechanisms that
regulate their interactions, 2) allosteric signaling in Cas9 to yield first-of-
its-kind insight into DNA editing to further improve laboratory science and
precision medicine, 3) peptide-protein interaction kinetics to modulate and
study cellular networks, among other projects. Helium recycling ensures the
ability to continue these efforts, the first steps in long-term objectives to
map mechanistic links between biological sequence, structure and
function.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.