* 2233401
* STTR Phase I: Biodegradable Electronic Sensors to Measure Environmental Data for Perishable Goods
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Aaron Franklin, TRANSPARENT PATH SPC
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 03/31/2024
* USD 274,147.00

The broader impact / commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project is to minimize food waste, reduce electronic
sensor waste, and develop a printed, biodegradable, electronic sensor. According
to the United Nations, food waste is valued at $2.4 trillion/year worldwide with
the majority of the expense attributed to transport. Electronic waste is
approximately 50 million tons/year with less than 18% being recycled globally.
Currently, disposable sensors are used to prevent food waste, yet these sensors
contribute to the electronic waste problem. The proposed printed, biodegradable
sensors will enhance scientific and technological understanding to move from
disposable to on-demand biodegradable sensors. The market opportunity addressed
by the proposed technology is over $300 billion in the food supply chain and
even larger in the broader perishable markets. The technological shift to
printed, biodegradable sensors will provide a competitive advantage compared to
other companies that are using disposable or semi-recyclable materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR) Phase I
project involves the development of carbon-based, printable, electronic
materials to produce a biodegradable sensing platform for measuring temperature
and humidity. The proliferation of electronic sensors continues to provide
access to transformative data, improving health, the environment, and
transportation. However, resultant electronic sensor waste is a critical concern
that precludes use for certain applications. This project will use graphene for
conducting, carbon nanotubes for semiconducting, and crystalline nanocellulose
for insulating inks that can be printed into temperature and humidity sensors on
a thin film of cellulose (i.e., paper). Technical obstacles include the co-
integration of these all-carbon inks, realization of target electrical
properties, and yield of functional sensors. The goals of this project include:
(1) the formulation of nanomaterial inks for their co-printing onto
biodegradable substrates; (2) the development of aerosol jet printing processes;
and (3) the demonstration of temperature and humidity sensors from the printed
carbon-based nanomaterials. To achieve these goals, innovations in the
formulation of these carbon-based inks will be required, along with the design
of sensor configurations that yield reliable temperature and humidity
measurements. More than a dozen distinct sensor designs will be explored, and
iterative tuning of ink and sensor designs will take
place.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.