* 2233697
* Conference: Supporting Students and Early Career Researchers as Participants in the 11th SNO Workshop and Conference 2022
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Onur Apul, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 11/30/2023
* USD 15,000.00

The theme of the 2022 Sustainable Nanotechnology Organization Conference and
Workshop is environmental applications and implications of nanotechnology.
Nanotechnology research and development in the United States has been thriving
to achieve paradigm shifting outcomes in a variety of industries within the last
two decades. Consequently, environmental impacts of nanotechnology have become
more relevant in recent years. One crucial component to advance environmental
nanotechnology research is organizing annual conferences. These meetings allow
discussions of the critical aspects of sustainable and safe nanotechnology among
the key players such as universities, companies, and policy makers. In addition,
these activities facilitate discussion of recent advances. The Conference also
fosters networking opportunities, helps workforce training by improving
students’ and early career researchers’ technical knowledge and communication
skills, and nurtures new ideas. The Conference will provide travel costs for
early career researchers. These attendees will be selected to improve the
diversity, equity, and inclusion of the Conference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
year’s Sustainable Nanotechnology Organization Conference will focus on
fundamental nano-scale processes related to sustainability and the environment
and presents state-of-the-art knowledge and an outlook on nano-enabled
applications. The conference will have a kick-start with a close look at
transport through nano-scale pores. This will be followed by a set of high-
profile plenaries and concurrent sessions covering a wide set of topics
including fate, transport, exposure of nanomaterials, nanomaterial applications
in the environment, energy sectors, and agriculture, as well as discussions on
women in engineering, education, and nano-impacts. A group of renowned experts
are leading these sessions who will share ideas, develop collaborations, and
recognize accomplishments of the leaders in the field. The Sustainable
Nanotechnology Organization Conference has served as the community for nano-
environmental scholars and has given a platform to many early-career
researchers. This exchange of ideas will serve as a catalyst for future
environmental applications, where nano-scale transport plays a central role. The
conference will also catalyze discussions in many areas including, but not
limited to, nano-energy, nano-scale transport, nano-fate and transport, nano-
enabled environmental applications, nano-sensors, nano-education, women in
engineering and nanotechnology, and sustainable nanotechnology. The conference
will seek to incorporate students, postdocs, and junior faculty members from
underrepresented communities as well as women scholars. The diverse academic and
ethnic backgrounds represented in the workshop augment a creative, inclusive,
and diverse intellectual environment. The students will gain experience and
inspiration from the diversity and inclusivity of the workshop, which will help
them build their careers in their respective fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.