* 2234112
* Transitions: A unified cellular and in vitro approach to discover molecular mechanisms of microtubule dynamics and regulation
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2025
* Luke Rice, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 12/31/2025
* USD 740,498.00

Through this “Transitions” award, the principal investigator will obtain
training in modern genetics and imaging methods and apply these skills to the
study of the dynamic cellular polymers called microtubules, which provide
structure and shape to eukaryotic cells. The goals of this projects are to
discover new, mechanism-defining mutations in the polymerizing subunits and to
understand how cellular functions of microtubules respond to selective
perturbations of polymerization dynamics. The long-term goal of the work is to
create a more wholistic understanding of microtubule dynamics that bridges
molecules to phenotypes using a combination of in vitro and in cell studies,
unified with mechanism-specific tubulin mutants. The results and materials
arising from this work will provide new insights into a fundamental process of
high significance. In addition to the impact of the work itself, broader impacts
of the project include new training for the PI in scientific animation that will
allow dissemination of this increasingly important discipline at the PI’s home
institution through a new nanocourse. Graduate and undergraduate students will
also receive interdisciplinary training by taking part in the research, and the
PI will continue microscopy-based outreach activities at local public
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dynamic properties of microtubules are central
to their function, and they derive from the structural and biochemical
properties of individual αβ-tubulin subunits and their interactions within the
polymer. Understanding the molecular mechanisms underlying microtubule dynamics
and regulation has been challenging because doing so requires integrating ‘one
molecule at a time’ views of biochemistry and structure with lower-resolution
measurements of collective behavior spanning different length and time scales.
During the professional development phase of the project, the PI will receive
training in modern yeast genetics and imaging by performing suppressor and de
novo screens to identify new mutations that perturb microtubule dynamics and by
defining their consequences for cellular function. The research portion of the
project will encompass two complementary directions: (i) using larger scale
genetic screening to identify new buried mutations that perturb microtubule
dynamics, and (ii) determining the consequences for spindle assembly and
chromosome segregation of ‘re-tuning’ cellular microtubule dynamics by
expressing variable amounts of mechanism-specific tubulin mutants. These new
methods and directions will overcome current bottlenecks and allow the PI to
undertake a broader scope of research to connect mechanistic studies to cellular
physiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.