* 2234058
* III: Small: Intelligent Scientific Text Analytics with Knowledge-Augmented Abductive Reasoning
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Meng Jiang, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 05/31/2026
* USD 599,962.00

Scientists are producing vast numbers of research articles and patents every
year to advance our understanding of our world and the universe. Meanwhile, they
are making a great effort to build tools to boost their productivity. While
these tools are able to process scientific text, they are not endowed with
intelligence to think or write like scientists to help their work. Natural
language generation systems may generate some new statements that are fluent to
read and hard to distinguish from human-written texts. However, existing systems
are not as intelligent or reliable as working with human research assistants due
to lack of reasoning abilities about scientific innovation. This project aims to
enable comparative reasoning in a novel intelligent system of scientific text
analytics, which is missing in existing systems. Comparative reasoning
establishes the importance of something by comparing it against something else.
Comparative reasoning plays a central role in scientific innovation and can be
categorized as abductive reasoning in the context of artificial intelligence.
This project will design and develop novel text generation approaches for
scientific abductive reasoning and intelligent scientific text analytics.
Moreover, this research will support the professional development of a cohort of
PhD, undergraduate, and high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical
aims of the project are divided into three thrusts. The first develops and
compares natural language generation models based on a data-driven architecture
and a novel architecture inspired and rooted in theories of abduction. These
models will be evaluated on the tasks of comparative summarization and
comparative argument generation in scientific domains. The second thrust designs
retrieval-augmented approaches with heterogeneous knowledge sources such as
tables, taxonomies, and knowledge graphs to improve the performance of
scientific abductive reasoning models. Because retrieving and encoding every
instance can be very time consuming, the third thrust builds knowledge memory
networks that learns and manages distributed representations of scientific
concepts and relations from the knowledge sources. They will accelerate the
retrieval augmentation, when all the types of scientific source data are of
large scale. Finally, these techniques will be integrated into a new artificial
intelligence system that accurately generates explanatory sentences to automate
comparative reasoning and assist scientific
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.