* 2234401
* Collaborative Research: CCRI: Planning-C: Enabling Computer Architecture Simulation as a Service
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Katherine Isaacs, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 02/29/2024
* USD 27,631.00

Simulators are essential to computer architecture as they allow designers to
validate design ideas without producing real chips on silicon, which is
expensive and time-consuming. However, there are currently many issues slowing
the advancement of computer architecture design through simulation: 1)
Fragmentation of the ecosystem; simulator models developed in one framework
cannot be used in another. 2) High barrier of entry; extensive training and
powerful hardware are required, limiting participation, particularly from
marginalized populations and institutes with limited resources, and 3) Neglect
of usability and user experience; poor result interpretability hinders insights
generated from simulations. The project's impacts are empowering the computer
architecture research community with a one-stop, web-based, and cloud-powered
computer architecture simulation environment to support more complex computer
architecture simulations and to allow more researchers to participate in the
advancement of computing system design. The project’s novelties are creating new
computer architecture design principles that bridge technical and human aspects
of usability across the computer architecture simulation
ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project delivers an online platform that
allows users to conduct complex simulator-based computer architecture research
without leaving the platform. Central to the platform is a Model Zoo for
researchers to publish simulator models, fork others’ models, validate models,
and use others’ models in their experiments. This project unifies the ecosystem
by building a compatibility layer to connect simulator models developed in
popular simulator frameworks such as gem5, SST, and MGPUSim. This project also
enables computer architecture simulation as a service (CASaaS) as users can
configure experiments, run simulations in the cloud, and monitor the running
simulations in real-time. The platform also provides an integrated visualization
tool for result analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.