* 2234544
* PFI-RP:  Partnerships for Patient Safety: Utilization-Driven Management of Critical Medical Equipment
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Ekundayo Shittu, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2026
* USD 550,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation â€“
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project relates to the improvement of patient
safety and hospital efficiency through the advent of utilization-driven
equipment management techniques, specifically for infusion pumps. Infusion pumps
serve a vital role in administering treatment to hospitalized patients, but are
prone to damage through regular use, resulting in medication errors that harm
patients and generate substantial excess healthcare costs. Presently, infusion
pumps are serviced according to predetermined time intervals that do not account
for variations in device usage, allowing potentially hazardous devices to remain
in use between inspections and wasting resources on excessive maintenance of
functional devices. Through a multidisciplinary collaboration between
university, industry, and healthcare partners, this project will develop a
system that makes utilization-driven equipment management practicable in
hospitals. The proposed system will facilitate early detection of damaged
infusion pumps, thereby reducing the likelihood of costly medication errors and
saving thousands of patients from harm each year. In addition to increasing
patient safety, the system will address the growing demand among healthcare
technology managers for data-driven maintenance and procurement strategies that
reduce equipment-related costs and increase the value of care.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project seeks to advance the state-of-the-art
in healthcare technology management by developing and advancing towards
commercialization a system that leverages newly available sources of infusion
pump utilization data, in conjunction with advanced survival analysis and
reliability engineering techniques, to formulate optimized utilization-driven
equipment management programs accounting for device risk and hospital resource
constraints. Technical challenges that will be addressed include (i) knowledge
gaps related to the precise nature, variability, and decision implications of
the relationship existing between infusion pump utilization and reliability, and
(ii) technical barriers pertaining to the implementation of scalable data
analysis and construction of a proof-of-concept software tool that will enable
end users to formulate optimal infusion pump management programs tailored to
their organizational needs. This translational research will result in the
creation of data-driven adaptive knowledge specific to healthcare technology
management and generalizable to the broader reliability engineering and
operations research disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.