* 2234630
* PFI-RP:  Architectural design and intelligent control tools for decarbonizing space cooling and heating in buildings
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Sandipan Mishra, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 05/31/2026
* USD 549,999.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project will be realized through the creation of
new tools to dramatically increase the energy independence of buildings, improve
their thermal survivability during power outages, as well as reduce their energy
demands and greenhouse gas emissions. Space heating and cooling comprise the
single greatest energy end-use in US buildings, contributing to climate change.
Vigorous efforts are now underway to design, build, retrofit, and operate a new
generation of green buildings. The green building sector is one of the fastest-
growing markets in the US. Recent work has shown that well-designed,
intelligently controlled ‘dynamic passive’ systems, which use shading, natural
ventilation, and night insulation to recruit climatic resources such as solar
heat, cool air, and cold night skies, can reduce space heating and cooling loads
extensively across US. These dynamic passive systems contribute to the urgently
needed gas emission reduction effort and provide resilience to heatwaves and
cold snaps. Although the value of these potentially transformative systems is
recognized, effective tools for optimizing their design and control are lacking.
This project will, therefore, develop the needed tools, by creating new
marketable design software, design services, and system control hardware for
dynamic passive systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will address
the complexity of dynamic passive systems design and control generated by the
diversity of climatic resources, e.g., solar heat, cool air, and cold night
skies, in different US regions. All US climates possess extensive resources for
passive heating and cooling in different seasons, presenting valuable
opportunities nationally. At the same time, these systems require climate-
specific materials, configurations, and control logics. The first project goal
is to develop a practical design tool for specifying system components. This
goal will be accomplished by integrating structured, prioritized numerical
optimization procedures with existing building energy modeling programs. The
second goal is to develop a robust, practical control tool for operating the
systems’ dynamic elements. This goal will be accomplished by using deep
reinforcement learning methods to train and control climate-, weather-, and
occupant-responsive agents. The resulting policies will be used both in design,
to inform configuration refinements, and in operation, to alert occupants in
manual systems or to signal actuators in automatic systems. The project will
generate proof-of-concept and prototypes. The prototypes will be evaluated as
the tools’ abilities to reduce heating and cooling loads in simulations and
testbeds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.