* 2234041
* SBIR Phase I:  Engineered Induced Thymic Epithelial Cells for Novel T Cell Immunotherapies
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Hui Gai, RATTAN LIFE SCIENCE INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 05/31/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project is to develop novel off-the-shelf T cell immunotherapies. Adoptive Cell
Therapy (ACT) has revolutionized medicine for cancer patients, as evidenced by
the remarkable success of CAR-T therapies in treating advanced and refractory
leukemia and lymphoma. Despite the success in blood malignancies, solid tumors,
representing approximately 90% of cancers, remain difficult to cure. To
eradicate large tumor masses and reach complete remission, successful ACT
requires persistent, in vivo anti-tumor effects. Studies have highlighted the
correlation between greater ACT efficacy and transferring T cells with capacity
of in vivo expansion and memory formation. Among major T cell subsets, naïve T
cells have been identified as the optimal cell source for ACT compared to
further differentiated cell types. In vivo, naïve T-derived effector cells
demonstrate robust proliferation, potent tumor-killing and resistance to
terminal differentiation and exhaustion. In vitro, these cells have
significantly higher efficiency for blood malignancies and solid tumors. This
project may enable large-scale and renewable production of homogenous T cells
with optimal and persistent tumor-killing properties. This approach aims to
address the unmet challenges of T cell exhaustion, improve scalability, reduce
repeated blood collection, and offer broad patient access.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims to develop a platform technology
for generation of iPSC-derived naïve CD4+ and CD8+ T cells with fidelity,
reproducibility and scalability. The platform employs a proprietary method to
generate iPSC-derived thymic epithelial cells as a critical element to enable
naïve T cell production. The rationale resides in the natural biology of the
Thymus, where the transition of immature CD4+CD8+ double positive T cells to
naïve CD4+ or CD8+ T cells requires interaction with thymic epithelial cells
through a process called positive selection. Concerns have been raised regarding
the therapeutic efficacy associated with current Notch-activation based iPSC-
derived T cell methods because T cells developed through sole Notch activation
are phenotypically and functionally different from naïve T cells. Major
technical limitations in Notch activation-based extrathymic differentiation
methods are addressed by providing biologically relevant thymic positive
selection signals. The resulting product enables a significant advance in the
development of iPSC-based T cell immunotherapies with clinically relevant cell
fidelity. Reproducibility and scalability of the proposed platform will be
assessed and optimized in a bioreactor to demonstrate viability for
commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.