* 2234604
* PFI-TT:  Carbon dioxide hydrates-based storage of carbon on the seabed
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2025
* Vaibhav Bahadur, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 02/28/2025
* USD 266,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is the development and subsequent
commercialization of a new technology to sequester carbon dioxide on the seabed.
There is growing consensus that gigascale carbon removal will be needed to limit
the Earth’s temperature rise to less than 1.5 ºC. Injection of carbon dioxide in
underground reservoirs is the primary industrial scale option for sequestration;
However it has significant issues associated with limited suitable reservoirs,
risk of leakages and extensive monitoring requirements. Success of this project
will contribute to positioning the US as a leader in the fight against climate
change. The research will add to the currently limited portfolio of solutions
for dealing with excess carbon dioxide. On the education front, this project
will provide entrepreneurship as well as technical training to a postdoc and
graduate and undergraduate students. Existing programs at the University of
Texas at Austin, a Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI), will be used to recruit
students from underserved communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project targets applied research on a technology to sequester carbon dioxide on
the seabed as hydrates. An alternative sequestration option is carbon dioxide
hydrates, which are ice-like solids of carbon dioxide and water. The proposed
technology involves rapid formation of hydrates, sealing them in a matrix (to
prevent dissociation), and seabed disposal, noting that the seabed provides a
naturally occurring, stable environment for hydrates to exist. This project will
conduct applied research to de-risk two aspects of this technology. First, the
most appropriate, commercially available material for sealing hydrates will be
identified by testing of materials. Second, hydrate formation from impure carbon
dioxide streams and seawater will be studied. Results from this proposal will
set the stage for future field trials, paving the way to
commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.