* 2234368
* The Causal Structure of Intervocalic Lenition
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Jonah Katz, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 05/31/2025
* USD 249,794.00

Linguists typically study the sounds of human languages from two different
perspectives: the phonological one, which focuses on their patterns and
organization at a symbolic level (e.g., language X has more vowels than language
Y) and the phonetic one, which focuses on physical properties, including
acoustic characteristics (e.g., intensity) and articulatory movements (e.g., the
sound /b/ is produced by closing the lips). An ongoing debate on the realization
of consonant sounds is whether the amount of effort speakers make to produce
them is represented for different sounds at an abstract level in the mind or is
simply explained by the position these consonants occupy in words and sentences.
This project sheds light on this matter by analyzing and comparing the acoustic
properties of multiple consonants in different positions in two languages.
Additionally, this study trains and supports student participation, contributing
to the development of the next generation of language researchers.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;All sound productions require some degree of movement in the vocal
tract, and languages generally show two processes that regulate the amount of
effort involved in those movements, namely fortition (more articulatory effort
and clearer gestures) and lenition (less effort and more relaxed movements).
This study tests a) what kinds of consonants are affected by these two
processes, b) how these two processes are conditioned by the position of the
consonant (e.g., beginning of a word vs. between vowels vs. beginning of a
phrase), and c) if some common sound patterns involving these two processes are
predictable from the duration of different sounds. The analysis of two different
languages also serves as a starting point for a cross-linguistic comparison
leading to a greater understanding of the extent to which linguistic sound
patterns are dependent on abstract mental processes or concrete physical
ones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.