* 2234126
* Collaborative Research: Roles of lithology and water on deep continental crustal rheology from a natural setting and laboratory experiments
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Caleb Holyoke, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 07/31/2026
* USD 359,704.00

Earthquakes are generally observed at shallow depths (&lt;15 km) in Earth’s
upper continental crust or at greater depths (50-660 km) in subducting oceanic
plates. Recent discoveries of rocks that are only formed by melting on fault
surfaces during seismic slip events in the deep (20-50 km) continental crust
indicate that earthquakes can occur in zones previously thought to be aseismic.
The mechanisms that can cause earthquakes to occur in aseismic shear zones are
not understood. However, recent observations indicate that the strength of many
minerals in these rocks is sensitive to the amount of water entrained inside the
mineral grains and that water loss may strengthen them. Researchers from the
University of Colorado Boulder and the University of Akron will perform an
integrated series of modeling, field, and laboratory-based investigations to
quantify how water loss affects the strength of a deep crustal fault zone. They
will perform field-based investigations of the processes operating in the Cora
Lake Fault Zone, Saskatchewan, Canada, measure water contents in all of the
rocks in the fault zone, and perform experiments to characterize the effect of
water content on the strength of quartz, one of the dominant phases in the fault
zone. The results of these studies will be used to create a predictive model of
the processes that caused the deep crustal earthquakes. Desired societal
outcomes will include advancement of our understanding of the processes that
cause earthquakes, as well as the support of an early-career post-doctoral
researcher, graduate students, and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance our understanding of
the rheology of “dry” deep continental crust using three complementary
approaches. First, the researchers will conduct field-based and microstructural
characterization of a kilometer-scale shear zone exhumed from 35–25 km
paleodepths in the Canadian shield. The structure hosts synkinematic
pseudotachylyte that developed under nominally anhydrous granulite- to upper
amphibolite-facies conditions. The work will include water content measurements
on nominally anhydrous minerals, particularly quartz and feldspar, to correlate
their rheology to dry, damp, or wet deformation experiments and rheologic
modeling. Second, pressure-stepping deformation experiments will determine the
effects of water content and fugacity on quartz creep strength. Shear
experiments on low water content quartzites will also be conducted to compare
microstructure and deformation/recovery mechanisms with observations from the
shear zone. Third, viscoelastic numerical modeling using dry and wet mineral
flow laws, with refined parameters from the above experiments, will test the
hypothesis that stress enhancement due to lithologic and water content
variations led to episodic brittle failure and pseudotachylyte generation in the
shear zone. The models will also guide field work by highlighting areas in the
shear zone where more accurate characterization of field relationships is
needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.