* 2234028
* NSF-DFG Confine: Aqueous Electrolytes in Nanoporous Media: Structure, Dynamics and Electrochemo-Mechanical Actuation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Gennady Gor, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Walker
* 08/31/2025
* USD 400,000.00

When salts dissolve in water, they form electrolytes. Near a charged solid
surface ions in an electrolyte redistribute, forming an electric double layer
(EDL). EDL plays an important role in geochemical and biological processes and
is utilized in technologies for electrochemical energy storage. While the
structure and properties of EDL are well understood for an EDL near a planar
surface, understanding of EDL in nanoporous materials is poor. These nanoporous
materials are of interest for electrochemical energy storage applications, which
motivates this project. In particular EDL formation in nanoporous materials
causes mechanical stresses and lead to materials deformation. This research
project aims to quantify the formation of EDL in aqueous solutions of
electrolytes in nanoporous materials and relate it to stresses and strains in
these materials. The knowledge gained from this research could contribute
towards developing new electrochemical energy storage devices, such as
supercapacitors with green, water-based electrolytes, as well as actuators based
on electrochemical principles. This project will contribute to improved STEM
education through the inclusion of research related topics in the undergraduate
courses taught at the university. During the summer months high school interns
will work on projects related to this research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objective of this research project is to apply experiments on the micro- and
macroscale along with molecular simulations to gain fundamental understanding of
the electromechanical properties of an EDL in nanoporous media. Electrically
conducting nanoporous carbons with high specific surface area, well-defined pore
sizes (1-10 nm) and pore geometries will be synthesized. Different surface
chemistries (hydrophobic vs. hydrophilic) will be introduced. Depending on the
applied electrical voltage between electrolyte and solid, the surface chemistry
and the pore diameter, EDL formation and mechanical actuation in the material
will be investigated. Synchrotron-based X-ray scattering will be used to study
the EDL in-operando, with special attention to the charge/discharge and thus ion
transport kinetics. Molecular dynamics simulations will be employed to represent
the structural properties of the surface of the nanoporous medium and the
electrolyte. Combination of experiments (German team) and simulations (US team)
will help to derive the structural, thermodynamic and transport properties of
the geometrically confined electrolyte and their role for electrochemo-
mechanical coupling at the scale of a single pore and the entire porous sample.
In addition to these fundamental insights into aqueous electrolytes in geometric
confinement, this study can potentially contribute to development of new
generations of electrochemical devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was
awarded through the â€œChemistry and Transport in Confined Spaces (NSF-DFG
Confine)" opportunity, a collaborative solicitation that involves the National
Science Foundation and Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(DFG).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.