* 2234156
* The Current Status and Future Direction of High Magnetic Field Science in the United States
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Michelle Schwalbe, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Leonard Spinu
* 09/30/2024
* USD 600,000.00

The National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine is undertaking a
forward-looking study to examine (1) the status of domestic and international
high magnetic field science and technology; (2) current and future science
disciplines that have critical needs for new capabilities that could only be
enabled by high magnetic fields; and (3) gaps in current high magnetic field
science, technology, and infrastructure that could help address critical needs.
The committee will recommend approaches to maximize the potential for existing
and emerging high magnetic field technologies and infrastructure. This study is
a follow-up of the 2013 National Academies report “High Magnetic Field Science
and its Applications in the United States,” and will account for the significant
advances and new research over the past decade. The study may address topics
such as (1) the evolution of recommendations from the 2013 report; (2) current
capabilities; (3) the community's access to high magnetic field facilities,
instrumentation, and data; (4) training and education; and (5) application
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The National Academies will appoint a cross-
disciplinary study committee of approximately 14 experts to carry out this
24-month study. During the course of the study, the committee and National
Academies staff will meet regularly to gather input, deliberate, and draft the
consensus report. During this time, committee members and staff will solicit
input from relevant communities, possibly including town halls, participation in
professional society meetings, solicitation of white papers, and use of
electronic communications and networks. The committee may also convene focused
symposia on special topics of interest. A consensus report will be released
outlining new scientific opportunities enabled by existing and emerging high
magnetic field technologies for the next decade and beyond. The committee and
staff will then help disseminate the study's
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding for the study is provided by the
Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences (Division of Materials
Research, Division of Chemistry) and the Directorate for Biological Sciences
(Division of Biological Infrastructure, Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences) at NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.