* 2234838
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Experimental priming of phonological variant choices
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2025
* Meredith Tamminga, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 01/31/2025
* USD 18,094.00

Language is highly variable such that words can have different pronunciations.
For instance, in American English, the word WALKING can be pronounced as either
walking or the more casual walkin'. Among the many social and linguistic factors
shaping which option people choose, it is known that people tend to repeat the
same pronunciation that they have recently used or heard. For example, an
English speaker who just said or heard workin' becomes more likely to say
playin' a few moments later, repeating the use of the casual -in' pronunciation
even on a different word. In this doctoral dissertation project, the
investigators use laboratory speech perception and production experiments to ask
how basic properties of human cognition lead to this kind of repetitiveness in
real-world language use. The results of the project have the long-term potential
to help improve the capacity of language technology to handle the socially-
meaningful variability that is pervasive in everyday language, to identify
typical and atypical language use patterns in clinical settings, and generally
to contribute to our scientific and cultural understanding of how humans
communicate across a diverse range of language
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The repetitiveness effect described above,
known as variant persistence, has often been attributed to a cognitive process
called priming, where processing a particular linguistic form makes it easier to
produce the same form again. This dissertation provides experimental evidence
for priming variable pronunciations in perception and production through English
words whose ending alternates between -ing and -in', connecting data from
controlled laboratory experiments with data from informal conversational speech
in order to understand the perception and production of socially-situated
language variation. A series of laboratory experiments will be conducted to show
that variable pronunciations can be primed in perception and to investigate how
these priming effects may be weakened or strengthened under various
circumstances. To tie more closely into previous work on variant persistence in
large corpora of conversational speech data, the proposed experiments also
examine priming of the variable pronunciations that individuals choose in speech
production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.