* 2234281
* Integrating an Artificial Intelligence-Driven, Culturally Responsible Digital Graphic Novel Curriculum into STEM Introductory Biology Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Shayla Williams, Albany State University
* Standard Grant
* Julio Soto
* 02/28/2026
* USD 299,998.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by implementing a novel
approach to engage and retain students in STEM. Traditional classroom-focused
programs often fail to adequately stimulate interest in STEM and STEM-based
research, especially for minority groups underrepresented in their pursuit of
STEM fields of study. However, hands-on focused classrooms have been shown to
increase minority and female participation in STEM. The use of graphic novels is
another hands-on, practical proven technique, as such artifacts are a learning
medium that combines both text and visuals to improve student performance.
However, the creation of a custom graphic novel can be time-consuming. Thus,
this project will focus on using an artificial intelligence/natural language
processing (AI/NLP) approach to develop a digital graphic novel curriculum that
is personalized to the cultural background and challenge level of the user. The
target group of students comprises freshman and sophomores taking a Principles
of Biology course because the first two years of college are considered
potential “leaks” in the STEM pipeline. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will develop a prototype of the front-end student experience and
workflows for digital interaction with a graphic novel curriculum through an
intuitive, web-based interface design. An educational curriculum, content, and
engaging humor will be integrated with navigation tools to enable transitions
into, within, and between different graphical-comedic lessons. The envisioned
web app will be developed, tested, and produced on Amazon Web Services. Platform
architecture will be composed of three components: electronic data sourcing,
student web interface, and a back-end AI engine. This approach will address a
paucity of data on the impact of using an effective learning modality such as
graphic novels with a predominately historically disadvantaged population in the
STEM fields. The success of this project will create a reproducible method for
effectively designing, producing, and integrating a customized, culturally
responsive graphic novel using an AI/NLP-driven platform into inquiry-based STEM
classes, as well as determining its efficacy and impact on student learning
gains and STEM course retention. Project findings may have additional
implications for increasing minority STEM participation in upper class biology
courses and for disciplines outside of biology. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through its Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.