* 2234875
* Comprehensive analysis of alkenones and alkenoates by reversed phase HPLC-MS with unprecedented sensitivity and selectivity
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2024
* Yongsong Huang, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 12/31/2024
* USD 304,397.00

This project will develop sensitive and time-saving analytical methods to
quantify an important class of organic compounds, long chain alkenones, in ocean
and lake environments. Alkenones are produced only by microalgae belonging to
the order Isochrysidales, with no other organisms known to make such compounds.
Such unique compounds are termed biomarkers. Alkenone biomarkers are extremely
resistant to break-down and have been found in geological sediments as old as
120 million years. Remarkably, alkenones measured from ocean and lake
environments display consistent structural changes at different growth
temperatures and also track aquatic photosynthetic productivity. Thus,
measurement of alkenones in ancient sediments provides quantitative insights to
past climate and aquatic productivity. That information helps predict future
changes in climate and aquatic ecosystems in the era of global warming induced
by human activities. The project Broader Impacts include support for a Ph.D.
graduate student, undergraduate student researchers, and a high school summer
intern. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditionally, alkenones are analyzed using gas
chromatograph coupled to a flame ionization detector (GCFID), or in extremely
low concentration samples, gas chromatograph-chemical ionization mass
spectrometry (GCCIMS). However, GCFID is non-selective (i.e., cannot exclude
interferences if present) and has relatively low sensitivity and requires
tedious sample cleanup for complex samples, whereas GCCIMS displays non-linear
and often variable responses to alkenones, which increases analytical
uncertainties. The proposed research takes advantage of the latest advances in
high pressure liquid chromatograph mass spectrometry (HPLCMS). Preliminary data
shows that the new reversed phase HPLC-MS based analytical methods will have
much higher sensitivity (up to two orders of magnitudes), and exceptional
selectivity (i.e., strong capability to exclude interferences) for analyzing
alkenones. The proposed work includes testing various liquid chromatographic
conditions (solvent elution schemes, column types) to optimize the
chromatographic separation of long chain alkenones. Mass spectrometry parameters
including two different ionization modes (atmospheric pressure chemical
ionization, or electrospray ionization), and various electronic settings will
also be optimized. A series of algal culture samples will be grown at different
temperatures and measured using the traditional GCFID method. These culture
samples will then be used as standards for calibration between the authentic
alkenone proxy values and HPLCMS based measurements. A large set of global ocean
surface sediments collected from diverse ocean environments and containing
variable interferences will be analyzed to fully validate the new reversed phase
HPLCMS methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.