* 2234496
* I-Corps: Volumetric Light-Assisted Manufacturing of Dental Implants and Tissue Scaffolds
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Amir Miri, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a biomanufacturing tool for dental products. To date, most dental
implants have been made by selective application of a single starting material
by making a specific mold for each case. The main limitations of such approaches
are low fabrication speeds, significant labor costs, and lack of stability in
materials that are produced. It is crucial to achieve a high fabricate rate and
stable constructs without limiting the desired function of the implant or tissue
scaffold. An ideal dental implant fabrication method should make molds within
minutes. Modern 3D printing techniques and proper material selection enable this
technology to rebuild portions of lost tissue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on the development of a customizable, light-assisted, 3D
printing platform that allows for quick fabrication of polymer-based inks and
hydrogels. The technology will be used to fabricate stable and functional
(dental) implants. Such polymeric inks are based on photoresponsive molecules in
the material. This technology will use ultraviolet (UV) crosslinking of
methacrylate groups in conventional hydrogels or polymer precursors for long-
term stability of the selected implant. Advantages of this technology include: a
modular chamber for multi-component biomaterials; very rapid fabrication of
implants, scaffolds, and surgical tools; a significant level of control
creation, and a low-cost product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.