* 2234088
* Collaborative Research: Photoelectrosynthetic Aminoxyl Catalyzed Alcohol Oxidation
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Gyu Leem, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 05/31/2026
* USD 324,218.00

Lignocellulosic biomass offers a carbon-neutral alternative source of fuels and
chemicals which are currently sourced from petroleum and other fossil fuels.
Converting lignin, a largely underutilized yet chemically rich byproduct of the
biorefining industry, to valuable aromatic platform chemicals is an energy-
intensive process that has made this approach cost prohibitive. Recently, dye-
sensitized photoelectrosynthetic cells (similar to photovoltaic cells) have
emerged as a low-cost and environmentally friendly technology for converting
solar energy into chemical fuels or electricity. These photoelectrochemical
cells offer a means of using renewable solar energy to drive energy-intensive
chemical conversions at ambient temperature and pressure. Here, the
collaborative fundamental research project will study how a dye-sensitized
photoanode can chemoselectively oxidize lignin with a suitable catalyst as a
first step toward a complete light-driven lignin depolymerization process. This
approach will expand on the use of heterogeneous catalysis for the oxidation of
primary and secondary alcohols to produce carbonyl or carboxyl compounds for the
fine chemical and pharmaceutical industries. This work represents a new
application for dye-sensitized photoelectrosynthetic cells, and the research
findings from the project will be disseminated to the public through research
publications, conference presentations, and by organizing and hosting
educational outreach programs for future professionals in the STEM field. The
PIs will also actively recruit and support underrepresented minority students
through the outreach program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organic oxidation reactions
are important in organic synthesis or lignocellulosic biomass processing.
Chemoselective oxidation of the aliphatic and/or benzylic alcohol moieties in
lignin is a good target for controlling the degradation of lignin to generate
desired small molecular products. This project aims to elucidate a
photoelectrosynthetic chemoselective oxidation of alcohol moieties in lignin by
combining the use of aminoxyl mediators with a dye-sensitized photoanode (DSP)
at room temperature. Essential to this approach is the use of a dye-sensitized
electrode interface to activate a nitroxyl mediator via light-induced charge
separation. This presents both a new approach for driving the photochemical
oxidation of the secondary benzylic alcohol and the primary aliphatic alcohol
functional groups found in lignin, as well as a new photocatalytic application
for dye-sensitized photoelectrosynthetic cells, which have traditionally focused
on solar water splitting. The approach will involve (1) the synthesis of
photoactive polymeric catalysts and the elucidation of their underlying
photochemical electron transfer properties for activating nitroxyl mediators,
(2) the fabrication and evaluation of mesoporous semiconductor-based electrodes
specifically designed for the chemoselective oxidation of lignin dimer model
compounds with a series of nitroxyl mediators, and (3) the elucidation of
mechanistic pathways for the light-driven oxidation of 2o benzylic and 1o
aliphatic alcohols using a DSP and address practical challenges presented by the
use of oligomer model compounds and technical lignin. This research is
significant as a first test case of a DSP to carry out the selective oxidation
of real lignin at room temperature as a first step toward light-driven biomass
conversion to value-added chemicals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.