* 2234119
* Collaborative Research: The role of capillaries in the Arctic hydrologic system
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Chandi Witharana, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 06/30/2026
* USD 358,030.00

Thawing ice-rich permafrost is transforming Arctic tundra landscapes from being
relatively flat and evenly moist into a mosaic of dry mounds and narrow ponds.
As thaw progresses, a well-drained landscape with a maze of tiny surface
drainages may form. This dense network of small channels represents the
capillaries of the Arctic hydrologic system and serves as the originators of the
water that feeds large rivers. An expanding capillary hydrologic system may
change habitat for wildlife due to an overall drying of the tundra landscape,
increased river runoff, and through more nutrients exported from terrestrial to
aquatic environments. Further, an expanding capillary hydrological network that
is identifiable from sub-meter resolution satellite imagery can serve as an
indicator of ice-rich permafrost thaw and, therefore, warn of hazard to
infrastructure. The development and expansion of a surface drainage system may
also decrease the likelihood of moss to thrive, which results in loss of a
vegetation cover that effectively cools the ground and preserves the upper
permafrost from thawing. The project will produce a pan-Arctic map of the
capillary hydrological system and in selected areas, advance understanding of
how the capillary system has changed over time. The geospatial products will be
made publicly accessible on the Permafrost Discovery Gateway to enable discovery
and knowledge-generation by scientists, stakeholders, and the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Field observations have shown that runoff from many
Arctic rivers has increased in recent decades. Simultaneously, several studies
have documented ice wedge degradation across the Arctic, and a handful of local
field and remote sensing studies in Northern Alaska have shown that the
capillary hydrologic system is expanding due to partial melting of ice wedges.
This project aims to map the extent of the capillary hydrologic system across
the pan-Arctic tundra and assess the role of the capillary system in generating
water flow and lateral carbon flux to large rivers. Graph analysis techniques
applied to the pan-Arctic ice-wedge polygon map, as well as deep learning/AI
algorithms trained to detect a capillary system from very high spatial
resolution satellite imagery, will allow the network of ice wedges and the
capillary hydrologic system to be mapped across the Arctic tundra. Field
measurements in northern and northwestern Alaska will include geochemical water
sampling, coring of permafrost to assess ice-wedge status (degradation or
stabilization), and ground-truthing for the remote sensing hydrologic network
analyses. This new information will inform a numerical hydrology model to
quantify how important the capillaries are in contributing freshwater and carbon
flows to the Arctic Ocean. Earlier hydrological model experiments have shown
that the formation of connected troughs-networks can double the runoff from the
landscape even if the rain and snowfall amounts remain unchanged. The pan-Arctic
map of hydrological capillaries will support a first study on how important sub-
meter wide channels are to large Arctic river runoff.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.