* 2234617
* PFI-RP:  Novel Alloy Materials and Device Designs for 5G Wireless Communications
* TIP,TI
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Geoff Brennecka, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 04/30/2026
* USD 548,676.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation –
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project extends the operational frequency range
of wireless communication devices to the next stage of 5G operation by
developing new materials. Higher operating frequencies mean higher data rates,
but the compact, efficient, and low-cost acoustic components that dominate the
wireless handset market today are limited by the fundamental properties of the
materials at their core. The current alternatives to the existing materials are
bulky, inefficient and lead to rapid battery drain with unacceptable heating
during data transmission. Extending these acoustic components into the 6 – 10
GHz region requires a high throughput screening combined with co-design approach
to rapidly and efficiently develop new materials with enabling properties that
can be rapidly leveraged by novel device designs and chips manufacturing. This
project builds from fundamental materials concepts of non-linear alloy behavior
to extend these components into emerging 5G communication
bands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will address the open
scientific question of how to accurately compute the speed of sound of complex
alloys from first principles, including multi-scale chemical ordering, using
tools that we have recently developed. Guided by such tools, we will leverage
high throughput experimental screening capabilities to fabricate new
piezoelectric alloys with higher acoustic velocities than existing options. This
process will increase our understanding of the energetic non-equilibrium
fabrication via reactive sputtering and electromechanical properties of complex
multi-cation and simultaneously multi-anion alloys. Development and property
optimization of these newly conceived piezoelectrics having increased acoustic
velocity and reduced permittivity will be coupled to novel device structures to
demonstrate acoustic resonators at &gt;6 GHz operating frequencies. Co-design of
the new materials that exhibit enabling properties and the resonators that can
leverage said properties will lead to compact, low-cost, high efficiency filters
for wireless handsets for &gt;6 GHz operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.