* 2234907
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Cross-language transfer in voice onset time: A window into perceptual adaptation in brain and behavior
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2025
* Janet van Hell, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 02/28/2025
* USD 11,852.00

Of all languages acquired as a second language, English has both the largest
number of users (978 million) and the broadest geographic reach. In the U.S.,
approximately 22% of the population speaks both English and another language.
Consequently, “foreign-accented” varieties of English are common. Foreign-
accented varieties differ from “native-accented" varieties in several ways. This
doctoral dissertation focuses on how speech sounds are pronounced by different
speakers who speak English as a first or second language. Previous research has
shown that listeners are able to adapt to the speech sounds of foreign-accented
speech within a minute of exposure. However, how listeners acheive this rapid
adaptation is still unknown. Understanding how listeners achieve this level of
flexibility in speech perception is critical for informing not only linguistic
theories of speech perception but also technological advances in automated
speech recognition systems like the popular voice assistants Alexa and Siri. The
present dissertation investigates the interface between second language speech
production and first language speech perception in a series of behavioral and
electrophysiological experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The doctoral dissertation
research is guided by three research questions: (1) How does experience with
Spanish-accented English facilitate later comprehension of Spanish-accented
English speech? (2) How specific does this experience need to be? (3) What can
time-sensitive neurocognitive measures of language processing such as
electroencephalography--the measure of electrical activity at the scalp--
illuminate about second language-accented speech perception? The ideal adapter
framework provides a strong theoretical foundation from which to investigate the
interface between second language (L2) speech production and first language (L1)
speech perception. Under this framework, listeners are sensitive to the
probability distributions between acoustic cues and phonetic categories.
Listeners can learn the specific cue-category mappings that characterize a
particular group of talkers in order to achieve robust perception. The present
dissertation uses the cue-category mapping between voice onset time (VOT) and
the voiceless stop consonants /p/, /t/, and /k/ as a test case for this
hypothesis. Perceptual ambiguity between these voiceless stops and their voiced
counterparts /b/, /d/, and /g/, respectively, due to cross-language transfer in
Spanish-accented English provides a window into the adaptation process. The
present dissertation uses cross-modal priming to measure adaptation to Spanish-
accented /p t k/ both behaviorally and neurocognitively with
electroencephalography (EEG/ERP). The researchers implement an innovative
experimental design to compare the factors of (A) exposure to variability across
multiple talkers with the same accent and (B) the level of similarity between
the accented features encountered during the exposure phase and those
encountered during the test phase. To date, these factors have not been compared
directly, limiting our understanding of adaptation to L2-accented speech. In
addition, the researchers use a single group of talkers across exposure
conditions to control the type and amount of experience with each individual
talker. Finally, this study is the first to investigate perceptual adaptation to
L2-accented speech with EEG. Using this fine-grained, time-sensitive measure
reveals the relative contributions of phonetic, phonological, and semantic
information in resolving perceptual ambiguity in L2-accented
speech.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.