* 2234895
* CCRI: Planning-C: Facilitating Language Technologies for Crisis Response (LT4CR)
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Antonios Anastasopoulos, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Tatiana Korelsky
* 02/29/2024
* USD 98,899.00

The advent of digital era has made natural language processing (NLP) technology
both promising and important for disaster response. Language technologies can,
for instance, be used for triaging the need for immediate assistance based on
text messages, translating vast amounts of data related to ongoing pandemics, or
engage in conversations to guide natural disaster victims. However, these
advances are only limited to a few dozen of the more than 6500 languages spoken
or signed in the world today, neglecting millions of people and widening the
"digital divide", effectively reducing the technologies' real-world
utility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CISE Computing Research Infrastructure (CCRI)
planning grant will lay out a concrete path to language technologies for
crisis/disaster response that will be useful for everyone. This requires
developing crucial infrastructure to support research towards technological
solutions that enable and support communications in crisis scenarios.
&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the project will produce a thorough survey of language
technologies for crisis response, in order to identify stakeholders and
literature gaps. The team will then curate plans for research instrastructure,
which will consist of datasets applicable to carefully curated crisis/disaster
scenarios tied to prototypical language scenarios that are necessary for
communicating with vulnerable populations. The planning phase will disseminate
the results via a workshop, which will bring together researchers focusing on
NLP, experts in disaster relief, linguistics, and human-computer interaction, as
well as representatives from local speech communities, to facilitate a research
community focused on language technologies for crisis response with
representation from all stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.