* 2234150
* PFI-RP: Mass-Manufacturing of Low-Cost, Lower Environmental Impact Microfluidics
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Donald Ingber, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 03/31/2026
* USD 566,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation â€“
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project is to develop new ways of leveraging
existing US-based legacy, mass-manufacturing infrastructure and knowledge to
provide new materials that can be used in biotechnology applications ranging
from diagnostics to water disinfection. Although this project will not seek to
directly create diagnostic or disinfection devices, it will provide new
materials to manufacturers of such devices and serve to address the critical gap
of affordability and availability of the necessary materials. The knowledge
generated as part of this work will enable the rapid development and testing of
new technologies that leverage the power of microfluidics to improve lives and
generate actionable information. The proposed approach will directly leverage
the technological capabilities and facilities of Maine-based paper
manufacturers, positioning Maine and traditional paper mill workers to
participate in the biotechnology revolution. Finally, this project will train
students in the types of skills sets needed to not only develop technology that
can make lives better, but also to bridge the gap from the lab to the market,
sparking interest in and comfort with working at the industry-academia
interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will result in the building and de-
risking of functional microfluidic prototypes using industrial-scale, US-
manufactured roll-to-roll cast microfluidic channel systems. To maximize the
potential of the research, three proof-of-concept applications at different
length scales will be targeted: microdroplet generation, cell sorting, and water
disinfection. The prototypes will be used to facilitate integration with the
worldwide microfluidic industry. Through the development process, the team will
elucidate mechanistic design rules that enable the fabrication of prototype
microfluidic devices, making it simpler for industry leaders interested in
developing new products to quickly test designs compatible with industrial-scale
roll-to-roll processes. The set of tools created for the commercial
microfluidics industry will bridge the historically wide gap between academic
benchtop microfluidic designs and platforms which can be transferred to mass-
manufacturing. In addition to creating a pathway for cost-effective scale-up of
microfluidic technology, the ability to quickly test prototypes of scalable
microfluidic devices in roll-to-roll compatible prototyping processes has great
potential to inform the design of new advanced materials for a broad range of
applications beyond the traditional diagnostic test and/or small-scale liquid
treatment markets, including new and fast-growing markets such as wearable
technology and low-cost sensor systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by Partnerships for Innovation program (PFI) and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.