* 2234319
* SBP: Neurocognitive Mechanisms in the Perception of Race
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Hannah Volpert-Esmond, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 04/30/2026
* USD 326,105.00

People routinely assign other people to categories, including race and gender.
It happens quickly and almost automatically. Decades of theory and research in
social psychology have helped to uncover how and why this common facet of social
cognition occurs. Social categorization has important consequences, and often
contributes to social bias including prejudice, discrimination, and societal
inequities. As racial diversity in the United States increases, and the
importance of race as an attribute by which people group themselves and others,
it is especially important to understand the factors that determine how people
perceive race. Some of the information that people use in perceiving race comes
from physical characteristics of others, including skin tone, hair texture, and
facial features. Other information is independent of the person being perceived,
including historical and societal factors or qualities of the perceiver
themselves. This project focuses on the role of facial features, and how
attention paid very early in the processing of facial features helps to shape
racial categorization of faces. It also considers how the social context
influences attention to those facial features. The research extends
understanding of how and when early attention to race is beneficial or harmful
to downstream consequences of racial categorization, and informs potential
interventions aimed at reducing negative consequences of race
perception.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The attention to racial information in faces
happens very early in the perceptual process, typically within 200 milliseconds
of seeing a face. It is less clear how this early attention to race contributes
to the way in which those faces are ultimately racially categorized. The studies
in this project measure quickly occurring and distinct neurocognitive processes
as racial categorization of faces unfolds. The studies consider two contributing
factors to racial perception: physical features and social context. Past
research has focused primarily on Black and White faces. This project expands on
that to include Latinx faces. Not only is the Latinx population the fastest
growing racial/ethnic group in the United States, the historical fluidity of
racial categorization of Latinx people is unique. Inclusion of Latinx
populations strengthens the opportunity to address the project’s aim of
considering both phenotypicality and social context. It is clear from research
that racial categorization of others results in bias, even among those who are
motivated to be egalitarian in their behavior. Focusing on earlier, up-stream
cognitive perceptual processes that may contribute to spontaneous racial
categorization will help to identify mechanisms or interventions that can
facilitate intentional control and ultimately mitigate the bias that results
from social categorization. These issues are central to the science of
broadening participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.