* 2234283
* NSF-DFG Confine: Reacting precursor/solvent microdroplets in confined 2-D microflows for tailored nanomaterials synthesis
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Stephen Tse, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 10/31/2025
* USD 360,000.00

This project was awarded through the “Chemistry and Transport in Confined Spaces
(NSF-DFG Confine)" opportunity, a collaborative solicitation that involves the
National Science Foundation and Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(DFG).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ubiquitously, our daily life involves the use of
high surface-area materials. Frequently, these materials are the key to the
sustainable use of energy and resources. Examples of their applications include
catalytic components, batteries, electrodes, composite materials, gas sensors,
flowing agents, 3D printing, and artificial slag systems. The demand for high
surface area per unit mass and fast mass transfer in most applications requires
using very small particles with a large external surface area. The way to
success is by producing and using such nanoparticles, mostly in the form of
oxides and often with specific composition, stoichiometry, and multi-material
interactions. Their bottom-up synthesis involves reaction, nucleation, surface
growth, coagulation, coalescence, and often crystallization. A novel
microreactor involving combusting microdroplets is proposed to synthesize
nanoparticles of tailored chemical composition and crystal structure in a
scalable, uniform, and consistent fashion. Successful results of this project
will reveal fundamental processes and improve practical process control to
bridge the current gap between laboratory studies and industrial large-scale and
high-rate manufacturing of functional flame-synthesized nanoparticles. This
project unites the capabilities of researchers from the U.S.A. (Rutgers
University) and Germany (University of Bremen), who are recognized specialists
in the emerging field of flame synthesis of nanomaterials. Curricula will be
developed as an integrated, multidisciplinary research and education project to
train a future nano-manufacturing workforce. Through a joint Ph.D./MBA
curriculum on technology entrepreneurship, new business ventures based on the IP
from this project will be assessed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed program’s
objective focuses on investigating the mechanisms of droplet-to-particle
conversion (DPC) and gas-to-particle conversion (GPC) in a confined environment
by utilizing a reactive multiphase 2D microflow system with controlled
individual burning liquid precursor/solvent droplets in precisely adjustable gas
composition and temperature environments. Defining process conditions along a
microdroplet’s path should allow unparalleled ability to fabricate high-quality
and tailored nanoparticles in a continuous system whose output can be directed
into another system for inline processing of composite materials or other uses.
Our microfluidic geometry and available operational parameters allow basic and
isolated studies of various phenomena hardly discernable in other macroscopic
systems. The microdroplets in the microreactor can experience large heating and
cooling rates, affecting detailed chemistry and transport in far-from-
equilibrium conditions. Individual droplet investigation can be conducted using
temperature-controlled (heated or cooled) walls to sustain combustion or quench
reactions, where the droplets and as-produced nanomaterials can be characterized
(e.g., offline using chromatography by sampling) at different locations
(correlating to different residence times), thereby measuring reaction kinetics
and nanomaterials evolution. Burning droplets can coalesce with burning/non-
burning droplets of the same or different precursors. The setup of burning
microdroplets moving through a transparent microfluidic reactor (Hele-Shaw cell)
is amenable to a host of in-situ diagnostics, including laser-based
spectroscopy, high-speed imaging, interferometric particle imaging, and rainbow
refractometry. Ex-situ characterization and computational modeling will be
conducted to understand, optimize, and guide the experiments. Perhaps hitherto
unseen in conventional combustion synthesis, the combinations and direct
manipulation of uniform droplets in the proposed setup can produce a variety of
nanoparticles, such as organic, inorganic, hybrid, and complex nanoparticles,
with exceptional control of size, size distribution, morphology, composition,
and crystallinity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.