* 2234415
* Flow Dynamics in Buoyancy-Driven Variable-Density Turbulent Mixing with Compressibility Effects
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Denis Aslangil, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2025
* USD 299,075.00

In general, complex flows - those observed in supersonic-to-hypersonic
combustion and propulsion, fusion technologies, and astrophysics - involve
multi-material mixing and span a broad range of space and time scales. Fluids
participating in such flows have a wide range of molar masses, and in many
cases, the flow is highly compressible. It is still a challenge for current
engineering tools to predict the key flow physics that arise due to the
compressibility and large material property variations. A stronger fundamental
understanding of these effects on turbulent flows will significantly increase
our ability to model the flow physics accurately, such as the rate of turbulent
mixing that occurs in complex multi-material flows, and to perform numerical
simulations of such flows with a decreased computational expense. These gained
abilities will have a direct impact on the improvement and development of many
high-tech products in the space, energy, and defense industries. Therefore, the
focus of the proposed study is to quantify the coupled large molar-mass ratio
and compressibility effects on the gravitationally driven turbulent flows. The
project will also deliver an educational component by generating content for
undergraduate- and graduate-level courses. It will also support outreach
activities to promote interest in fluid dynamics and turbulence, and more
broadly in STEM among local middle-school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multi-
material turbulence has so far mostly been studied with quasi-incompressible and
Boussinesq flows with small variations in material properties. The proposed
project aims to describe flow compressibility effects on Rayleigh-Taylor
unstable turbulent mixing with large density variations beyond the Boussinesq
approximation and the incompressible assumption. Novel direct numerical
simulations of buoyancy-driven flow that resolve all spatial and temporal scales
will be performed at large density ratios (&gt;2) with highly compressible
fluids using the adaptive mesh refinement to optimally deploy computational
resources. Unique statistical tools will be developed to quantify the non-
Boussinesq turbulent compressible mixing dynamics. The proposed simulations and
statistical analyses will be used to establish a deeper understanding of
turbulence transition for non-Boussinesq flows, and in particular, the small-
scale flow topology of the compressible active-scalar mixing. In addition, the
findings of this research are expected to inform new sub-grid-scale models and
strategies to decrease the computational cost of the multi-physics complex
fluid-flow simulations and validate the reduced-order models for these complex
flows. This project is jointly funded by Fluid Dynamics program and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.