* 2234013
* NSF-DFG Confine: MolPEC – Molecular Theory of Weak Polyelectrolytes in Confined Space
* MPS,CHE
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Jianzhong Wu, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 10/31/2025
* USD 400,000.00

In this project supported by the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational
Methods Program (CTMC) of the Division of Chemistry, Professor Jianzhong Wu of
the University of California-Riverside is developing theoretical models that
describe a class of polymers known as weak polyelectrolytes (WPEs). This is a
collaborative project with researchers from the Georg-August-Universität
Göttingen, Germany. WPEs are a large class of macromolecules that may either
protonate or deprotonate depending upon the environmental conditions such as pH
and salt concentration. Their stimuli-responsive behavior has been broadly
utilized in functional “smart” materials for applications such as targeted drug
delivery or underwater adhesion. Whereas practical applications often entail
chemical and physical processes under spatial confinement, the structure and
dynamics of WPEs remain incompletely understood due to the strong coupling of
reaction and polymer-mediated correlations at both monomer and polymer scales.
The rational design of WPE systems is calling for advances in theoretical and
computational methods that are able to accurately describe confinement effects
on local solution environment, protonation/deprotonation equilibrium, and the
dynamics of polymers reacting with ionizable surfaces. This research aims to
develop a theoretical framework for describing the properties of WPEs in
confined space and their responses to environmental conditions including
solution pH, electrolyte composition, and the chemistry of confinement. We will
utilize these techniques to investigate the interplay between ionic size,
valence, ionization, surface reactions and the dynamics of polymer binding that
cannot be reliably addressed with conventional methods. The theoretical and
computational advances will contribute to a rational design of weak
polyelectrolyte systems for a wide spectrum of technological applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on complementary advances in polymer density
functional theory (PDFT) and molecular simulation, the US-German team will study
the structure, thermodynamics, and dynamics of weak polyelectrolytes at and
between surfaces. The idea is to combine and extend Ising Density Functional
Theory (iDFT) and Single-Chain-in-Mean-Field (SCMF) simulation. iDFT considers
single-chain configurations and ionization states of segments on equal footing
and captures liquid-like packing and electrostatic correlations via the
molecular density. The joint probability distribution of configurations and
ionization states of an entire macromolecule is dictated by a single-chain
potential, which, in turn, is a functional of the molecular density. The high-
dimensional molecular density will be efficiently evaluated via SCMF simulation
on parallel, GPU-accelerated supercomputers, employing the iDFT single-chain
potential. The team will extend the simulation code, SOft coarse-grained Monte-
carlo Acceleration (SOMA), to incorporate electrostatic interactions and
nonlocal interactions along the molecular contour. The particle-based
simulation, Dynamic-iDFT (D-iDFT), accounts for long-range fluctuations and
allows us to study the configuration dynamics. Additionally, we will derive a
segment-based dynamic iDFT (SD-iDFT) for describing the local polymer mass and
charge density in response to environmental changes. The generic nature of the
theoretical techniques proposed in this work ensures broad applications to
diverse phenomena in polymeric and biological systems. This project will provide
training opportunities for early career scientists to gain interdisciplinary
research experience and cultivate their career interests in computational
molecular engineering. In addition to supporting graduate students, it offers
research-based thesis projects for undergrads in active military service,
veterans, and students from the University Honors Program (UHP). This project is
being awarded through the “Chemistry and Transport in Confined Spaces (NSF-DFG
Confine)" opportunity, a collaborative solicitation that involves the National
Science Foundation and Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(DFG).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.