* 2234077
* STTR Phase I:  Registration of Below-Canopy, Above-Canopy, and Satellite Sensor Streams for Forest Inventories
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Peter McHale, GAIA AI, INC
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 04/30/2024
* USD 275,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer (STTR)
Phase I project is to increase the volume and improve the accuracy of data on
the world’s forests. Presently, when collecting data on forests, surveyors must
choose between slow, laborious methods, or quick but inaccurate ones. This
project uses recent advances in sensors and machine learning to greatly improve
data collection speed without sacrificing accuracy. The resulting rich datasets
enable the construction of true “digital twins” of forests and open the door for
higher fidelity modeling of forest growth trajectories. This information is
useful both for timber firms seeking to maximize the potential of their assets
and environmental groups projecting how changes today could impact a forest’s
performance as a carbon-sink over the long term. The impacts on United States
citizens are widespread. Here are two examples: improved efficiency in the
timber industry brings down the cost and improves the quality of raw materials
and turning forests into denser carbon sinks helps meet climate change goals.
The availability of such broad and deep data on forests could also drive a boom
in research and understanding about the more complex and nuanced relationships
that drive forest health and productivity, launching entirely new sub-industries
around forestry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key technological innovations explored
in this STTR Phase I project are in constructing the most high-fidelity forest
model (digital twin) by combining disparate information sources, each with their
own advantages and disadvantages. Light detecting and ranging (LiDAR) and camera
sensors on backpacks provide high-quality inventory metrics nearly 1000 times
faster than manual measurements, but still require someone in the forest to wear
the backpack. Satellite imagery scales almost instantly to entire forests and
also through time with historical data but is limited by the top-down nature of
satellites and the resolution they offer, especially when historical and free
data sources are considered. Drone-based imagery sits in-between, with
advantages and disadvantages of both. In practice, combining information sources
that measure in such different ways can be very difficult. In this project, the
team explores how to express LiDAR-based metrics to best associate them with
top-down imagery from satellites and drones. From these associations, one can
then build powerful machine learning models and specialize them to individual
forests. This ability may enable the company to provide forest inventories and
forest management recommendations to timber companies at any scale: with
satellite imagery only or with a combination of backpack-LiDAR and satellite for
the highest accuracy over the entire forest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.