* 2234710
* CyberCorps Scholarship for Service: Interdisciplinary Cybersecurity and Cyber Forensics
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Min Kyung An, Sam Houston State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ambareen Siraj
* 12/31/2027
* USD 985,055.00

Sam Houston State University (SHSU) establishes a CyberCorps® Scholarship for
Service (SFS) program to serve four cohort classes of undergraduate and graduate
students with a strong emphasis on interdisciplinary education and research
opportunities for scholars. The program will prepare 20 highly qualified
students to become cyber leaders in the government workforce, with goals of
increasing the percentage of scholars who are from underrepresented groups and
supporting transfer students from community colleges. SHSU is a National Center
of Academic Excellence in Cyber Defense Education designated by National
Security Agency and Department of Homeland Security. As a Hispanic Serving
Institution, the SHSU SFS program will also facilitate interactions with other
minority serving institutions, building networks of universities and community
colleges in the region recruiting cyber scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SFS
program at SHSU will educate and train scholars in different aspects of
cybersecurity, such as Computer Science, Cybersecurity, Digital Forensics, and
more. The interdisciplinary collaboration offers practical experiences to ease
the transition into the workforce. The unique cross-department collaborative
environment at SHSU will develop an interdisciplinary approach to educating and
training cybersecurity workforce. Students will be prepared to make substantial
contributions to our country’s cybersecurity defenses. This program targets the
final two or three years of undergraduate and graduate students. The selected
scholars will receive academic advisement, research and career mentoring,
extracurricular activities, and coordinating placement with Office of Personnel
Management (OPM) for internships and service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is supported by the CyberCorps® Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which
funds proposals establishing or continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity
and aligns with the U.S. National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior
cybersecurity workforce. Following graduation, scholarship recipients are
required to work in cybersecurity for a federal, state, local, or tribal
Government organization for the same duration as their scholarship
support. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.