* 2234213
* CAREER: A convergent and transformative approach to understanding human access to groundwater and its impact on the hydrological cycle
* GEO,EAR
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2028
* Debra Perrone, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 02/29/2028
* USD 277,539.00

Groundwater is a critical resource for society, but information related to its
use is limited. The goals of this research are to improve our understanding of
where and how much groundwater is used. The research outcomes will be directly
relevant to water managers, irrigators, and policy makers, benefiting society.
The PI will use Hydrologic Sciences Workshops and Scientist Spotlight activities
to integrate research into the education of undergraduate students and into the
training of a graduate student. The integrated research and education plan will
enhance partnerships with state water agencies and produce data
products—groundwater well classifications by the geologic formation they tap,
and estimated groundwater use—that will enhance infrastructure for research. The
data products have the potential to improve existing water storage and depletion
tools, models, and assessments that rely on water-use data to constrain water
availability, contributing to broader policy discussions. Through this work, the
PI will build upon her track record of science communication by broadly
disseminating her research in general media outlets through short videos
designed to engage the public and policy makers with scientific findings. The
research prioritizes scalable methodologies and dissemination of scientific
methods and outputs through open access repositories, which will enable further
research beyond the expected outcomes from this work.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Humans dominate critical components of the hydrosphere,
but their impact is challenging to quantify. In the western United States, where
direct human impacts on the terrestrial water cycle are expected to be
pronounced, the extraction and integration of data from human systems is
critical to characterizing hydrologic fluxes. Using the western United States as
a case study, this work will integrate large datasets from human systems with
more traditional information used in the hydrologic sciences to meet the
following objectives: (i) characterize groundwater wells by the geologic
formation they tap; (ii) quantify groundwater withdrawals for irrigated
agriculture; and (iii) integrate research with planned educational activities
that synergistically train undergraduate students and simultaneously produce
research outputs. The research will take a convergent approach, combining the
PI’s training in hydrology, water-resources engineering, big-data analytics, and
water law to improve understanding of the hydrological cycle by characterizing
human access to groundwater. This research has the potential to improve existing
tools, models, and assessments of storage and depletion that rely on
understanding human impacts on the terrestrial water cycle and that rely on
water-use data to constrain water availability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal is co-funded by the Hydrologic Sciences and Education and Human
Resources programs in the Division of Earth Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.