* 2234888
* BRITE Pivot: Identification of the Biophysical Mechanisms Regulating Nuclear-Cytosolic Transport Capacity
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Daniel Conway, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* David Fyhrie
* 12/31/2024
* USD 370,871.00

The overall goal of this Boosting Research Ideas for Transformative and
Equitable Advances in Engineering (BRITE) Pivot research project is to develop a
comprehensive understanding of the biophysical regulation of the movement of
large molecules in and out of the cell nucleus. The nucleus is the largest
structure in a cell and has two membranes surrounding the DNA. The double
membrane has thousands of small pores called nuclear pore complexes (NPCs). The
NPCs are how molecules (including proteins and mRNA) move into and out of the
nucleus. This movement of molecules through NPCs is so important that mammals
(humans) and single-cell organisms all have it. Problems with NPC transport
occurs in many diseases, including cancer, infection by viruses, cardiovascular
disease, and aging. Because nearly every cell has a nucleus, the new methods for
measuring the molecules moving through the NPCs will be useful for research in
cell biology, biophysics, and mechanobiology. The educational goal of this
project is to introduce undergraduate students to the growing field of nucleus
mechanobiology by using these new research findings in educational and outreach
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The macromolecular structure of individual
nuclear pore complexes (NPCs) has been characterized in great detail, including
the localization and dynamics of many nucleoporin proteins. However, the
dynamics and regulation of NPC nuclear transport, at a spatial and temporal
level, have yet to be carefully studied, in part due to a limitation in tools
for detection of these processes. In this project biosensor-based approaches
will be developed and applied to better understand NPC nuclear transport in
order to understand of the biochemical and biomechanical factors that regulate
NPC transport. Results from these studies will provide substantial insight into
yet-unanswered fundamental questions concerning NPC regulation of transport: 1)
are there are spatial differences in NPC transport activity? 2) are individual
NPCs specialized for import versus export? and 3) does mechanical loading of
NPCs alter nuclear-cytosolic transport? This transformative research will
provide a new understanding of the biophysical regulation of NPC nuclear-
cytosolic transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.