* 2234291
* SBIR Phase I:  Directed evolution of site-specific bacterial transposase genes to alter specificity and efficiency of insertion of large DNA segments into restorable gene fusions
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Verne Luckow, SYNTHETIC VECTOR DESIGNS, LLC
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 07/31/2024
* USD 274,999.00

The broader impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) Phase I
project will be to develop methods to facilitate the efficient, reproducible
insertion of large DNA segments into stable locations on bacterial vectors,
viral and non-viral shuttle vectors, and the chromosomes of prokaryotic and
eukaryotic host cells comprising novel target sequences plus helper and donor
vectors that could impact many areas of synthetic biology. Directed evolution
experiments will be carried out to recover genes encoding bacterial transposase
variants that have altered specificity or increased efficiency of transposition,
compared to those recovered by products encoded by the wild-type transposase
genes. Homologues of the bacterial target site will be used to recover genes
encoding variant transposases that should function efficiently in eukaryotic
cells. Modified helper and donor vectors will also be constructed with promoters
and genes having optimized codon preferences to facilitate the efficient, direct
generation of composite vectors harbored in eukaryotic cells, and eventually,
the efficient, reproducible generation of cells harboring large DNA insertions
at one or more specific stable sites within a host cell
chromosome.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will exploit the key
properties of the bacterial Tn7 transposon system for much broader utilization
in many aspects of systems biology. Genes encoding transposases and accessory
proteins will be mutagenized to alter the specificity and enhance the efficiency
of insertion events in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells. This platform
could have advantages over other gene transfer approaches by allowing stable,
precise insertion events without the subsequent remobilization or the creation
of indels/rearrangements at the target site. The ability to move large segments
of DNA in such a manner would benefit many fields of synthetic
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.