* 2234047
* Diode-Laser-Based Doppler Wind Lidar for Vertical Wind Profiling
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Kevin Repasky, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 12/31/2025
* USD 336,148.00

Numerical models for weather forecasting rely heavily on observations of the
initial conditions of the atmosphere to provide accurate projections. For
shorter-term forecasts, it is important to have timely and dense observations of
the lower atmosphere. This project intends to fill in a current observational
gap by developing an instrument that can provide continuous, unattended
measurements of the vertical wind in the layer of the atmosphere closest to the
Earth’s surface. In addition to the potential impact on society through enhanced
forecasting, this award will provide education and training opportunities for
students in optical remote sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is for the
development of a prototype diode-laser-based (DLB) dual-edge direct detection
Doppler lidar for vertical wind profiling in the lower troposphere. This
development would represent a next step in providing a range of measurements via
lidar that began with the successful completion of the MicroPulse Differential
absorption lidar (MPD) network for water vapor and the ongoing upgrade to
provide remote sensing of temperature. In this project, the research team will
develop and demonstrate a DLB Doppler wind lidar instrument’s capability to
retrieve vertical wind velocity. The initial phase of the project is to conduct
a modeling study that looks at the performance tradeoffs of using etalons and
interferometers in the optical receiver. The construction of the lidar will then
commence, with the completion of a laser stabilization scheme, the construction
of the laser transmitter, design and machining of the temperature-stabilized
mounts, and assembling of the lidar receiver. Software development will consist
of modifying the current data acquisition program and completing the wind
velocity retrieval algorithm. The system would then be tested against other
observations of vertical wind.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.