* 2234455
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Selection pressures on skull and pelvis proportions at birth
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Marianne Cooper, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Robin Bernstein
* 03/31/2024
* USD 32,087.00

Being born is a process all humans must experience; however, even with modern
medical intervention, it is risky and potentially fatal for both mother and
infant. This doctoral dissertation project examines the evolution of skull and
pelvis shape in a wide range of monkeys and apes to better understand how and
when birthing difficulties may have arisen in different primate lineages, and
better determine whether the difficulties faced by humans are unique to our
species or a legacy shared by our taxonomic order. This project fosters graduate
student training of a female scientist and can provide a deeper understanding of
the difficulty of human childbirth for medical professionals. Results of this
research are communicated to the public through popular science
outlets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due to the tight fit between the birth canal and
the infant skull, modern human childbirth is more dangerous and more likely to
result in death for the infant or mother than in other large-bodied apes like
chimpanzees and gorillas. As a result, difficult childbirth has historically
been thought of as an evolved trait unique to humans, possibly stemming from the
combination of pelvic adaptations to walking upright and the evolution of
unusually large brains. However, smaller-bodied primates, such as the lesser
apes and some monkeys, have been reported to experience serious complications,
including maternal and infant death, during labor. This raises questions about
whether humans experience difficult births for the same reason as smaller-bodied
primates, or if difficult birth in humans is, in fact, unique. To address this
question, this project investigates patterns of evolution and natural selection
in the primate skull and pelvis, particularly in regions critical to childbirth,
using 3D scan data to compare the patterns and magnitude of shape differences in
the skull and pelvis to those expected based on genetic relationships among a
wide sample of ape and monkey species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.