* 2234141
* I-Corps: Artificial Intelligence Models to Improve Heart Failure Management
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Roman Lubynsky, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of technology that could improve heart failure management for many
stakeholders, including hospitals, integrated health organizations (IHOs),
medical insurers, electronic health records (EHRs) vendors, medical device
manufacturers, pharmaceutical companies, and contract research organizations
(CROs). Hospitals, IHOs and medical insurers may see value in the technology’s
potential to improve patient outcomes, increase productive lifespans, and reduce
healthcare costs. Pharmaceutical companies, medical device manufacturers, and
CROs may also see value in the technology’s potential to expedite and improve
patient recruitment for clinical trials. Furthermore, the technology could
ultimately be applied to adjacent chronic conditions, such as chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and kidney failure. The vision is to
develop an artificial intelligence (AI) platform that integrates siloed patient
data to improve management of chronic conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is based on the development of machine learning (ML) algorithms
that stratify and phenotype heart failure patients to identify those at risk of
adverse events and recommend appropriate interventions. The ML models are
trained on millions of de-identified patient records including chest radiographs
and numerical data (e.g., vital signs and lab tests). The trained artificial
intelligence (AI) models identify subtle indicators and patterns from the
clinical data and stratify patients on a granular level. The deep phenotyping
has the potential to personalize intervention plans for heart failure
management. The team developed machine learning (ML) algorithms to
quantitatively assess patient fluid overload from chest radiographs, finding
chest radiographs contain information that can be used to predict readmissions
of heart failure patients. The 30-day readmission rate correlates well with the
pulmonary edema severity that the AI model estimates based on the pre-discharge
chest x-ray images.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.