* 2234517
* Collaborative Research: CCRI: New: ScooterLab - A Programmable and Participatory Sensing Testbed using Micromobility Vehicles
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Anindya Maiti, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 02/28/2026
* USD 205,900.00

Micromobility vehicles, such as battery-powered e-scooters, are rapidly gaining
popularity in urban communities. Yet they also present significant safety, user
privacy, infrastructure, and planning challenges that must be addressed. The
research community –including computer and data scientists, engineers, and urban
planners– has started responding to these challenges, but the progress has been
ad hoc and slow. This can be primarily attributed to a lack of micromobility
infrastructure for collecting diverse rider, mobility, and contextual data in
realistic settings and environments. There is a critical need for a large-scale
and easily accessible research instrument to enable such data collection. To
this end, this project will design, develop, deploy, and manage ScooterLab, a
community research infrastructure comprising a highly customizable fleet of
micromobility vehicles. These battery-operated vehicles will be retrofitted with
heterogeneous sensing and remote communication and control capabilities to
crowd-sense data related to riders’ mobility, context, and environment, enabling
research at the confluence of (1) multiple computing disciplines, including
machine learning, computer vision, image processing, high-performance computing,
big data analytics, and privacy-enhancing technologies; and (2) (micro)mobility,
urban planning, and transportation research. The project will provide community
researchers with well-designed and usable web interfaces for requesting the
deployment of customized sensing experiments and for accessing carefully curated
datasets from past experiments and trials. The project will also conduct
periodic community outreach and engagement activities, including workshops to
promote the testbed’s use and share the outcomes of research activities enabled
by the testbed data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ScooterLab vehicles, besides
providing a convenient, electric option to its participants, will serve as
excellent instruments to crowd-sense fine-grained, multi-sensor scientific data,
enabling new research breakthroughs in Computer and Information Science and
Engineering (CISE) and other interdisciplinary domains. By empowering NSF CISE
and other research communities to openly access these scientific datasets, the
ScooterLab testbed will engender transformative advancements. Successful
development and deployment of ScooterLab will transform micromobility-related
and micromobility-supported research at the University of Texas at San Antonio
(UTSA), the University of Oklahoma (OU), and other collaborating organizations
and institutes of higher education. ScooterLab will improve opportunities
nationally for attracting and sustaining CISE, engineering, urban planning, and
policy faculty and students working on emerging intelligent transportation and
mobility solutions. The ScooterLab testbed will also serve as a foundational
research instrument for UTSA’s recently launched School of Data Science located
in downtown San Antonio, and contribute to the university’s initiatives to
reduce its carbon emissions. As a Minority-Serving Institution (59% Hispanic and
53% Female), UTSA will provide extensive research and participation
opportunities for people of color and women.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.