* 2234876
* Rapid Adjustments and Their Effects on Arctic Amplification
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Lorenzo Polvani, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 02/28/2026
* USD 760,789.00

Arctic amplification (AA) refers to the enhanced warming of the Arctic relative
to lower latitudes. Understanding the physical processes that give rise to AA is
critical, given its impacts on a range of human and natural systems. This
project tests the hypothesis that fast atmospheric processes – known as “rapid
adjustments” – are fundamental to the occurrence of AA. This represents a new
way of thinking about AA, which has traditionally been attributed to much slower
processes such as sea-ice loss. The project thus will enhance our understanding
of AA and its underlying physical mechanisms, and also has the potential to
fundamentally reshape how we view this phenomenon. Broader impacts of the
project will include the development of a new curriculum on climate modeling
that will be suitable for use in high school Earth science or physics
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite intense scientific scrutiny, the relative
importance of different physical processes in driving Arctic amplification (AA)
remains uncertain. Most studies to date to understand these processes have
focused on long time scales (e.g., multidecadal and longer). This project, in
contrast, focuses on the short time scales of AA. More specifically, the project
will test the hypothesis that rapid adjustments to external forcing – which are
the response to the forcing that is independent of global mean surface
temperature change – are fundamental to the occurrence of AA. This hypothesis
will be tested by analyzing a series of new and existing global climate model
(GCM) simulations. The project will provide the most systematic investigation to
date of the role of rapid adjustments in AA, potentially transforming current
understanding of AA and its underlying physical mechanisms. The project will
also enhance understanding of rapid adjustments more generally, including how
they differ between CO2 and non-CO2 forcings, and how they depend on the method
used to define them (e.g., “Gregory” regression versus fixed sea surface
temperature GCM simulations). The new GCM simulations created for the project
will be made freely available to the scientific community, thus contributing to
scientific discovery beyond the scope of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.