* 2234456
* PFI-RP:  Precision diagnostics for personalized cancer care: development of new drugs and selection of treatment
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Nancy Guo, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 03/31/2026
* USD 549,994.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation â€“
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project is to benefit cancer patients by using AN
innovative artificial intelligence (AI) technology to select optimal treatment
options tailored to each individual patient with the goal of prolonging patient
life. Despite emerging new therapies, cancer remains the second leading cause of
death in the United States. Clinical tools to select optimal treatment options
suitable for individual cancer patients are currently lacking. To meet these
unmet clinical needs, this project will employ an established cutting-edge
AI/big data technology to determine the best treatments and therapeutic options
for individual patients to improve cancer outcomes. Upon successful completion
of the development of this technology, the solution will reduce healthcare costs
by avoiding initial treatment failures. This project will also foster
transdisciplinary graduate research and educate future leaders in innovation and
entrepreneurship. This work, if success, will result in industrial investments
and workforce development in Appalachia, reducing health disparities in West
Virginia, which has high cancer incidence and mortality
rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is based on leading-edge AI
technology with competitive advantages in computational efficiency, scalability,
and accuracy over existing other methods for developing diagnostic gene tests
and new drugs. Using the proposed technology, new prototype gene assays can be
developed and patented for diagnosis, prognosis, and prediction of therapeutic
benefits in breast, ovarian, colon, and lung cancer patients. These gene assays
will have the ability to identify individuals who are at high-risk for tumor
recurrence and metastasis and select the drug treatments that will benefit the
patients the most. The proposed AI pipeline will initially focus on the
discovery of new drug options for treating lung cancer but can be expanded to
other types of cancers. This project has three goals: 1) to establish the
connection with multiple innovation networks/hubs, enhancing academia-industry
collaboration, 2) to accelerate market-oriented development of prototype
products, and 3) to develop a novel multidisciplinary graduate training program
across computer science, oncology, biomedical research, and entrepreneurship. To
overcome the technical hurdles in commercialization, this project will leverage
multi-modal patient data using several precision medicine companies'
manufacturing platforms to 1) validate the prototype gene assays for optimal
treatment selection and better cancer outcomes, and 2) establish an AI-based
technology for comprehensively discovering new drugs and/or repositioning Food
and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved drugs for cancer patients with failed
prior therapy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by
Partnerships for Innovation Program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.