* 2234921
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Small: Sub-millisecond Topological Feature Extractor for High-Rate Machine Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Jason Bakos, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 04/30/2025
* USD 266,000.00

High-rate systems are defined as dynamic systems experiencing high-rate and
high-amplitude events. Examples include hypersonic vehicles and active impact
mitigation strategies. The advanced operation of these mechanisms can only be
achieved through control and feedback systems capable of operating in the sub-
millisecond range, thus necessitating tight performance constraints.
Additionally, high-rate systems are highly nonlinear and nonstationary, for
which traditional real-time inference methods are incapable of providing
credible predictions. Topological data analysis is gaining popularity for
classifying complex time series. Its integration with architected machine
learning algorithms shows promise in advancing the predictive capabilities for
high-rate systems. However, topological data analysis is computationally
expensive and cannot be applied in the sub-millisecond range. This project will
investigate real-time topological data analysis capabilities by developing and
integrating advances in mathematical, software, and hardware foundations.
Successful completion of this project will yield theoretical foundations
enabling the integration of topological data analysis with machine learning for
modeling and forecasting time series, constituting a major leap from the pure
algebraic topological approach. It is envisioned that the developed foundations,
along with software and hardware artifacts, will find applications in
supercomputing, high-speed data storage, connected vehicles, financial fraud
mitigation, cyber-security, deep-fake detection, active blast shielding, and
hypersonic vehicles. This project will broaden participation in computing by
training multiple undergraduate and graduate students through a well-structured
research and education plan that leverages existing programs and partnerships at
the three partnering universities, including an undergraduate historically black
college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will demonstrate that complex
nonstationary systems can be learned in real-time by integrating modern
mathematical tools combined with advances in hardware, notably by generating a
field-programmable gate array design for a real-time predictor running on the
edge. To that end, customized variations of traditional topological data
analysis will be developed to meet the needs of the targeted modeling and
forecasting tasks while producing computationally efficient machine learning
representations. Concurrently, opportunities and limitations in conducting
topological data analysis in real-time and in producing a modular automated
programmer for heterogeneous hardware will be identified. Then, software and
hardware discoveries will be integrated to demonstrate real-time topological
data analysis and to conduct time series modeling and forecasting. Undergraduate
students involved in these research projects will be provided with long-term
mentored research and learning experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.