* 2234443
* Travel: NSF Student Travel Grant for 2022 Internet Measurement Conference (IMC)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Taejoong Chung, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 07/31/2023
* USD 20,000.00

The 22nd ACM SIGCOMM Internet Measurement Conference (IMC), sponsored by ACM
SIGCOMM will be held in Niche, France October 25 - October 27, 2022. This grant
will help 10 - 12 US-based graduate students participate in the conference to
disseminate their research outcomes, connect them with other researchers, and
train them as the next generation of scholars. The Internet Measurement
Conference (IMC) is the premier international conference in the area of Internet
measurement. Attending the conference will help them pursue research in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this travel grant, the IMC 2022 will bring
together the expertise, scholars, and students who might not otherwise be able
to attend. The conference will facilitate three days of interactions and mutual
learning and active discussion, which help the students learn from them. Upon
completion of the conference, the students will be required to submit a report
describing (1) the session that they find most valuable and (2) the efforts and
outcomes that they made for the new relationships and contacts made through
networking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal will increase the dissemination
of the conference's research results to a larger and more diverse audience.
Moreover, IMC has a strong track record of giving preference in grant awards to
women and minority students. To encourage researchers from under-represented
groups to get involved with Internet measurement research, in the selection
process, under-represented groups or institutions will be considered the most
important factor. Advertising to a wide range of colleges and universities,
participants from a more diverse set of institutions should also be able to
attend and benefit from the conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.