* 2234580
* Conference: Frontiers in artificial intelligence and machine learning for ecology: 17-20 October 2022
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Kathleen Weathers, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 08/31/2024
* USD 19,230.00

Ecological and artificial intelligence theories are both about understanding how
complex systems work and defining system predictability. This award will support
a workshop convening experts at the nexus of data science, artificial
intelligence, computer science, and ecology. The aim is to identify aligned
research frontiers, refine a common vocabulary, and support cross-fertilization
supporting artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) development to
target wicked challenges in leveraging ecological theory and data assimilation
to generate predictive understanding of complex system properties such as
ecosystem resilience and pathogen emergence Artificial intelligence and machine
learning have been heralded as revolutionary approaches for harnessing big data
and generating hypotheses and predictions for complex systems. Traditional
theory and process-based approaches in ecology can be powerful tools for
learning but are often limited to low-dimensional analyses. Yet ecological
systems are complex and multi-dimensional in space, in time, and in networks of
interactions - and current directions in ML and AI development are exploring
approaches to understand predictability in such complex
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite burgeoning use of machine learning
approaches to describe pattern, process, and predictions in ecological systems,
there are a paucity of resources for critically evaluating how these approaches
can align with ecological theory development and process understanding.
Likewise, there are limited opportunities for ecologists to interact with the
computer and data scientists developing AI and ML, and these interactions are a
critical opportunity for cross-fertilization to explore beyond current practices
and refine shared targets. This workshop will produce two published deliverables
in widely known forms for both communities that will highlight convergent
opportunities for AI and ML development for ecological, ecosystems, computer,
and data science audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.