* 2234748
* Career: Moving During Deliberation-Online Interplay Between Deciding and Acting
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Joshua Cashaback, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 04/30/2028
* USD 351,826.00

Many human activities, such as walking in a crowded hallway or steering a car to
avoid an accident, involve making fast decisions while controlling one's
movements. Researchers have extensively (but largely independently) studied
human decision making and movement control so that their joint influence remains
poorly understood. This CAREER award uses computational modeling,
neurophysiological recording, and behavioral methods to address the real-time
interplay between the evolving decision-making process and movement control
during human reaching. Many neurological disorders such as stroke and
Parkinsonâ€™s disease involve both motor and cognitive deficits. This research
program aims to uncover the mechanisms that underpin the interplay between
movement and decision making, paving the way for targeted, patient-specific
neurorehabilitation of motor and cognitive deficits. The long-term goal is to
create sustainable and reciprocal pipelines between research, education, and
community outreach by focusing on the interplay between decision making and
movement control. The investigator has a strong commitment to diversity and
provides training opportunities underrepresented minorities and women
undergraduate and graduate students. Open-access educational games and
interactive programs will be developed and made freely available to grade-school
and high-school students, with the aim of raising awareness about neurological
disorders and inspiring a new and diverse generation of STEM scientists and
industry leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators merge computational
models from optimal feedback control and decision sciences to understand how
goal-related evidence influences the online control of movement. The subject's
movements provide a real-time measure of the evolving decision-making process in
order to assess 1) how rapid visuomotor feedback loops integrate and express
both goal-related evidence and potential energetic cost and 2) whether reward
boosts the need to modulate movement vigor and the efficacy of visuomotor
feedback during decision making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by The Perception, Action, and Cognition (PAC) Program, the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the Decision, Risk, and
Management Sciences (DRMS) Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.