* 2234567
* PFI-TT:  Developing Protein-based Edible Coatings to Extend the Shelf Life of Fruits and Vegetables
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Muhammad Rahman, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 08/31/2024
* USD 249,610.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is the development of an innovative, low
cost, healthy and sustainable edible coating technology that can extend the
shelf life of fruits and vegetables to combat the challenge of food preservation
and waste management effectively and simultaneously. Among all foods, fruits and
vegetables are the ones with the highest categories of losses, with up to 50-60%
of spoiled produce discarded in landfills. The proposed innovation will provide
a desirable and healthy protein-fortified coating for food preservation.
Moreover, the coating is washable, edible, and glossy providing an all-
encompassing yet desirable food preservation solution that benefits consumers,
sellers, and farmers. The proposed coating technology will enhance the window
for the markets of edible coatings that focuses on the growing health- and
sustainability-focused retail stores and health-conscious consumers. Other than
reducing food waste and economic losses, the anticipated technology could have
significant environmental impacts. For example, reducing food waste can save 25%
of the freshwater supply, 3.9 billion tons of fertilizer, 300 million barrels of
oil, and 135 million tons of greenhouse gases every year in the USA alone. This
project will also benefit the education and training of students related to
research translation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is based on the
development of an eco-friendly and biodegradable protein-based nanocomposite
coating that can be applied to the surface of perishable fruits and vegetables
of any shape. On the lab scale, egg and soy-protein composite coatings have
significantly extended the shelf life and cosmetic appearance of various fruits.
However, testing on a pilot scale will provide a detailed understanding of
performance and cost matrices. To fully understand the technological viability
of commercializing the proposed coating, the optimum combinations of various
proteins with cellulose nanomaterials, chemical modifications of proteins via
selected plasticizers and crosslinkers, and easily scalable mechanisms for
controlled coating methods will be explored. The coating will extend the shelf
life by reducing maturation, senescence, dehydration, and microbial growth rate.
The deliverables of this project will be a minimum viable product via pilot-
scale studies. Overall, with an end goal of improving the environmental
performance and sustainability of the food industry, the outcomes of the
research will lead to the development of a protein-based inexpensive, and green
coating that will enhance the shelf-life of fruits with the added benefits of
biodegradability, washability, edibility, and cosmetic appearance and provide a
business feasibility analysis for the potential commercialization of the
product.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.