* 2234627
* Role of ecological interactions on diversification of coexisting species in microbial communities
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Alejandra Rodriguez Verdugo, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Judy Stone
* 03/31/2026
* USD 672,995.00

Microbial communities — or groups of microorganisms that live in a shared
environment — perform essential functions that support life on earth, from the
cycling of elements through ecosystems to digesting complex foods. Many of these
functions rely on an incredibly diverse pool of microbial species. Understanding
what forces have shaped this diversity is important to understand how microbial
communities function. A complete understanding of these functions would
ultimately allow scientists to restore ecosystems and improve human health.
While many scientific theories explain why such microbial diversity exists,
scientists currently have little experimental evidence. The project will provide
this missing evidence by looking at a phenomenon known as evolutionary
branching, in which an ancestral microbial population splits into two descendant
populations. The experiment will test a new idea about how the exchange of
nutrients from one species to another can lead to two different evolutionary
strategies that maximize growth. One strategy involves swimming toward the
nutrients leaked by the other species and consuming the resources before others
do. The other strategy is not to move and save the energy that would otherwise
be required for swimming. Over time, these two strategies can set populations
onto different trajectories and eventually lead to the creation of new species.
The project will also develop techniques to maintain an experimental system,
which will help other groups of scientists study the origins of microbial
species diversity. A third impact of the research is to provide opportunities to
increase the participation of underrepresented groups in science. Finally, to
disseminate the importance of microbial research to a public audience, the
researchers will work with science-education interns to implement a middle
school curriculum on the impacts of microbial biodiversity on ecosystem
functioning and climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In commensal interactions,
one species benefits while the other is unaffected. The researchers will
experimentally determine the role of commensal interactions in the formation of
new bacterial species in microbial communities. They will culture bacteria in a
commensal relationship: Acinetobacter, which produces a metabolic by-product,
and Pseudomonas, which can consume that by-product. Using these cultures, they
will (1) assess the conditions promoting divergence of Pseudomonas lineages by
evolving the commensalism under lab conditions over 1000 generations; (2)
characterize fitness tradeoffs and test frequency-dependent selection for
divergent lineages; and (3) assess coevolution and divergence by tracking the
fate of adaptive mutations in populations. To achieve this, the researchers will
employ a combination of experimental evolution, physiological assays, whole
genomes and population sequencing, and reciprocal invasion experiments. The
research will provide an exceptionally comprehensive characterization of
microbial speciation in a coevolutionary context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.