* 2234422
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Effects of Language Experience on Statistical Learning in Infants and Adults
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2025
* Toben Mintz, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 02/28/2025
* USD 18,949.00

This doctoral dissertation project examines how the particular language a person
knows influences how they learn an additional language. The project also
examines whether knowing more than one language affects how a person learns an
additional language. To address these questions, the researchers carry out
experiments with infants who are exposed to only one language, infants who are
bilingually exposed to two languages, and with monolingual English-speaking
college students who are in the process of learning a second language. The
experiments for all the participants involve testing their ability to learn
artificial languages that have been designed to have important similarities to
real human languages. By investigating what properties of the artificial
languages are easier or harder to learn for various groups of participants, the
researchers understand how a person's overall experience with languages
influences their learning of new ones. The results of this project generate
insights into the process of normal language learning that can be used to design
language interventions for people with language learning difficulties. This
project provides training opportunities for undergraduate students, to gain
expertise in psycholinguistic research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The language
properties we investigate involve dependencies between words that arise because
of the grammatical rules of the language, in particular non-adjacent
dependencies (NADs) that involve words that are not immediately adjacent. For
example, in typical sentences in English, the form of the verb and the following
noun depend on each other, but can be separated. Discovering these dependency
patterns is essential for language acquisition. While recent research suggests
that learners’ prior experience within a laboratory testing session shapes their
expectations and influences the types of patterns they subsequently track, there
has been little attention to the influence of learners’ broader language
experience on subsequent learning. This project uses behavioral measures to
examine the interactions between someone’s prior language experience and the
ability to learn and generalize from dependency patterns in a new language. The
first experiment compares the performances of monolingual and bilingual
12-month-old infants learning different languages on a NAD learning task. It
tests two hypotheses: 1) that the structures in 12-month-old infants’ exposure
to language influence their sensitivity to NADs, and 2) that their bilingual
status influences this sensitivity. The second experiment compares the learning
of different dependency patterns in native English speakers learning two
different languages, and monolingual English speakers. In this experiment, the
researchers test the effects of learning one language on the ease of learning an
additional language, examining how the particular language that is learned make
certain properties of the additional language easier to
learn.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.