* 2234257
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Sound Automatic Exploit Generation
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Nico Naus, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2026
* USD 192,607.00

Modern society relies on computer software. Security vulnerabilities in software
systems pose a serious threat as vulnerabilities are increasingly exploited to
leak users' confidential data, leak computer systems' privileged information,
and hijack computer systems to create malicious behaviors, among others. Current
techniques for detecting exploitable software vulnerabilities lack a
mathematical basis in that they cannot prove soundness of detected exploits or
prove the absence of classes of exploits. The project will develop techniques
that can establish the presence of a class of memory-related exploitable
software vulnerabilities. Thus, if a given software has such vulnerabilities,
the project's techniques are guaranteed to detect them. The project targets
legacy software systems for which source codes may not be fully available, and
therefore targets their binary codes. The project's methodology involves
translating the binary code to a model that permits relatively easier reasoning
of the code's exploitable vulnerabilities. On such a model, the methodology's
algorithms compute initial program values that can result in the code's
exploitable vulnerabilities to manifest, if there exist such values. Each step
of the methodology is mathematically proven correct in a theorem-prover, a
software tool that allows mathematically proving properties of algorithms. The
project's techniques will be applied to industrial-strength production software
systems to detect exploitable vulnerabilities and thereby demonstrate the
techniques' effectiveness. The project's results will be broadly disseminated
through publications of the results in the relevant software security literature
and open sourcing the project's tool implementations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Security vulnerabilities in software systems pose a
serious threat to modern society. Existing techniques for detecting exploitable
software vulnerabilities are largely non-formal. That is, current exploit
detection techniques do not provably establish the presence of exploits (if they
exist). The project's objective is to develop formal techniques and toolchains
that can prove the presence of a class of memory corruption-related exploits,
and targets legacy (binary) software systems for which source codes may not be
fully available. The project formulates exploit detection as a reachability
problem: computing initial program states that are provably guaranteed to reach
exploitable program states in some execution of the program. The project uses
program logic triples, a variant of Hoare Logic triples, that formally defines
the relation between the reachability of exploit states and the preconditions
which allow them to occur. This relation is then used to compute the search
space of preconditions. The project's methodology involves lifting the binary
code to a high-level model that is provably over-approximative in that the model
subsumes programmer-intended as well as unintended code behaviors. The lifted
model is then instrumented with assertions that describe a class of memory
corruption-related exploits. Preconditions that populate the search space of
exploit states are then computed. The methodology's steps are proven correct in
a theorem prover, which enables provably establishing the presence of exploits.
The project's toolchain will be applied to industrial-strength production
software systems as application case studies. The project's results will be
broadly disseminated through publications of the results in the relevant
software security literature and open sourcing the project's tool
implementations. Additionally, they will be integrated into popular Integrated
Development Environments and decompilers, and into a graduate course at Virginia
Tech.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.