* 2234390
* EAGER: Quantum Manufacturing: Atomic-layer Etching Manufacturing Processes for High Performance Superconducting Quantum Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2025
* Austin Minnich, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 01/31/2025
* USD 299,999.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) Quantum Manufacturing
award supports research contributing new knowledge to a novel atomic-scale
manufacturing process, promoting both the progress of science and advancing
national prosperity. Quantum computers, sensors, and other devices harnessing
the counter-intuitive effects of quantum mechanics are now of intense interest
due to their potential applications in science and technology. However, new
atomically precise manufacturing processes beyond those used for semiconductors
are needed. Conventional semiconductor processing can result in decreased
performance of quantum devices spurring the development of manufacturing
approaches compatible with the materials and structures comprising quantum
devices. This award supports fundamental research to provide needed knowledge
for the development of atomic layer etching for quantum technology. Atomic layer
etching has the potential to enable precise manufacturing on the atomic scale
with precision beyond existing manufacturing methods. Such new processing
techniques could lead to quantum devices that could perform significantly better
than present devices, facilitating their eventual applications. Results of this
research will benefit the U.S. economy and society through the further
development of new technologies. This research involves several disciplines
including manufacturing, plasma processing, microwave engineering, and materials
science. The multi-disciplinary approach will help broaden participation of
underrepresented groups in research and positively impact engineering
education.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Realizing the revolutionary potential of
quantum devices based on superconducting circuits will require orders-of-
magnitude improvements in coherence times and stability. The present limiting
mechanisms of superconducting quantum hardware arise from surface imperfections
introduced from traditional manufacturing methods of microfabricated systems.
Atomic layer etching (ALE) is a novel manufacturing process with potential to
overcome this long-standing challenge by enabling a subtractive manufacturing
process with atomic monolayer precision and in-situ passivation capability. This
project will develop ALE processes to engineer the surfaces of dielectric and
metallic films used in superconducting quantum devices with potentially greatly
improved precision, markedly reducing the negative effects of two-level systems
(TLS). The outcome of this research will be a novel manufacturing process to
realize superconducting quantum circuits for which surface imperfections are no
longer the dominant contributor to decoherence and low frequency
fluctuations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.