* 2234513
* EAGER: Moire Cavity Single Emitter Lasers (MOCSELs)
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2023,11/30/2024
* Eric Mazur, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 11/30/2024
* USD 199,999.00

Periodic patterns of holes etched into semiconductor slabs can serve as
efficient cavities for microscale and nanoscale lasers by controlling the
interaction between input energy and the emitters in the cavity. This research
focuses on the possibilities of a new kind of semiconductor laser cavity, formed
of two such slabs, where control of the lasing threshold and frequency may be
done by changing the angle of one slab with respect to the other. Such cavities
are called moiré photonic crystal cavities, because of the moiré patterns that
are formed by the combined patterns of the two slabs. This exploratory research
will be multi-facetted and strongly integrated, combining cavity simulation and
design, nanofabrication of the moiré cavities, development of the means of
controllable adjustment of the twist angle, and analysis of the lasing behavior
of these new devices. Beyond the achievement of a suite of new efficient,
tunable microscale and nanoscale lasers, this exploration will provide important
insights into the details of the lasing process itself. The integrative and
collaborative approach will provide an exceptionally rich research and education
environment for the postdocs and graduate students involved in the project. We
also expect that the multidisciplinary and collaborative aspects of this EAGER
project will be amplified by the participation of undergraduates and high-school
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Photonic crystal slabs permit increasing the
efficiencies and dramatically lowering the threshold of micro-scale and
nanoscale semiconductor lasers. The proposed EAGER program on Moiré Cavity
Single Emitter Lasers (MOCSELs) will further push the limits of lasing
efficiency by fabricating moiré photonic crystal cavities, where two photonic
crystal slabs are twisted relative to each other. The twist angle will be used
to tune the quality factor, resonant frequency, and spatial distribution of the
cavity modes, matching modes to atomic-scale emitters, such as InGaN quantum
dots to achieve targeted and tunable non-linear cavity coupling to single
quantum dots. This multi-facetted yet tightly integrated program will develop
the simulations and design of the appropriate cavity structure, matched to the
materials and emitters, implement the nanoscale fabrication processes needed to
realize the design and match cavities to emitters, and as well, explore and
implement Micro-electromechanical means to tune the twist angle, achieving
optimal coupling across a range of quantum dot frequencies and spatial
locations. Beyond demonstrating proof-of-concept of new, tunable, and highly
efficient nanoscale lasers, the program research should provide transformational
insights into the mechanisms of lasing, and cavity-emitter interactions, and
therefore tunable lasers at the single-emitter level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.