* 2234410
* PFI-RP: Novel coated geotextile to enhance water drainage from soil
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Jie Han, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 03/31/2026
* USD 565,996.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation-
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project includes establishing a new technological
platform and associated fundamental science allowing for the rational design of
geotextiles (factory-made fabric products) that can drain water from soil with
high transport efficiency. Geotextiles have been widely utilized in
infrastructures including roads, railways, and airports to improve soil
properties by serving functions of drainage, separation, filtration, and
reinforcement. Recently, a wicking geotextile that possesses deep grooved fibers
was demonstrated to be able to remove water from soils through evaporation at
the edges exposed to air. However, its water removal capability becomes limited
either by high humidity or by fine particles in the soil. To overcome these
limitations, this project will apply a porous absorbent coating on a wicking
geotextile that can generate higher suction of water, and attract, transport,
and discharge water laterally to the edges. This project will provide a solution
to difficult water-related infrastructure problems that may pose risks to the
public and require significant funding for repair and maintenance.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will advance the knowledge of water
absorption and transport behavior on an absorbent with tailored wettability.
Application of an absorbent to a wicking geotextile will enhance its
effectiveness in removing water from soils with fine particles. The technical
hurdles to be addressed include: effectiveness and durability of the porous
absorbent, application of the coating on geotextiles, interfacial behavior
between absorbent and soil, survivability of the absorbent coating during
geotextile installation in soil, and lateral water transport and discharge
in/from the geotextile buried in soils. The specific research objectives are to:
(1) manufacture an absorbent-coated geotextile; (2) evaluate the water drainage
performance of the geotextile in soils; (3) gain insights into the controlling
factors for the effectiveness of the geotextile in soils through numerical
modeling; and (4) develop design methods to account for the benefits of the
geotextile in roads. The results and insights obtained from the proposed work
will serve as a cornerstone for geosynthetic applications that will enhance the
water removal from soils by incorporating an absorbent with tailored solid-
liquid interfacial wettability. The research outcomes will also allow for
rational design of geotextile surfaces enabling absorbing and transporting water
even in unsaturated soils.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.