* 2234399
* Extraordinary Radiative Transfer through Hyperbolic Material and at Interface
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Xianfan Xu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 02/28/2026
* USD 350,928.00

For centuries, radiation has been considered a heat transfer process across
space, with rates of this process inside a material being much slower than
conduction. The proposed project will investigate newly discovered, greatly
enhanced radiative transfer inside a type of material called hyperbolic
material. The proposed research will contribute to the fundamental
understandings of this new radiative transfer process inside materials and
across different types of materials and devices. The recent rapidly developed
and discovered new materials including hyperbolic materials have shown great
promises in advancing modern technologies including photonics, electronics,
energy conversion, and future quantum technologies. Enhancing heat transfer will
significantly impact technology developments based on these new materials as
heat transfer is vital for the performance of these materials and devices. This
project will also have significant efforts in human resource development,
including contributions to training of graduate and undergraduate students in
emerging engineering areas, expanding undergraduate education based on newest
research results, and outreach to elementary-to-high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is built upon extensive
expertise in thermal transport studies, especially the recent discovery of
significant radiative transport in hyperbolic materials enabled by a large
number of propagating energy carrying modes called hyperbolic phonon polaritons.
The proposed work will investigate fundamentals of this new heat transfer
process in detail by combined theoretical/computational and experimental
studies, with the use of many advanced computational and experimental methods,
including: (1) theoretical studies of spectral and temperature dependent
radiative transport; (2) experimental measurements of temperature dependent,
spectral and spatial radiative transport and total radiative transport; (3)
greatly enhanced radiative transfer across nanometer-size gaps; (4) greatly
enhanced radiative transport across materials and devices. Collectively, these
studies will enhance understanding of the fundamentals and the limits of
radiative transfer and to guide thermal design or co-design for engineering
applications. The subjects studied in this project can be extended to other
fields of science and engineering, including radiation at small scales for high
resolution imaging and sensing, infrared radiation sources for medical use, and
design of advanced electronic, photonic, and energy harvesting
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.