* 2234802
* EAGER: A Training Tool to Help Teachers Recognize and Reduce Bias in Their Classroom Behaviors and Increase Interpersonal Competence
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Susan Fussell, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

What teachers say is important, but how they say it is also important. Nonverbal
behavior can unintentionally convey information about teachers’ emotional states
and personal biases. Poor nonverbal communication can affect teachers’ abilities
to deliver lessons, assess students and manage classrooms. Effective nonverbal
communication increases student engagement, improves classroom management, and
make students feel that the teacher cares about them. Students with teachers who
communicate effectively nonverbally are more motivated to learn and demonstrate
more academic progress. Nonverbal communication is a skill that can be improved
with guidance and reflection. This project will work with students and teachers
to prototype training modules in virtual reality that track teacher movement.
This will compare teachers’ nonverbal behaviors with transformed nonverbal
behaviors that would effectively engage students. It will also give students
from underrepresented backgrounds the opportunity to observe and participate in
our research at both Cornell University and University of North Texas through
lab visits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Early Grant for Exploratory Research
(EAGER) will contribute to the fields of education and learning technologies by
exploring how nonverbal behaviors are expressed and can best be transformed in
virtual reality classrooms, and how skills learned in virtual reality
environments can be transferred to teaching in physical classrooms. This
exploration will advance our theoretical understanding of how teachers use
nonverbal behavior effectively in the classroom and develop novel techniques for
helping teachers to recognize and selectively adapt nonverbal behavior to their
individual students’ interpersonal communication styles in the context of small
to medium classes (5-30 students). The exploration will also contribute to the
field of human-computer interaction through the development of novel interfaces
to display contextualized nonverbal behavior and promote reflection on this
behavior, as well as to the fields of social psychology, communication,
Computer-Mediated Communication (CMC), teacher education, and computer-supported
collaborative work by developing new corpora and theoretical models of how
nonverbal behaviors are evidenced in classroom settings. This EAGER will
contribute to designing guidelines on how to aid self-reflection on nonverbal
behavior, and how behavior is interpreted in the classroom by both teachers and
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.