* 2234618
* PFI-RP:  Efficiency and Driving Range Improvements of Electric Vehicles through a Novel Battery-Inverter Architecture
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2026
* Alex Huang, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 02/28/2026
* USD 550,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation –
Research Partnership (PFI-RP) project is to enable the automotive industry to
make battery-powered electric vehicles (BEVs) more affordable and with a longer
driving range. This project will support the transition from fossil fuels to
clean electric energy. Reduced costs and improved performance in terms of higher
efficiency and longer driving range will accelerate the adoption of the BEV
technology. The project will also create a unique partnership with an automotive
industry leader that will train the next generation technical and
entrepreneurship leaders to lead the US automotive industry. The outreach
efforts through student competitions and the Engineer Your World high school
engineering program will broaden the participation of a diverse student
population. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is based on a disruptive
battery-inverter architecture. Today’s battery in a BEV is a high voltage system
based on series connection of many low voltage battery cells. In such
architecture, all cells must perform together as a whole and any non-performing
cell degrades the whole system’s performance and increases the cost due to the
need for complicated management and mitigation components. The proposed project
addresses this issue by allowing battery cells to operate almost independently
based on their state of the health and state of charge. This architecture can
substantially extend the overall battery life, effectively reducing the system
cost. The novel inverter can also achieve much higher power conversion and motor
efficiency, further extending the drive range of the BEVs. The project will
develop a prototype system that will be tested to verify the thermal and
electrical performance of the battery-inverter system and its suitability to be
implemented in future BEV platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.