* 2234633
* Fostering More Accurate and Identity-Affirming Science Teaching and Learning at Hispanic-Serving Institutions
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Antonio Duran, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 05/31/2026
* USD 91,987.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by increasing and diversifying
the STEM and healthcare workforce with individuals equipped with accurate and
identity-affirming scientific knowledge and experiences. A team of faculty from
Colorado State University, Florida International University, and Arizona State
University will investigate how the norm of “neutrality” (i.e., not
acknowledging the role of social identities and social contexts on science or
the role of science on society) impacts undergraduate science teaching at
Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs), how some instructors break free of this
norm to teach identify-affirming content, and how this change impacts students.
This work at HSIs is important because of the growing interest in how educators
within HSIs are intentionally serving, rather than simply enrolling, students
from minoritized backgrounds and attending to different subgroups within
Hispanic/Latinx communities. Understanding how to support instructors to break
with the norm of “neutrality” should create more welcoming environments for
students with a range of identities and increase student belongingness,
interest, and retention in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project plans to
employ a mixed methods (interviews and surveys), multi-site case study approach
at five HSIs. Three goals guide the execution of the project. The first is to
characterize how undergraduate biology instructors at HSIs make decisions about
if and how to include identity-affirming content in their courses and the
various factors that influence these decisions. Second is to establish how
identity-affirming content in biology impacts student experiences, such as
belongingness, interest in biology content, and perceived content relevance. The
third goal is to develop a survey instrument to capture student perceptions of
the prevalence of different instructor approaches to biology instruction at
HSIs. The project team will specifically focus on instructors’ use of identity-
neutral or identity-affirming content in biology classes, and the impact this
type of content has on students with minoritized identities. This project takes
a novel research approach by examining instructors’ decisions regarding both
content and pedagogy, a more holistic approach to understanding how instructors
create identity-affirming environments. This project should advance
understanding of how instructors make decisions about their pedagogy and course
content in the context of HSIs. The NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through its Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.