* 2234326
* 21st Century Research-Cyberinfrastructure for MSIs through the Minority Serving - Cyberinfrastructure Consortium (MS-CC): A phased approach to engage the Missing Millions
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2027
* Ana Hunsinger, INTERNET2
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2027
* USD 12,499,916.00

This project expands access to the cyberinfrastructure necessary for research
relevant to Minority Serving Institutions (MSIs), first targeting several
Historically Black Colleges and Universities (HBCUs) and a Tribal College. In
collaboration with Internet2, through a Cyberinfrastructure Center of Excellence
Demonstration Pilot award, the Minority Serving-Cyberinfrastructure Consortium
(MS-CC) supports HBCUs, Tribal Colleges and Universities (TCUs), and other MSIs
by providing cyberinfrastructure-focused professional development opportunities,
advocacy, and community engagement. This project further accelerates
cyberinfrastructure-centric research capacity at MS-CC campuses, taking an
approach that can become a repeatable model that drives transformational change
in research cyberinfrastructure on a wide range of MSI campuses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through Proof-of-Concept Grants (PoCGs) and three shared
Tiger Teams, Cyberinfrastructure, Stakeholder Alignment, and Research and
Education, the MS-CC is taking the necessary steps to address challenges faced
by many MSIs. The PoCGs support the funding of key cyberinfrastructure
technology investments (e.g., network services, data storage) as well as local
capacity for facilitating researchers and educators in their identification and
pursuit of local and external cyberinfrastructure resources for research and
STEM education activities. The Tiger Teams provide facilitation and capability
building support for these investments, conducting campus-specific
cyberinfrastructure assessments, as well as the expertise to drive
implementation of cyberinfrastructure plans and engagement with the greater
research and education community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MS-CC is a prism and
change agent that advances strategies and programs to directly engage and
support the 21st century digital STEM workforce by advancing the important
research and education work of HBCUs, TCUs, Hispanic Serving Institutions
(HSIs), and other MSIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.