* 2234945
* CyberCorps(R): Scholarship for Service (Renewal): An Interdisciplinary Cybersecurity Program with Technical and Managerial Paths
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Thomas Cusick, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 06/30/2028
* USD 1,312,252.00

Security training has become the foundation of societal resilience, often
necessary for organizational effectiveness. The State University of New York at
Buffalo (UB) is a designated National Center of Academic Excellence (CAE) in
cybersecurity education and a CAE in cybersecurity research (CAE-R). UB will
leverage this security foundation by participating in the CyberCorps(R):
Scholarship for Service (SFS) program to prepare highly qualified cybersecurity
professionals to enter the federal workforce. This project builds on a
successful program and develops a comprehensive cybersecurity curriculum based
on security best practices, experiential learning, and applied research. It will
develop authentic pathways to cybersecurity by expanding the program's scope to
include undergraduate students and by recruiting students for graduate studies.
This project also plans to inspire middle and high school students to become
security problem solvers and security professionals. The project will provide
scholars with an enhanced, interdisciplinary cybersecurity experience by
engaging faculty from computer science, engineering and management sciences with
support from mathematics and law at UB. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will
continue to develop and sustain a successful, broad cybersecurity program by
building on existing research on ransomware, blockchain technology, and
information authenticity. The project will train 24 students in four cohorts in
both technical and managerial paths. A minor in cybersecurity will be offered
for undergraduate students and an advanced certificate for graduate students
specializing in cybersecurity. UB will leverage the state-of-the-art resources
in Buffalo's Regional Computer Forensics Lab (RCFL) to offer 15 high-level
experience-based courses. These courses include Software Testing, Blockchain
Application Development, Systems Security, Network Security, Privacy, Ethics,
and an integrative Information Assurance course that will prepare students for
industry certification. The project team will actively engage underrepresented
groups through the local Minority Management Society, the SUNY Louis Stokes
Alliance for Minority Participation program, and the Women in Management and
Engineering and Science groups to recruit students and conduct cybersecurity
awareness workshops in Buffalo. Partnerships with local industries will allow
educational opportunities and talent development in the emerging domains of
artificial intelligence, analytics, and blockchain technology. These stakeholder
engagement opportunities will broaden the impact of the project’s cybersecurity
efforts within the community. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is supported
by the CyberCorps® Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which funds proposals
establishing or continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity and aligns with
the U.S. National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity workforce.
Following graduation, scholarship recipients are required to work in
cybersecurity for a federal, state, local, or tribal Government organization for
the same duration as their scholarship support.  &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.