* 2234676
* Conference: Enabling the Implementation of Integrated and Scalable Smart Cities
* TIP,ITE
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Burcu Akinci, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Michal Ziv-El
* 09/30/2023
* USD 60,000.00

Less than ten years ago, the promise of smart cities seemed endless and ripe
with opportunity to improve citizen quality of life through application of
technologies such as cameras and Internet of Things (IoT) sensors with a layer
of artificial intelligence (AI) to streamline and optimize operations and
outcomes. Since that time, the shine has worn off. Projects often do not go past
the pilot stage, are application and context specific, are not implemented at
scale, do not explicitly integrate community input during design, planning or
operation, and largely consist of isolated platforms or systems of operation
without integration. To address these issues, we will hold a workshop focusing
on the significant technical, policy and socioeconomic challenges with respect
to the integration and scalability of smart city technologies, approaches and/or
deployments in real-world settings. Current barriers to integration and/or
scaling of the above are likely also related to current policy/regulations,
financing, and workforce gaps and as such, they will be considered to inform the
research agenda. The workshop will discuss potential solutions to the
scalability and integration challenges to help guide future NSF investments in
smart cities deployments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will convene a
series of online “listening sessions” with diverse stakeholders from around the
United States, including rural, urban and suburban perspectives, to better
inform our understanding of the aforementioned challenges. We will use these
listening sessions to develop a set of research questions which will be refined
in an in-person workshop where we will discuss potential solutions to the
scalability and integration challenges (technical and non-technical) to help
guide future NSF investments in smart cities deployments. This workshop will
foster convergence by engaging participants from academia, government, non-
profits, community advocacy, private property owners, civic agencies, and
industry, across a range of smart city applications relative to different
infrastructure systems. For each of these application areas (such as energy,
transportation, water, etc.), we will bring together expertise from engineering,
public policy, computer science, and social and decision science, as well as
direct input from community leaders and partners. The main intellectual merit of
this workshop will be the development of a summary report outlining a multi-
disciplinary research agenda (gaps, questions, and proposed research tasks) to
overcome the scalability and integration challenges identified throughout the
multi-stakeholder discussions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.