* 2234256
* IUSE/PFE:RED Innovation: Breaking the Binary
* ENG,EEC
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2028
* Jane Lehr, California Polytechnic State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 05/31/2028
* USD 1,999,922.00

This revolutionary project will involve both students and faculty in a process
of transforming the Computer Engineering (CPE) department at Cal Poly, San Luis
Obispo, and potentially engineering education as a whole, through rejecting
binaries or dualisms commonly used to create hierarchies in engineering thought
and practice. The activities in this project will ask faculty and students to
actively engage in dismantling the binaries by identifying and breaking down
oppressive norms. Instead, they will embrace a complex coexistence; develop new
skills in co-creation of holistic learning experiences and inclusive cultures;
and evolve personal and professional identities that are constantly challenged
and often in flux. The work is based on a “Critical Collaborative Educational
Change” model which maps individual and group change to critical consciousness,
values and beliefs, actions, and collective well-being in order to break the
binaries in our culture, policies, and curriculum. Activities in the project
include workshops and critical dialogs which will inform curriculum and course
redesign, critical mentoring with faculty and students, and finding and changing
department policies and practices by working with a student advisory board. The
research will inform the engineering education community about the need and path
to significant transformation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three broad goals of
the project are to 1) Enhance critical consciousness and expand group capacity
through workshops and critical groups dialogs, 2) Interrupt structures that
inhibit action by deepening relationships between and among students, staff, and
faculty, and 3) Dismantle and reimagine the department by identifying and
understanding structures of oppression impacting the individuals in the
department. The proposed plan offers an opportunity to research how faculty and
students engage in the dismantling of oppressive engineering learning
structures. The work will draw attention to the connection between departmental
culture and individual and collective well-being. Through the project activities
the team will gain insights into how educators translate their new ways of
knowing, being, and relating to the design of tangible curricular artifacts
(courses, assignments, physical spaces) and visible behaviors (pedagogical
style, caring, interpersonal connections), as well as understandings of how
students respond to the more visible components of the new program. We will
answer the following: (1) As we engage in the activities described in this
proposal, how will the CPE department culture reject binaries that commonly
create hierarchies in engineering thought and practice, and embrace a learning
culture that is holistic and integrated? (2) To what extent does the Critical
Collaborative Education Change Model help students, staff, and faculty navigate,
respond to, and engage in critical organizational change? (3) What are the
impacts of a holistic environment on individual growth and social cohesion? This
project includes a strong vision for change, qualified team, connection to
research, and a faculty development plan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.