* 2234769
* Alkali metal based selective combustion catalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Aditya Bhan, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 03/31/2026
* USD 360,000.00

Advances in chemical process technology will be key in reducing the energy use
and emissions footprint of petrochemical manufacturing. A recent global
chemistry industry technology roadmap identified production of olefinic
hydrocarbons (key molecular building blocks for polymer materials) as a standout
opportunity in this regard. To that end, the project addresses a novel process
scheme for converting light hydrocarbon alkanes to olefins. The process is
rooted in a tandem catalytic operation in which alkane dehydrogenation is
coupled with selective hydrogen combustion (SHC) to decrease the energy demands,
increase olefin yield, and decrease greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions compared to
conventional alkane-to-olefin process technology. The technical objectives are
supported by a range of educational and outreach
initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project explores catalytic technology
based on a new class of non-redox-active alkali metal formulations to
selectively combust hydrogen in mixtures with hydrocarbon species. This research
will systematically probe the structural and functional evolution of the alkali
metal catalyst under high temperature conditions. The research aims to develop
an understanding of mechanisms of oxygen activation and selective hydrogen
combustion, probe kinetics of the underlying reactions, and ultimately determine
the molecular characteristics that enable efficient alkane-to-olefin reaction
via selective hydrogen combustion. The scientific objectives will be
accomplished by (i) structural and chemical characterization of the alkali metal
catalyst formulation using a combination of probe molecule adsorption and
reaction studies, near ambient pressure X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, and
diffraction and microscopy methods; and (ii) identification and enumeration of
radical species using probe molecule reactions and molecular beam mass
spectrometry to determine the potential catalytic role of radical species.
Training, education, and outreach efforts as part of this research effort will
emphasize the key role of science and engineering in paving next generation
technologies for industrial manufacturing and will involve virtual after-school
programs, lectures in a massive open online course, training at the
undergraduate and graduate level, and development and dissemination of practices
suited for safe operation of high temperature
reactors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.