* 2234055
* Participant Support: 2023 Co-located International Advanced Manufacturing Conference (NAMRC/MSEC/LEM&amp;P); New Brunswick, New Jersey; 12-16 June 2023
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Karl Haapala, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 09/30/2023
* USD 49,600.00

This award will support about 60 selected students and recent graduates studying
in US institutions from groups underrepresented in STEM disciplines to
participate in the 2023 co-located International Advanced Manufacturing
Conference (NAMRC/MSEC/LEM&amp;P), including the 51st North American
Manufacturing Research Conference (NAMRC51) sponsored by the North American
Manufacturing Research Institution of the Society of Manufacturing Engineers,
the International Manufacturing Science and Engineering Conference (MSEC 2023)
sponsored by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers, and the International
Conference on Leading Edge Manufacturing/Materials &amp; Processing (LEM&amp;P
2023) sponsored by the Japan Society of Mechanical Engineers, to be held at
Rutgersâ€“New Brunswick, New Jersey, June 12-16, 2023. These co-located
conferences represent the premiere research forum for advanced manufacturing in
the U.S. and globe, with topics including conventional and emerging
manufacturing technologies, additive manufacturing, nano-/micro-/meso-
manufacturing, biomanufacturing, manufacturing equipment and automation,
manufacturing systems, quality control and reliability, advanced materials
processing, applications of machine learning and artificial intelligence,
sustainable manufacturing, life cycle engineering, and engineering education and
many other cross-cutting research. As such, this International Advanced
Manufacturing Conference acts as a global bridge between industry, government
laboratories, and academic institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participation of
undergraduate and graduate students as well as recent graduates from U.S.
institutions, especially from groups underrepresented in STEM disciplines,
economically disadvantaged backgrounds, and first-generation families, at
national manufacturing conferences is crucial to expanding the manufacturing
research base in the United States. This award will help lower the barrier for
conference participation for selected students by defraying the costs of
registration and accommodation. This will enable them to exchange ideas with
leading researchers and engineers from industrial and governmental facilities
around the world, as well as with students and faculty from both domestic and
international universities. The call-for-award applications will be disseminated
through postings on main conference websites and directly by conference
organizers, track chairs, and symposium organizers, etc. Submitted applications
will go through a selection process by the conference committee, who will
prioritize applicants to broaden diversity of participants according to their
prior conference involvement, educational institution, and personal background.
During the conference, the awardees will be announced in the conference program.
This award will enable selected participants to improve their knowledge of
advanced manufacturing research and help them become engineers and researchers
to lead the next generation of U.S. manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.