* 2234449
* PFI-TT: Active Acoustic Noise Cancellation and Control for Scanning Probe Microscopy
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2025
* Qingze Zou, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 02/28/2025
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to create a technology to eliminate
image distortions in scanning probe microscopes (SPM). An SPM is an instrument
used for studying surfaces at the nanoscale level. The proposed technology is
disruptive compared to existing noise isolation approaches as it is based on
novel computer algorithms instead of bulky and costly hardware solutions. The
success of the project will enable SPMs to attain sub-nanometer accuracy. The
proposed solution is crucial for SPM companies to expand their footprints in the
semiconductor and chip making industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project aims to accomplish the following tasks: (1) achieve acoustic noise
cancellation when the signal to noise ratio is low (as in cleanroom
nanometrology application), by combining data-driven Kalman and Wiener
filtering, sensing enhancement, and iterative optimization and adaptation
together; (2) achieve acoustic noise control for in-liquid imaging of live
biological species, by capturing and accounting for the hydrodynamic force
effects; and (3) integrate the proposed algorithms into the software of
commercial SPM systems. The proposed research features a holistic approach
combining both online control and offline filtering, a data-driven, dynamics-
based framework that eliminates the performance-robustness trade-off, a new SPM
imaging mode that is robust to acoustic noise, and a gradient-based coherence
minimization methodology that optimizes the performance with little to no need
for a priori knowledge of the noise and the SPM
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.