* 2234713
* I-Corps:  Device for subdural hematoma visualization and access during evacuation
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Benjamin Rapoport, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a subdural hematoma removal (evacuation) device. Subdural
hematoma is the most common surgically treated neurological disease, occurring
due to traumatic brain injury and chronically in older populations. Over 100,000
hematoma cases undergo neurosurgical intervention every year. This incidence
rate is expected to increase with an aging population with frequent
anticoagulant usage. Interventions can be categorized as passive drainage
evacuation and active drainage evacuation. Active drainage requires the patient
to be in the operating room and results in higher evacuation rates. Passive
drainage procedures are done at the bedside, which is beneficial for the aging
population due to the less invasive nature of the procedure, but it is not
nearly as effective as active drainage procedures. Intended to be used at the
bedside, the proposed technology may allow for a minimally invasive subdural
hematoma evacuation procedure that minimizes recurrence rates and postoperative
complications. Additionally, if employed in the intensive care unit (ICU), the
procudure may result in lower hospital and patient costs compared with
procedures done in the operating room. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on the development of a minimally invasive subdural hematoma
evacuation kit that provides maximal subdural hematoma evacuation by taking
advantage of neuroendoscopy and active suction. The kit includes a ”periscope”
device that is specially designed to maximize subdural hematoma visualization
and access during evacuation. This technology may allow the surgeon to visualize
and remove the hematoma in a non-invasive manner, resulting in an improved
procedure. Current systems are either too invasive or not effective at
evacuating the subdural hematoma. Invasive procedures can be dangerous,
especially for patients over 65 years old, due to complications after surgery.
Alternatively, the minimally invasive procedures provide less visualization of
the hematoma and often no active suction. These operative conditions result in
high recurrence rates, with the patient returning a few months later with a
resurfaced hematoma. The proposed technology is intended to be used in the
intensive care unit and, if successful, may have the ability to decrease
recurrences, postoperative complications, and total hospital and patient
costs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.