* 2234188
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Multinational Corporation Behavior in Time of War
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Boliang Zhu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* James I. Walsh
* 07/31/2024
* USD 62,999.00

This project examines the extent to which countries can successfully wield
economic (dis-)integration as a foreign policy tool. That is, when and why can
countries use economic statecraft to pressure commercial firms to make
investments consistent with their foreign policy interests? The project will
examine the universe of foreign-owned firms in one aggressor state, and
researchers will use multilingual media reports, corporate press releases, and
other textual sources to document the behavior of MNCs toward the aggressor
state. Findings from this project will provide new insights into the relative
success of home countries' economic statecraft strategies against an aggressor
nation under conditions of deep economic globalization. This project will also
benefit both graduate and undergraduate students from diverse backgrounds
through hands-on training and practical experience with data management and
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines multinational corporation
(MNC) responses to a common host country political shock, while making clear the
depths of heterogeneity in MNC behavior, even and especially in light of
remarkably strong economic sanctions. The theory incorporates not only host but
also home country political risk, and the effects of political risk on decision-
making at entry and exit, which addresses serious lacunae in the ability of the
literature to explain disruptions in foreign direct investment (FDI) due to
aggressive war. The project will generate a public, replicable dataset covering
the universe of MNCs operating in a nation-state that initiated an aggressive
war. The researchers will document firm-level behavior following the invasion,
based on an analysis of a multilingual corpus of media reports, corporate press
releases, and related textual sources. A combined theoretical and empirical goal
of this project is to identify the relevance of economic statecraft and home
country political interests – whether favoring divestment or otherwise – to MNC
decision-making under conditions of contemporary economic
globalization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.