* 2234134
* Collaborative Research: NSF-DFG: Confine: Sculpting Confined Fluids for Transport using Self-Organization and Information Transfer
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2025
* Ayusman Sen, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 10/31/2025
* USD 225,000.00

The aim of this award is to create microfluidic platforms (micrometer-scale
liquid channels) that harness energy released from chemical reactions and
perform sustained mechanical work, ultimately enabling the development of
portable fluidic devices with autonomous, biomimetic functionality. The
(self-)regulation of fluid flow and transport across length scales in response
to specific chemical signals is critical for realizing next generation smart
micro- &amp; nano-scale devices; it enables innovative alternatives to current
microfluidic technology and establishes efficient and autonomous modes of
chemical synthesis, sensing, and delivery. The findings from this award will
have a transformative impact by uncovering the complex interplay among
molecular-scale catalytic chemistry, chemical networks, and macroscopic
transport in confined microfluidic geometries. Through collaborative training of
the students, the work will contribute to the development of the next generation
work force in scientific and engineering fields, which are ever increasingly
requiring expertise across a range of disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award will examine the fundamental effects of molecular-scale chemistry on
microscale flow of confined fluids, and, conversely, the effect of microscopic
flow on chemical kinetics in microchambers. The collaborative team encompasses
the unique and necessary skills to pursue this ambitious research, which will be
performed through three complementary work packages, with findings from each
work package revealing fundamental phenomena across different length and time
scales. The first work package concentrates on multi-material 3D microprinting
of microfluidic systems, the second targets active pumping mechanisms enabled by
enzymes on surfaces and deformable posts. The third work package implements a
superimposed self-organizing signal patterning process at the post arrays,
arising from DNA strand displacement reaction networks. The latter reaction
networks will then be coupled to active pumping by enzymes and sculpting of
fluid flows. Through these studies, new modes of chemically induced motion and
self-organization within confined fluids will be uncovered. Additionally, self-
regulating materials that transmit chemical information to drive and control
autonomous transport of micro- to macro-scale fluidic systems will be created.
This award will advance knowledge and understanding across a range of different
fields, from fundamental fluid mechanics and catalysis to chemical engineering
and process design. Since flow and feedback are non-equilibrium processes, these
studies will also provide new platforms for probing relationships among
structure, dynamics, and non-equilibrium behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project was awarded through the â€œChemistry and Transport in Confined Spaces
(NSF-DFG Confine)" opportunity, a collaborative solicitation that involves the
National Science Foundation and Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft
(DFG).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.