* 2234915
* CyberCorps Scholarship for Service: Accelerating Cybersecurity Education, Scholarship and Service
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Iren Valova, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Continuing Grant
* ChunSheng Xin
* 12/31/2027
* USD 1,218,640.00

This project establishes a new CyberCorps® Scholarship for Service (SFS) program
at the University of Massachusetts Dartmouth (UMass Dartmouth). The project aims
to (1) address the national need for a holistic cybersecurity education, (2)
create a supportive ecosystem for entering government careers, and (3) respond
to demands for a diverse workforce with master’s-level preparation in
cybersecurity by broadening participation of students. The project provides an
integrated experience that combines education and applied experiences to
increase understanding of cybersecurity and workforce opportunities in the
government. It includes a coordinated program of recruitment and workforce
development strategies to prepare and graduate master’s-level professionals to
meet the needs of the government. The overall outcome will be a diverse group of
scholars who are prepared for government cybersecurity positions and placed on a
pathway for success. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;UMass Dartmouth is designated as a
National Security Agency and Department of Homeland Security National Center of
Academic Excellence in Cyber Defense Education. The project leverages this
designation, accelerated B.S./M.S. programs in electrical and computer
engineering and computer science, graduate-level courses in cybersecurity,
established partnerships with government agencies, and federally sponsored
research efforts to advance scholarship in cybersecurity. Research completed
under the mentorship of UMass Dartmouth faculty will advance the science that
treats security as a fundamental system design attribute. The project will
implement, adapt, and study evidence-based activities, including professional
development practices, to recruit and support graduate students historically
underrepresented in the field of cybersecurity. In addition, the project will
generate and disseminate knowledge about activities affecting recruitment,
student success, and graduate degree attainment by students with specialized
cybersecurity research training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported
by the CyberCorps® Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which funds proposals
establishing or continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity and aligns with
the U.S. National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity workforce.
Following graduation, scholarship recipients are required to work in
cybersecurity for a federal, state, local, or tribal Government organization for
the same duration as their scholarship support.  &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.