* 2234554
* CyberCorps Scholarship for Service: Excellence, Ethics, and Strategic Thinking
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Ping Wang, Robert Morris University
* Continuing Grant
* ChunSheng Xin
* 12/31/2027
* USD 1,298,888.00

The project establishes a new CyberCorps® Scholarship for Service (SFS) program
at Robert Morris University (RMU) in western PA that will recruit and develop
excellent cybersecurity talent with strong ethics and strategic thinking skills
to defend America’s cyberspace. The general goal of the project is to recruit
highly qualified and diverse cyber talent and develop them into cybersecurity
professionals to meet the growing needs of the federal, state, local and tribal
government workforce. The project will utilize an existing cybersecurity program
to closely engage students in research and ethical training with faculty mentors
and government professionals, providing the education and training needed for
government service. It will implement and improve a unique and comprehensive
mentoring model with new empirical data to benefit the broader national
cybersecurity education effort. The project aims to extend the SFS scholarship
to student populations that are historically underrepresented by recruiting from
partner community colleges. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RMU is a national Center of
Academic Excellence in Cyber Defense Education (CAE-CDE) designated by the
National Security Agency/Department of Homeland Security (NSA/DHS) and a
national CyberPatriot Center of Excellence (COE) designated by the US Airforce
Association. The RMU SFS project will recruit and graduate selected students in
both the Cybersecurity B.S. and the 4+1 integrated Cybersecurity M.S. programs.
All SFS students are required to complete Cybersecurity Research, Cybersecurity
Ethics, and a SFS Seminar every semester. As part of the Cybersecurity M.S.,
students will take three courses with a strong research emphasis. The unique
mentoring model for the SFS project consists of academic mentoring, career
guidance, extra-curricular mentoring, and ethical guidance. The RMU SFS project
team will utilize working relationships with federal and local governments to
provide student internship opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by the CyberCorps® Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which funds
proposals establishing or continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity and
aligns with the U.S. National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity
workforce. Following graduation, scholarship recipients are required to work in
cybersecurity for a federal, state, local, or tribal Government organization for
the same duration as their scholarship support.  &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.