* 2234270
* NSF-DFG Confine: Plasma-Catalysis in Confined Spaces for Cold Start NOx Abatement in Automotive Exhaust
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Peter Bruggeman, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Walker
* 12/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

This project seeks to transform traditional chemical processing to ensure a
sustainable future. Catalysis, which facilitates desired chemical reactions, has
played a key role in defining the modern standard of pollution abatement, high-
energy density fuels, and proficient and safe fuels and fertilizers. This
project aims to develop an understanding of new concepts in the practice of
chemical catalysis enabled by coupling of non-equilibrium plasma with surface
catalyzed reactions. NOx abatement in capillary microreactors, mimicking
“honeycomb monoliths” in modern-day catalytic converters, at near ambient
temperatures serve as a testbed system. Tailpipe emissions in transportation
account for a majority of NOx pollution harming human health and the
environment. State-of-the-art automobile exhaust after-treatment systems
remediate NOx efficiently above a threshold light-off temperature &gt;473 K
(&gt;200 degrees C), sufficient to overcome kinetic limitations inherent in
catalytic processes. The project harnesses interactions among plasma chemistry
and thermocatalytic processes in confined geometries to enable NOx reduction in
automobiles at near ambient temperatures. This addresses “cold start” automotive
emissions during engine warm up, which account for &gt;80% of NOx vehicular
pollution. This project furthers US-German scientific collaboration and training
in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plasma chemistry occurs volumetrically and
involves short-lived reactive intermediates—ions, radicals, electronically- and
vibrationally-excited species—which when impinged on a selective catalytic
surface could effect chemical transformations and pathways inaccessible to
conventional catalysis. The disparity in reaction timescales of plasma
(sub-10^-6 to 10 s) and catalytic chemistry (10^-1 to 10 s) and the different
length scales for plasma (volume) and catalytic (surface) chemistry implies that
effective coupling between plasma and surface catalytic chemistry can only be
achieved if surface-to-volume ratios are large to enable a high flux of short-
lived plasma-derived intermediates to the catalyst surface. Hence, confinement,
enabling very high surface-to-volume ratios, is key to coupling volumetric and
fast plasma chemistry with selective, slower surface-based catalytic processes.
The project combines reactor design, advanced spectroscopic and spectrometric
diagnostics, and multiscale modeling to examine reaction and transport phenomena
impacting plasma-catalytic chemistry coupling in confined reaction environments.
This includes (1) probing characteristic diffusion time scales and lifetimes of
reactive species in combined operation of plasma- and thermocatalytic processes
within capillary microreactors, (2) developing spectroscopic and spectrometric
tools to identify and enumerate short-lived reactive intermediates in the gas
phase and on catalyst surfaces and (3) developing multiscale models describing
the underpinning processes in these confined reaction environments. This will
allow to elucidate how reaction and transport phenomena impact plasma-
catalytical coupling and describe new catalytic species and pathways for NOx
reduction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was awarded through the “Chemistry
and Transport in Confined Spaces (NSF-DFG Confine)" opportunity, a collaborative
solicitation that involves the National Science Foundation and Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.