* 2234975
* Collaborative Research: Research Infrastructure: CCRI:New: Data-Driven Cybersecurity Research Infrastructure for Smart Manufacturing
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2026
* sidi berri, CUNY New York City College of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 03/31/2026
* USD 28,177.00

Recent advances in Internet of Things sensors, artificial intelligence,
computing, and communications are enabling a more distributed manufacturing
paradigm where custom products are made at the point and time of need using
smart manufacturing (SM) technologies. While connectivity forms the backbone in
realizing SM, it has opened new cybersecurity risks and challenges, requiring a
fundamental rethink and foundational efforts to tackle these challenges. Recent
National Science Foundation-sponsored workshops have underscored a compelling
need for a research infrastructure that can bridge the traditional divide
between manufacturing and cybersecurity professionals and foster a community of
CISE experts in manufacturing cybersecurity. Creating such an infrastructure is
essential to understand the cybersecurity vulnerabilities, and to develop
solutions tailored to SM systems. This project envisions the creation of a
vibrant CISE research community for data-driven cybersecurity for SM by
launching a community research platform integrating three elements: (1) A web
infrastructure that enables virtual “playgrounds” to share data, codes,
resources, and tools, mostly contributed by the research community; (2) a data
infrastructure for curating diverse cybersecurity datasets; and (3) a SM machine
infrastructure that will leverage established national resources, including the
Smart Manufacturing Innovation Platform from the Department of Energy. Taken
together, this infrastructure will help CISE researchers to collaborate with the
SM community –spanning academia, industry, and government– to create and share
data for understanding the vulnerabilities of a network of SM machines and other
components of a manufacturing enterprise, and facilitate the development of AI-
driven cybersecurity innovations for SM. This infrastructure will enable CISE-
relevant, data-driven research thrusts spanning five key SM system elements: (1)
Cybersecurity by design; (2) compiler optimizations for SM process plans and
toolpaths; (3) forensics and watermarking of SM machines; (4) protections
against SM process-unique side-channels; and (5) fingerprinting and securing SM
networks. The community will be able to contribute their SM equipment, relevant
hardware and software components, data, and innovations to grow this networked
cyber-physical platform infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Emerging
manufacturing enterprises are increasingly adopting advanced sensor and AI
technologies and transforming themselves into smart manufacturing systems. These
smart systems can connect multiple manufacturers, designers, and businesses to
efficiently meet customer demands. A SM network is noted by IBM as the largest
target for cybersecurity attacks among all industry sectors. Securing such a
network is a daunting task. This project aims to create an online resource
consisting of web infrastructure, data, and machines to bring together
professionals from the manufacturing and cybersecurity communities. This
infrastructure will enhance collaborations among these communities to enable a
deeper understanding of current and emerging cybersecurity threats to smart
manufacturing environments and enable the development of innovations to assure
cybersecurity within the smart manufacturing sector. It will particularly
benefit diverse researchers, practitioners, and students from cybersecurity, AI,
and manufacturing disciplines. For example, the project will leverage the
Inclusive Engineering Consortium, a network of 20 Underrepresented Minority
serving engineering colleges to enable broad-based
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.