* 2234706
* Collaborative Research: Quantifying the thermal effects of fluid circulation in oceanic crust on temperatures in the southern Mexico subduction zone
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Lindsay Worthington, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 04/30/2026
* USD 137,131.00

Subduction zones are where one tectonic plate moves under another. They generate
the largest earthquakes and tsunamis. Earthquake size is affected by
temperatures on a fault. In subduction zones, temperatures also affect magma
generation. To understand earthquake and volcano hazards in subduction zones,
accurate temperature estimates are needed. Seawater flowing within subducting
tectonic plates can affect temperatures. For the hazardous subduction zone of
southern Mexico, the effects of this fluid flow are unknown. This causes large
uncertainty in temperature estimates. This study will measure temperature in
seafloor sediments and map sediment distribution off Mexico. The goals are to
improve estimates of subduction zone temperatures and understand their controls.
This study will benefit society by informing hazard estimates. Additionally, the
project will enhance education at two Hispanic-serving institutions. Students at
New Mexico Tech and the University of New Mexico will participate in the study.
They will work with a researcher and student from an Earth science research
center in Mexico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurate estimates of subduction zone
temperatures are required to understand a variety of critical processes,
including controls on seismogenic and aseismic behavior on subduction
megathrusts. The region of flat-slab subduction in Mexico has been a focus of
seismic and geodetic studies because it hosts an interesting range of behaviors
on the plate interface (e.g., tremor, slow slip, presence of an ultra-slow layer
postulated to be generated by fluid overpressure). Attempting to better
understand physical conditions within the subduction zone, various studies
predict temperatures and the distribution of slab alteration in this system.
However, thermal models for the margin remain largely unconstrained due to
insufficient heat flux observations on the incoming plate. Specifically, the
potential presence and effects of fluid circulation in the basaltic basement
aquifer of crust entering the southern Mexico subduction zone are unknown. The
subduction zone in southern Mexico is among the warmest globally and the extent
to which fluid circulation redistributes heat has profound implications for
temperature distributions and subduction processes. This observational and
modeling study will assess the thermal regime of the Cocos plate entering the
subduction zone offshore southern Mexico by collecting ~650 km of seismic
reflection profiles and ~200 heat flux measurements. This will provide a
process-based understanding of the thermal structure of the incoming Cocos
plate. The central hypotheses are: 1) hydrothermal circulation advects
substantial quantities of heat in oceanic crust near the deformation front
offshore southern Mexico, and 2) bending-related normal faults play an important
role in hydrothermal circulation and the thermal structure of the incoming plate
in this system. Analyzing and interpreting the controls on the thermal state of
the Cocos plate near the deformation front will allow for the development of
improved predictive models of subduction zone
temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.