* 2234271
* PFI-RP:  High-Reliability, Low-Cost, Rare-Earth-Free Electric Motor for Electrified Transportation Applications
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2026
* Seungdeog Choi, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 02/28/2026
* USD 566,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation –
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project is to develop a commercially-viable,
rare-earth material-free electric vehicle motor with new design and analysis
tools. This project, if successful will transform current design practices,
seamlessly integrating low-cost, high-performance, rare-earth-free magnet
materials into the wide spectrum of clean energy systems. The developed solution
could result in highly efficient, reliable, compact, and low-cost motors and
generators in the domestic and international electrified transportation
industry. This will accelerate faster and easier migrations toward clean energy
generation and consumption while avoiding global supply chain disruption of
critical minerals and limiting fossil energy usage and carbon dioxide (CO2)
emissions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project is cross-disciplinary,
spanning advanced magnet materials and thermal analysis in mechanical
engineering to solving electromagnetic field, torque, power generation, and
efficiency problems in electrical engineering. The design of new high-
reliability and low-cost electric motor for target market segmentation in the
electrified transportation industry is novel and transformative. The unique
design procedure with a 3-dimensional thermal analysis and optimizer can
generate several hundred design candidates with a new non-rare earth magnet
material as an alternative to the rare-earth magnets. This will result in
algorithms and tools that can benefit engineers and scientists directly. By
understanding the fundamental mechanism of demagnetization risk of non-rare
earth magnets and their thermal properties, the proposed research will impact
highly reliable next-generation motor and clean energy systems and derive
energy-efficient, low-cost design and control
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.