* 2234352
* Emergent phases in Kitaev spin-orbital magnets
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2026
* Onur Erten, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 01/31/2026
* USD 292,284.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Magnetic materials play a central role
in technological advancements in information storage in cell phones and
computers as well as creation and distribution of electricity. However, when the
magnetism is suppressed in these materials via quantum effects, a completely new
phase of matter called "quantum spin liquid" appears. This award supports
theoretical research on materials exhibiting the quantum spin liquid phase, in
which the quantum spins do not order in a fixed configuration even at absolute
zero temperature and perpetually fluctuate. Such materials show unusual
properties that may have technological implications such as the possibility of
offering a platform for quantum computation. In this project, the PI and his
team will investigate new models of quantum spin liquids called Kitaev spin-
orbital models. The team will theoretically design new materials that can
exhibit spin liquid phase and collaborate with experimentalists for the
identification of the key experimental signatures of these materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to graduate student training in condensed
matter theory, this award will also support the PI's outreach efforts that
involve promoting quantum literacy - understanding the fundamentals of quantum
physics - at the high school level. To achieve this goal, the PI will
participate in the ‘Science and Engineering Experience’ and ‘Clubes de Ciencia
Arizona’ high school outreach programs to mentor high school students and
organize workshops for them focused on the quantum
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theoretical research with an aim to investigate single- and bi-layer
Kitaev spin-orbital models as new platforms for the realization of quantum spin
liquids that are stable to external perturbations. While the Kitaev model on the
honeycomb lattice is the first exactly solvable model with a quantum spin liquid
ground state, direct application of this model to real materials is limited as
the quantum spin liquid state is fragile to additional interactions present in
real materials. One way to remedy this challenge relies on extending the Kitaev
model to its spin-orbital generalization, commonly called Kitaev spin-orbital
models. The research activities in bilayer Kitaev spin-orbital models will focus
on estimating the phase diagram as a function of interlayer exchange and small
angle twisting via complementary analytical methods. The PI will also perform
Monte Carlo simulations to investigate vison crystals (periodic arrangement of
flux excitations) that are stabilized by additional interactions. Successful
outcomes will provide key insights to upcoming experiments on quantum spin
liquids while advancing our understanding of spin-orbital generalizations of
Kitaev model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to graduate student training in
condensed matter theory, this award will also support the PI's outreach efforts
that involve promoting quantum literacy - understanding the fundamentals of
quantum physics - at the high school level. To achieve this goal, the PI will
participate in the ‘Science and Engineering Experience’ and ‘Clubes de Ciencia
Arizona’ high school outreach programs to mentor high school students and
organize workshops for them focused on the quantum
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.