* 2234944
* I-Corps: Artificial Intelligence (AI) Brain Lesion Detection Diagnostic Software
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2023
* Mark McManis, University of Arkansas Medical Sciences Campus
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a simple, workflow-driven solution for detecting focal cortical
dysplasia (FCD) with high sensitivity and specificity. As many rural hospitals
do not have epilepsy specialists, the proposed cloud-based solution can bring
the diagnostic tool into their patients’ care plan. Commercialization of this
technology may enable: clinical neurology teams - enabling them to better
evaluate patients with suspected FCD for surgery; hospitals - allowing them to
provide better patient care; patients - ensuring they live seizure-free lives;
and scientists, researchers, and biomedical engineers - enabling them to use
artificial intelligence to detect challenging medical conditions not limited to
FCD. The project combines biology, medicine, artificial intelligence (AI)
technology, and business.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on
the development of a cloud-based software system to automatically identify focal
cortical dysplasia (FCD) lesions with at least 90% accuracy by using adaptive
deep machine learning (ML) to segment magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) images
and indicate suspected lesions. The output will be an MRI sequence with lesions
highlighted and a clinician-friendly report indicating the probability that a
FCD lesion is present, and if so, the location. Automated detection of FCD
lesions may improve the care of epileptic patients. FCD lesions result in a form
of epilepsy characterized by medication-resistant seizures. These lesions are
difficult to detect due to their characteristics and location. The current
standard of care using visual MRI inspection misses up to 50% of cases, even
when employed by experienced neuroradiologists. These highly specialized
physicians are usually only available in select academic medical centers or
urban environments. Because of the limited availability of specialists and the
highly treatable nature of these lesions with surgery, there is a significant
unmet need for efficient and accurate identification of FCD lesions in MRI
scans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.