* 2234631
* Critical improvement of the Rocky Mountain Herbarium: securing and enabling access to the world's largest collection of plants in the Rocky Mountain region
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Burrell Nelson, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 04/30/2026
* USD 538,316.00

The Rocky Mountain Herbarium (RM) is among the largest public university
herbaria in the United States. With over 1 million accessioned specimens, it
contains the most comprehensive collection of Rocky Mountain plants in the
world. The RM has outgrown its space and the bulk of these specimens are
inaccessible to researchers. Rapid growth of the RM is the result of a large-
scale inventory program focused on documenting the flora of the Rocky Mountains.
This project will provide for greatly increased accessibility of RM specimens
and associated data, that are used for research, teaching, and outreach. More
than 200 herbarium cabinets will be added to secure over 420,000 specimens and
allow for incorporation of the Central Wyoming College Herbarium. A key activity
will be to image all mounted specimens that have not yet been imaged, resulting
in a total 700,000 completely digitized specimens that will substantially
increase accessibility of collections data from Wyoming and the Rocky Mountains
that are widely used by the public and land management agencies. The project
also includes a summer internship program, to train the next generation of
herbarium scientists in both traditional and modern aspects of specimen curation
and specimen-based research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Wyoming
Rocky Mountain Herbarium (RM) is in critical need of expansion to secure the
large number of specimens that are currently inaccessible and at risk. In
addition, the Central Wyoming College Herbarium (CWC), a regional collection of
ca. 45,000 specimens shuttered since the retirement of its faculty curator, will
be incorporated. Through the addition of the herbarium cabinets, the RM will
secure specimens that are currently in cardboard boxes on the tops of existing
cabinets and address a backlog of 250,000 specimens that are already mounted but
inaccessible to researchers. Specimens will be imaged, including those in the
CWC herbarium, to provide access to completely digitized specimen records or
nearly 700,000 specimens from Wyoming and the Rocky Mountains. Data will be made
available through the RM specimen portal, regional, national, and international
data aggregators and consortia including iDigBio.org. In addition, this project
will serve as a platform for a summer Rocky Mountain Herbarium Internship with
the goal of providing a foundational knowledge of herbarium management,
curation, and research through a directed, hands-on
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.