* 2234130
* Conference: Participant Support for the 2023 Biomedical Engineering Society - Cellular and Molecular Bioengineering Conference; Palm Springs, California; 2-6 January 2023
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2023
* Jianping Fu, Biomedical Engineering Society
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 11/30/2023
* USD 19,800.00

This award provides support for junior researchers (graduate students, postdoc
fellows, and untenured faculty) to attend the 2023 Biomedical Engineering
Society - Cellular and Molecular Bioengineering Conference to be held 2-6
January 2023, in Indian Wells, California. The individuals supported will attend
the conference and present a poster or oral presentation. These junior
researchers will benefit from the technical experience and professional
networking in both formal and informal settings at the conference. Consideration
in the selection process will be given to the inclusion of members of
underrepresented groups, diversity of institutions that the students represent,
and diversity of programs within cellular and molecular bioengineering. This
opportunity will have societal and economic impact of the field of biomechanics,
mechanobiology, biomaterials, tissue engineering, developmental bioengineering
and disease modeling, and in developing the next generation of researchers and
engineers from diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Biomedical
Engineering Society - Cellular and Molecular Bioengineering Conferences are a
leading forum for bringing together diverse, interdisciplinary groups of
researchers to discuss advances in highly focused symposia. In 2023, the
conference will have approximately 180-200 attendees participating multiple
technical thematic sessions that include the topics of cell state transitions,
cell competition in development and diseases, transcriptional noise and cell
states, links between biophysical and biochemical states, immune cell states,
and new technologies and approaches for regenerative medicine. The opportunity
to attend and present will broaden the participating researchersâ€™ technical
understanding, stimulate the development of new ideas and research topics, and
provide numerous professional development and networking
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.