* 2234243
* NSF-DFG CONFINE: Lithium ion transport in self-assembled zwitterionic nanochannels containing ionic liquids
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Matthew Panzer, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Walker
* 09/30/2025
* USD 517,023.00

Next generation energy storage systems such as lithium metal batteries are
crucial for the broader use of renewable energy resources and mobile energy.
Their success relies on the development of advanced electrolyte materials that
quickly and selectively conduct the target ion (e.g. Li+) while also providing
robust mechanical properties. Self-assembling polymers that confine the
conducting ions into nanometer-scale domains while providing a robust structure
can potentially enable such materials. This type of electrolyte, however, has
achieved only limited ionic conductivity levels to date. This project aims to
understand how ions travel within specialty polymers that self-assemble to form
zwitterionic nanometer-scale domains that can be preferentially swollen with
ionic liquids. We expect that these findings will open the door to new, better-
performing electrolytes for energy storage
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is to study Li+ ion
transport within zwitterionic (ZI) conducting nanochannels formed by the self-
assembly of amphiphilic comb copolymers. To ensure sufficiently high ionic
conductivity at ambient temperatures, the ZI-rich channels will be swollen with
controlled amounts of a nonvolatile ionic liquid (IL) containing a dissolved Li
salt. The resulting materials are referred to as nanostructured electrolytes
(NSEs). The primary objective of this study is to test the hypothesis that
confinement into nanochannels decorated with weakly interacting ZI interfaces
will selectively enhance Li+ ion transport within NSEs. The proposed
experimental plan is designed to examine the effect of ZI side-groups on Li+ ion
transport as the IL-swollen nanochannels size (i.e. channel diameter of the
conducting domain) inside a NSE is systematically modulated. Modulation of
confinement will be achieved by carefully tuning: (i) copolymer architecture,
(ii) degree of IL swelling, and (iii) rigidity of the structural domain. Overall
ion transport in NSEs will be characterized by AC impedance spectroscopy and DC
polarization measurements used to determine Li+ transference number values.
Diffusion of individual ion species will be probed using 7Li, 19F, and 1H pulsed
field gradient NMR spectroscopy. Electrophoretic NMR (eNMR) spectroscopy will be
applied to NSEs for the first time to measure selective Li+ conduction directly.
Physical characterization of NSEs will include DSC, TEM, SAXS/WAXS, and
rheology. The proposed NSEs featuring ZI conducting nanochannels are expected to
provide a valuable new strategy for electrolyte materials design to realize an
enhancement of targeted ion transport within electrochemical energy storage
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.