* 2234941
* Eleventh African Materials Research Society (A-MRS)  Conference
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Eric Garfunkel, Materials Research Society
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2023
* USD 49,000.00

This award to the Materials Research Society (MRS) will be predominantly used to
support travel and participating costs of students and young scientists
currently working in American universities to attend the Eleventh African
Materials Research Society (A-MRS) Conference. The Conference will be held at
the King Fahd Palace Hotel and Conference Center in Dakar, Senegal, in December
2022. Organized by the African-MRS with strong support of the MRS, the heart of
the Conference is to build knowledge, foster relationships and promote action to
further the understanding in the broad fields associated with materials science
and technology. The African-MRS Conferences plays a vital role to unify the
rapidly growing materials research community in Africa and helping couple it to
the broader materials research world outside of Africa, and to the US, in
particular. With an eye toward increasing understanding and awareness of how
materials impact development, a key goal of the Conference is to bring together
leading scientists from around the world to interact with leading African
researchers. The conference also informs non-African participants about the
current state of materials science and education in Africa, including research
needs and opportunities for development and collaboration. This year’s
conference will also include sessions on value chain and entrepreneurship in
materials science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference, organized by the
African MRS and a local team at the Universite Cheikh Anta Diop (UCAD) with
support of the (US-based) Materials Research Society (MRS), serves as a central
hub for the materials science and engineering communities across Africa. The
conference allows the basic and applied research communities to build knowledge,
grow relationships, and promote activities and exchanges for further
understanding and collaborations in the multidisciplinary fields associated with
materials science and technology. Participants will come from across Africa and
around the world, and meet in-person for the first time since the COVID 19
pandemic, with an anticipated attendance of 500. Themes of the conference
reflect both the needs of the global research community such as energy and
health, as well as needs specific to Africa such as appropriate construction
materials and sustainable biomaterials. The conference adds unique value by
bringing together leading international scientists and engineers to present and
discuss recent advances in several broad areas of materials research and define
future research priorities. This conference also provides a unique platform for
US and African students to interact directly with each other as well as with
national and international leaders, which is evidence of the African-MRS’s deep
commitment to education and capacity building. The themes of the conference for
this year are: Energy materials – photovoltaics, batteries, fuel cells,
catalysis, CO2 abatement Biomaterials and Health – polymers, nanomedicine,
imaging, sensors Agriculture– soil chemistry, food science, materials processing
Nano, Quantum, and Photonic Materials, and Nanotechnologies – nanoparticles,
graphene, nanotubes, optics, materials physics, quantum behavior Computational
Materials Science – ab initio, molecular dynamics, finite element, statistical
mechanics, multiscale modelling Materials for Mining and Manufacturing –
extraction, foundry, metallurgy Water &amp; Environmental Monitoring – filters,
waste-water treatment, desalination, sensors Education and Networking in
Materials Science and Engineering – curriculum development, online education,
academic and research exchanges, summer schools In addition to these themes, a
series of pre-conference workshops and special sessions are planned that will
include women and girls in science, and
entrepreneurship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.