* 2234450
* PFI-RP:  A Novel Plastic Waste Recovery, Based on Environmentally Friendly (Green) Solvents
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* George Huber, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 03/31/2026
* USD 549,954.00

The broader commercial potential of this Partnership for the proposed
Innovation-Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project is the separation of plastic
wastes into single pure resins to reuse in their original applications, such as
food packaging. This technological solution significantly reduces disposal of
plastic wastes in landfills. The novel approach turns a waste product into an
asset. Further, the energy required for this new process is 7-10 times lower
than the production of virgin resins from petroleum because the temperatures
involved are lower than those in the current production processes (110-130 oC).
The operation cost is lower than the petroleum-based polymers because no
catalysts are used and the equipment cost is lower because standard equipment
from chemical industry is used. Economic analysis has shown the technology to be
cost effective at small-medium-large plant sizes. The following are the main
benefits of this innovation: (1) prevention of disposal in landfills; (2)
production of recyclable plastic products; (3) reduction of carbon footprint;
and (4) lower costs. In addition, the societal benefits are the reduction of
land used for landfills, the reduction in greenhouse gas generation, the
reduction in ocean plastics, and an increased sustainability of
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enable the
separation of most of the resins in plastic wastes using a sequence of solvents
with each solvent specifically dissolving a specific resin. This process is
based on molecular dynamic calculations that elucidate the interactions between
the solvents and the polymers, accurately predicting and selecting solvents for
specific polymers. The process has been verified experimentally at the bench
scale. The key technological hurdle in scaling up the technology is integrating
the various pilot scale components, high solvent recovery rate,
and&lt;br/&gt;transition to the use of green solvents. The main advantage over
the competition is the ability to generate solubility curves for any plastic
resin in any solvent in a relatively short time. The team has a database of over
1000 solvents, including green solvents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.