* 2234592
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Understanding possibilities in children's counterfactual reasoning
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Ailis Cournane, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 02/29/2024
* USD 9,091.00

Counterfactual conditional sentences (e.g., “If giraffes had fins, they would
swim”) involve an antecedent (e.g., “If giraffes had fins”) which is false in
the actual state of affairs. They also involve a consequent (e.g., “they would
swim”), which is true given the antecedent. Reasoning about counterfactual
conditionals requires thinking about possibilities, and being able to choose
among them in a principled manner. Despite the conceptual complexity involved in
temporarily imagining falsehoods as true, humans can readily reason about
possibilities arising from counterfactual antecedents. This form of reasoning
develops fairly late for children, due to the complexity involved in choosing
among different possibilities. To further our understanding of these abilities,
the researchers analyze children’s use (i.e., their production and
understanding) of these sentences, and the kinds of possibilities children are
able to reason over when they are thinking of non-actual state of affairs.
Developing and practicing children’s counterfactual reasoning abilities is
crucial for both critical and scientific thinking, benefiting children’s ability
to control variables when testing hypotheses. Counterfactual reasoning is also
closely related to emotional and social development, for example, when
understanding regret and relief. By understanding which counterfactuals
facilitate development, the researchers encourage children at an earlier age, or
when they have developmental difficulties, to respond to counterfactual prompts,
and thereby foster more complex forms of reasoning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
doctoral dissertation project answers the following open questions: How do the
possibilities arising from counterfactual situations that children think about
differ from the ones that adults think about? Do children consider more
possibilities than adults when reasoning counterfactually? Finally, do
children’s possibilities involve any linguistic and conceptual features which
adults do not use? To answer these questions, the researchers conduct five
studies. Two studies examine children’s production of counterfactual
conditionals – considering the types of sentences children use, and the ways in
which they differ from those of adults, looking at both children’s natural
production of counterfactuals (e.g., produced contexts where they are playing or
having a casual conversation with a caregiver), as well as production elicited
through experimental prompts. The other three studies examine children’s
reasoning when hearing counterfactual utterances. The researchers ask targeted
experimental questions (e.g., “If giraffes had fins, could they swim?”) and
analyze children’s responses to understand the ways in which the possibilities
they reason over differ from those of adults.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.