* 2234932
* Collaborative Research: Implicit bivalence: Testing boundaries, causes, and consequences of coactivating positive and negative implicit evaluations
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2026
* Vivian Zayas, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Allen McConnell
* 03/31/2026
* USD 512,931.00

Social interactions, ranging from close others to relative strangers, involve
rewards (e.g., comfort, approval, joy) and costs (e.g., rejection, disapproval,
hurt). Even individuals in highly satisfied relationships can readily recall
negative interactions with their partner. Both theory and intuition assume that
feelings about significant others are complex. Yet, there is scant evidence that
this complexity exists implicitly (i.e., knowledge that people often cannot
deliberately bring to mind but that still impacts behaviors). Recent work shows
that in the first milliseconds of perceiving a significant other, both positive
and negative information is triggered. Clearly, the single individual most liked
in a person’s life strongly activates immediate positive evaluations, but this
same person also activates some negative evaluations immediately as well. The
current studies investigate this early signature of implicit bivalence (i.e.,
immediately activated positivity and negativity). Specifically, is implicit
bivalence triggered only by significant others with whom one has a long history
of affectively-complex experiences? Alternatively, might a stranger with whom
one has no past experience trigger implicit bivalence because interactions with
any person have the potential to be rewarding but also costly? Importantly, what
are the consequences of implicit bivalence for psychological functioning and
behavior in relationships? Understanding the evaluations that immediately come
to mind when one encounters or thinks about others informs how people quickly
make sense of the rewards and costs of social dynamics, with implications for
flexible and adaptive social functioning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mental
representations of others are the cognitive building blocks of human behavior
and color perceptions and interpretations of a person’s actions and social
interactions with them. One way in which mental representations help people to
interpret and react toward others is through enabling rapid and spontaneous
evaluations of them. These implicit evaluations are triggered effortlessly and
unintentionally whenever one encounters, or simply thinks of, another person.
Implicit evaluations deliver immediate information about the positivity and
negativity of another person, influencing how we think and behave toward that
other person. But initial research has revealed that rather than other people
triggering either positivity or negativity, they in fact trigger both positivity
and negativity, even for significant others. The current work investigates how
this affective complexity develops, for whom it emerges, and what consequences
it has for behavior. In so doing, the research examines the plausibility of two
theoretical accounts for why implicit bivalence emerges. One account suggests
that bivalence emerges whenever the information about the attitude object is
affectively complex, which would suggest that bivalence occurs toward a wide
range of objects and people but not for newly encountered others. The other view
suggests that bivalence prepares the perceiver to react to all people because of
their potential to behave in a positive and negative manner, which would suggest
that bivalence might emerge for others regardless of any past history. The work
utilizes a range of research designs to assess implicit evaluations for people
and for everyday objects (e.g., tempting foods, cigarettes), increasing the
generalizability of the findings, as well as for people and objects for which
implicit evaluations are experimentally created in the lab (e.g., by associating
a person or object with rewarding or aversive experiences). The findings will
inform models of social cognition, with implications for theory and research on
ambivalence, attitudes, implicit cognition, and relationship
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.