* 2234519
* I-Corps:  Novel Biometric Authentication Using a Smart Device
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2024
* Jo Woon Chong, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 03/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an individual security biometric-based access technique. The
proposed commercial market is cars and device access while the proposed
technology solves the problem of losing a car key, and of having a lost or
stolen phone accessed by the wrong person. Currently, $2.7 billion is spent
annually in the U.S. replacing lost items. Phones and car keys are in the top
five lost items. In addition, cars may be stolen if those items are used by
other users, but using the proposed solution car theft may be prevented. Another
potential application includes building access. Identification (ID) cards are
used commonly to control access to buildings. However, companies spend thousands
of dollars each year to replace lost ID cards, which may be mitigated by using
the proposed technology. In addition, the proposed touchless technology may be
useful to reduce the spread and costs associated with COVID-19 and other highly
transmissible diseases. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on
the development of a biometric authentication method. Facial and fingerprint
recognition have become popular methods in the biometric authentication market.
The proposed technology is a photoplethysmography (PPG)-based authentication
solution using signal processing and machine learning algorithms that can gather
physiological data by using integrated sensors on smartphones. It is a touchless
monitoring method to measure data and does not require additional hardware to
recognize users. Current biometric authentication solutions, including facial
recognition and physical fingerprint, require external hardware components that
may limit use and raise privacy concerns as well as the need for contact
monitoring, and expensive investments for manufacturers. The proposed touchless
biometric-based authentication solution may cost less, protect user privacy, and
eliminate touch points to mitigate the spread of COVID-19 and other
diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.