* 2234225
* Collaborative Research: The Math Your Earth Science Majors Need, When They Need It: Improving Quantitative Skills in The Future Earth Science Workforce
* EDU,DUE
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2025
* Beth Pratt-Sitaula, Incorporated Research Institutions for Seismology
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 11/30/2025
* USD 284,543.00

This project will serve the US national interest by strengthening undergraduate
Earth science majors' proficiency and confidence with quantitative skills and
reasoning, resulting in students who better understand Earth processes and are
prepared for geoscience careers. It is a Tier 2 project on the Engaged Student
Learning Track. Quantitatively skilled Earth science graduates are critical to
meeting the needs of the workforce and the country. However, the application of
math skills in a geoscience context is fraught with difficulties such as the
uneven preparation of students, gatekeeper mathematics prerequisite courses,
faculty who are not trained to teach quantitative skills, student math anxiety,
and the cognitive difficulty of transferring mathematical skills to a specific
science context. This project will develop the needed curricular resources and
faculty professional development to significantly improve geoscience majorsâ€™
disciplinary math capabilities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will improve
the quantitative skills and confidence of Earth science undergraduates by a
multi-pronged approach: 1) developing co-curricular modules to support majors-
level quantitative skill development within Earth science courses and programs;
2) organizing faculty professional development for developing and integrating
these resources; and 3) conducting educational research on effective
implementation strategies and student skill progression and attitudes. Central
to the resource design will be the application of math skills to Earth science
applications with examples drawn from a variety of sub-disciplines. Module
authors having a range of geoscience disciplinary expertise will be recruited to
ensure broad applicability of the resulting resources. Assessment and evaluation
will be carried out by the project principal investigators and an external
evaluator. The modular approach will allow faculty to adopt modules appropriate
for their individual courses and help scaffold quantitative skills across
geoscience curricula or into dedicated quantitative geoscience courses. The free
online module collection will be hosted on the Science Education Resource Center
(SERC) site. The project will also work with SERC to improve instructor
discovery of existing activity collections in which students can further apply
the quantitative skills they have developed using modules written in this
project. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to
improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.