* 2234201
* I-Corps: Cyber Physical System for Telehealth for Seniors with Cognitive Impairments
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2023
* Robert Miller, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a technology to better reintroduce the human touch in telehealth
and improve the general quality of care. Most telehealth companies have focused
on providing convenient logistics. Less effort has been devoted to consultation
accuracy. This proposed technology uses Internet of Things (IoT) sensing to
enable a more precise medical diagnosis, with measurement of temperature, blood
pressure, and specific inputs depending on the specialty. Diagnosis and
monitoring of neuromuscular disorders rely on a nuanced physical examination.
Most neurologists are unfamiliar with telemedicine's potential use for stroke
and movement disorders. This proposed technology may provide improved
assessments of variable weaknesses, increase patient monitoring and education,
reduce the burden and cost of clinic visits, and increase patient
access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of
a cyber-physical and community system that address the use of telemedicine for
neuromuscular disorders using computer vision, robotics, and non-invasive
cognitive assessment tools. This technology includes a telehealth platform
augmented by a digital twin of the patient that assists with diagnostic testing.
This system lets doctors focus on taking notes, interacting with the patient,
and getting more accurate diagnosis for their
patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.