* 2234855
* Collaborative Research: RAPID: Flooding and Geomorphic Change in Yellowstone National Park
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Lyman Persico, Whitman College
* Standard Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 07/31/2024
* USD 40,883.00

Extreme events such as floods threaten infrastructure, lives, and livelihoods,
as well as altering landscapes and ecosystems. Climate change is increasing the
frequency of such events and heightening the imperative to understand their
drivers and landscape responses and to translate such understanding into hazards
reduction. In mid-June 2022, extreme floods on the Yellowstone River and many of
its tributaries in and around northern Yellowstone National Park were generated
by an atmospheric river that delivered 2.5–10 cm of rain to high-elevation
snowpack. Large rain-on-snow floods have created large and persistent channel
changes in Yellowstone in the past, and they may become more common in a warming
climate. The extreme June 2022 event provides a rare opportunity to examine its
magnitude and effects on Yellowstone River tributaries. This project will
support research experiences for five undergraduate students and one M.S.
student and represents a new collaboration between primarily undergraduate-
serving and very high research activity institutions. The project will
contribute to National Park Service after-event analysis and planning. The
investigators will engage broad audiences through social media. Project findings
will be incorporated into university classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
aims to reconstruct flood hydraulics and assess the hydrogeomorphic effects of
the June 2022 event, to contextualize the impacts relative to previous extreme
flooding events, and to inform geohazards planning at Yellowstone National Park.
These goals will be accomplished by targeted field surveys, geomorphic change
analysis over larger areas using repeat lidar, and hydraulic modeling. The
investigators' efforts will focus on areas that are both well-suited to the
research questions and have pre-flood data. Research objectives include
estimating the hydraulics of the June 2022 flood and how the flood affected
channel geometry and floodplain character, including incision and/or aggradation
of Yellowstone River tributaries. The research is time sensitive and urgent
because landscape changes induced by the floods are most evident in the
immediate aftermath, before subsequent rainfall events in 2022 and the spring
2023 snowmelt runoff season further rework fluvial systems and floodplains.
Further, rapid deployment will allow the team to contribute to National Park
Service after-event analysis and planning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.