* 2234729
* Collaborative Research: Disentangling runoff- and Terminus-driven Velocity Variations of Fast Flowing Outlet Glaciers
* GEO,OPP
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2027
* Elizabeth Ultee, Middlebury College
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 03/31/2027
* USD 226,997.00

Ice loss from the polar ice sheets is the largest anticipated contribution to
global mean-sea-level rise in the coming century. A fundamental control on the
rate of ice loss is how fast ice flows from ice sheet interiors out to the
edges. In the interior of the Greenland Ice Sheet, ice flow responds to liquid
water (“runoff") input, which affects how the ice slides over the bedrock
beneath. At ocean-terminating "outlet glaciers” around the edges of Greenland,
ice flows into the ocean with speed that varies by season. That strong seasonal
variation makes it more difficult to determine the extent to which liquid water
input is affecting the flow speed. Identifying the relative strength of ocean-
driven versus melt-driven ice flow variations is essential for computer models
used to forecast future ice loss. It has been difficult to assess those factors
in a consistent way because they operate over multiple time scales, thus
requiring different methods of observation that could not be directly
compared.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks to address three key
motivating questions: (Q1) How does runoff affect outlet glacier flow over
timescales of hours to years?; (Q2) How does glacier geometry affect the
response to runoff?; and (Q3) How do runoff- and terminus-driven velocity
variations interact? To address these questions, the PIs will combine new field
observations at a large marine-terminating outlet glacier with newly available
satellite data from multiple sources, using recently developed methods for
flexible time series analysis. Multivariate statistical analysis and idealized
numerical model experiments will test hypothesized feedbacks between runoff-
driven and terminus-driven changes, as well as connect the observational work to
more general settings. The PIs will develop open-source software that allows
other researchers to replicate their analysis for remote-sensing and in situ
data obtained on any glacier. Museum professionals on the team will coordinate
with the PIs to develop a special exhibit on the drivers of Arctic glacier
change; after initial installation at the University of Alaska Museum of the
North, the exhibit will be made available to tour other Arctic
museums.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.