* 2234961
* Leadership Support for Core Activities of the Board on Behavioral, Cognitive, and Sensory Sciences
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Daniel Weiss, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2028
* USD 250,000.00

The National Academies of Sciences, Medicine and Engineering (The National
Academies) in Washington, DC was chartered in 1863 with the mission of advising
the government on scientific matters. The Board on Behavioral, Cognitive, and
Sensory Sciences (BBCSS), set up with original funding from the National Science
Foundation, has functioned as the primary voice for behavioral, cognitive, and
sensory sciences for 25 years within the National Academies and to external
national and international stakeholders. BBCSS promotes cross-disciplinary
inquiry into complex scientific and policy questions, draws attention to the
behavioral and cognitive sciences for national policy initiatives, and engages
research scientists to develop a vision of where the behavioral and cognitive
sciences are headed. It also provides a forum for objective, independent, and
rigorous deliberation among researchers, the public, the media, Congress,
professional associations, the National Science Foundation and other federal
agencies in a variety of activities that it oversees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award supports the core activities of the Board. BBCSS oversees numerous
consensus studies, workshops, expert meetings, and seminars involving hundreds
of volunteer experts drawn from the top echelons of the behavioral and cognitive
sciences. BBCSS has produced impactful reports on a range of topics including
Reproducibility and Replicability in Science; How People Learn; Advancing Anti-
Racism, Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion in STEM Organizations; Ontologies in
the Behavioral Sciences; Advancing the Science of Team Science; Behavioral
Economics and Public Policy; Understanding Dementia; and many others. Moving
forward, the board continues to advance themes related to diversity, equity, and
inclusion, team science, creativity and innovation, cognitive diagnostics, as
well as lending new insights into emerging issues related to behavioral,
cognitive, and sensory sciences, such as myopia, olfaction and health, healthy
aging, and stemming substance abuse. Progress made on these themes (and
additional ones that may emerge) can be tracked on the Board's publicly
accessible website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.