* 2234841
* SBP: Collaborative Research: RUI: Expansion and Infrastructure Development of the Chicago Face Database
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Joshua Correll, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 03/31/2026
* USD 109,864.00

This project expands and diversifies the Chicago Face Database â€“ a source for
high-quality facial stimuli freely available for scientific research. The
database is utilized extensively by the research community to study phenomena of
interest to a variety of fields, including psychology, computer science, and
economics. Human faces offer a rich source of information and are critically
important as people navigate the social world. Babies enter the world ready to
orient and attend to human faces. By adulthood, humans learn to prioritize the
features that allow for the rapid categorization of others by sex, age, and
race. People infer a large number of psychologically meaningful attributes about
others based on facial features. Effectively studying face processing and its
downstream effects on human behavior requires high-quality, valid stimuli. This
project expands, enhances and makes available such stimuli to researchers. By
improving the Chicago Face Database, this project promotes better scientific
practices, helps researchers test new and different questions, pursues basic
science questions, and trains historically underrepresented students in the
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Chicago Face Database currently includes
digital images of over 800 Asian, Black, Latinx, multiracial, and White
Americans and South Asian Indians. It also includes important ratings and
physical measures of the faces. The Chicago Face Database was designed to fill a
significant research need: providing high-quality and diverse face stimuli to
researchers at no cost. Since being released in 2015, the Chicago Face Database
has been downloaded over 8,000 times and cited over 1,400 times, affirming its
value to the scientific community. The current project expands and diversifies
the Chicago Face Database to include 200 additional images of people
photographed in China and Japan, update the subjective ratings of the faces,
provide more comprehensive measurements of the faces, and design new web-based
tools for accessing the resource and facilitating stimulus selection. In
accomplishing these goals, the project addresses basic science questions related
to the cross-race recognition deficit, a psychological phenomenon whereby people
show better recognition for faces belonging to their own race than to other
races. In addition, a high-impact, hands-on mentoring program is offered to
historically underrepresented students pursuing computer science. The students
receive professional development coaching and individualized mentoring as they
work closely with a computer scientist in the development of the web-based
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.