* 2234762
* CAREER: To see a world in a grain of sand: Novel applications of sand grains as records of ancient surface environments
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2028
* Elizabeth Trower, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 07/31/2028
* USD 132,262.00

Sedimentary rocks preserve a record of how ancient ecosystems and environments
responded to changes in climate, integrating over durations much longer than
human lifetimes. This information provides a useful perspective on how modern
ecosystems might be affected by climate change. This project will develop a new
set of tools to estimate the amount of CO2 that was present in Earth’s ancient
atmosphere based on the characteristics of a unique type of sand grain, which
will improve our understanding of Earth’s past climate states. This research
effort will be integrated with an educational project that will develop new
inquiry-based teaching materials and curriculum to improve the Earth science
education for K-12 students in Colorado, while also providing professional
development opportunities to local schoolteachers and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to expand the scope of
paleoenvironmental information sedimentologists can glean from the rock record.
This work will build upon the PI’s novel approach for reconstructing the
carbonate mineral saturation state of ancient waters to address the primary
research objective: to build and share a toolkit for applying ooid size
measurements to reconstruct the carbonate chemistry of ancient waters and
ancient pCO2 that will be widely useful to the scientific community. This
objective will be accomplished by (1) creating a standardized and reproducible
workflow for measuring and interpreting ooid size data, and (2) expanding the
utility of this proxy by assembling a large suite of ooid size data from
Cenozoic carbonate-producing lakes in the western US to test and refine the
application of ooid size as a pCO2 constraint. The education and outreach
component of this project will design, test, and share an educational platform
consisting of a virtual and physical “Sand Library” paired with inquiry-based
curriculum to improve Earth science education across a range of educational
levels by illuminating the connections between the characteristics of sand
grains and Earth surface processes. Sand Library development will be in
partnership with a local Title I STEM magnet school and will engage with
students in classrooms, provide professional development to schoolteachers, and
facilitate opportunities for STEM enrichment outside of the
classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.