* 2234308
* Evolved changes to neural systems for reactive aggression in humans and other primates
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Erin Hecht, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2026
* USD 342,550.00

Various types of aggression are a part of how species function adaptively in
their social environments. At the same time, aggression can pose a threat to
societal well-being. This project uses brain imaging datasets and associated
behavioral data for multiple species to examine the neurobiology of reactive
aggression and investigate whether reactive aggression has been selected against
in humans. Understanding how aggression may differ in humans as compared to
other animals is fundamental to understanding the nature of our own species and
how we fit into the animal kingdom more broadly. The project supports student
training and mentoring in STEM and creates publicly available teaching materials
for an undergraduate seminar course focused on improving the ability to
critically evaluate scientific theories and recognize societal impacts of
understanding of scientific concepts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project tests
predictions that follow from current prominent theories on the role of
aggression in the evolution of humans and our closest ape relatives using unique
multispecies neuroimaging datasets to examine neural circuitry supporting
variation in aggressive behavior both within and across species. The
investigators use existing MRI and DTI scans from chimpanzees combined with
behavioral measurements in the same animals. In humans, they collect a highly
validated measure of reactive and proactive aggression as well as neuroimaging
data directly comparable to the chimpanzee dataset. Within each species, they
examine links between aggression and (a) gray matter morphology, (b) white
matter microstructure, and (c) white matter connectivity. Direct comparisons
between chimpanzee, bonobo, and human brains are used to assess whether bonobos
and/or humans show evolved change in neural circuits linked to individual
variation in reactive aggression. Additionally, comparisons with patterns of
brain organization observed in tame foxes provide a second, independent
mechanism to address whether human and bonobo brains have undergone selection
for reduced reactive aggression.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.