* 2234002
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Microstructure Observations of Vertical Mixing and Heat Fluxes from Chipods Deployed on Arctic Observing Network Cruises
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2025
* Jonathan Nash, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 02/28/2025
* USD 44,873.00

Climate change is causing the Arctic Ocean to get warmer and Arctic sea ice to
melt. These two effects are related, because a warmer ocean can melt sea ice
faster, and when sea ice melts, more sunlight gets into the ocean, making it
even warmer. Melted sea ice may also result in more ocean turbulence as it
allows for bigger waves on the ocean surface. We do not fully understand how
melting sea ice and a warming ocean influence each other, and it is difficult to
make ocean measurements in the Arctic Ocean. Here we propose to use an existing
dataset of turbulence observations to understand whether warming of Arctic
waters is associated with ocean mixing, to identify regional patterns in mixing,
and to quantify changes in recent years. These observations were made with a
highly specialized instrument that can directly measure ocean turbulence, which
has been infrequently used in the Arctic Ocean. Part of the proposed work is to
develop new methods to interpret the data in this unique environment. Once these
methods are developed, they may make long term monitoring of changes in Arctic
turbulence possible. The motivation driving this work is to improve
understanding of how Arctic climate change will affect interactions between the
ocean and sea ice. This is an important goal both for Arctic coastal
communities, who face a loss of sea ice and increasing coastal erosion, and for
improving predictions of global climate. The proposal will support the early
careers of two female scientists, and will also support a collaboration with the
Birch Aquarium to develop an exhibit to explain Arctic climate change to a broad
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate change is dramatically
altering the Arctic Ocean, including the multidecadal loss of Arctic sea ice.
Understanding potential feedbacks between sea ice loss and the warming Arctic
Ocean is of critical importance to predicting and mitigating future climate
change. Here we propose to use an existing dataset of 264 profiles of shipboard
turbulence observations collected on two Arctic Observing Network cruises to
&lt;br/&gt;assess the strength of vertical mixing in boundary current regions of
the Arctic Ocean, and quantify any correlation between the strength of mixing
and temperature of boundary currents (which have warmed in recent years); and
&lt;br/&gt;identify regional patterns in mixing along the Arctic shelves and
quantify any changes in mixing rates relative to prior studies. &lt;br/&gt;We
aim to use the results to both improve our understanding of Arctic ocean mixing
in a warming climate and inform future efforts to monitor changes in the Arctic
mixing environment. These deployments represent some of the first uses of
turbulence instruments in the Arctic ocean which can be routinely deployed on
hydrography cruises, and processing and interpreting the resulting data will
require new methods due to differences between the Arctic ocean and the lower
latitude oceans where these instruments are usually deployed. Once completed,
this analysis will provide information about changes in Arctic oceanic vertical
mixing and how the vertical transport of heat and nutrients will evolve in a
changing climate. The underlying objective of this work is to improve
understanding of the Arctic climate and its likely trajectory in terms of
vertical mixing rates along the margins. This aim is important regionally, as
Arctic coastal communities face a loss of sea ice and coastal erosion, and
globally for improving predictions of the future climate. Additionally, this
proposal is structured to support the early careers of two female scientists,
and will also support a collaboration with the Birch Aquarium to develop an
exhibit to explain Arctic climate change to a broad
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.