* 2234360
* EAGER: State Replication Amongst Communicating Parties
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Patrick Crowley, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,152.00

This project will explore a new approach for digital communication on the
Internet. Contemporary systems, including all Internet-connected devices and
infrastructure, use an approach modeled on the early telephone system; the
telephone system sent signals between two endpoints which share a single
channel—the telephone “line”. This model is a transmit-receive model whereby a
person places a call and transmits her message to another person who receives
the call. This model forms the basis for the Internet Protocol (IP) that is in
use on the Internet today. There is another approach called a request-response
model used on the Internet whereby a user makes a request (for example asking
for what is showing at the local theater) and a response with that information
is returned to the requester. This project, however, takes a different stance
based on “state synchronization.” Consider two examples of modern communication
that are not well-served by the existing models. When editing collaborative
documents, it is natural that the users want to access and modify the same
document, even when they each have their own copy. Likewise, in multi-player
games, each player wants to observe and manipulate the same shared virtual
environment, even though the players are hosting their own copy locally. We
observe that most applications, such as collaborative document editing,
messaging apps, file backups, social media apps, and multiplayer games, as well
as cloud services, are naturally expressed in this model. Our vision is to
demonstrate that applications and systems that use a synchronization model that
keeps shared information in sync, are significantly simpler, more efficient, and
more trustworthy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will elaborate the
fundamentals of the synchronization model of communication and will explore its
relation to the transmit-receive and request-response models used in
contemporary Internet protocols. This work pursues a new model because problems
and challenges in today’s networked systems, such as infrastructure complexity,
security and privacy, centralization of service providers, and application
complexity, are likely properties of the underlying communication models rather
than protocol implementation details. The synchronization model is inspired by
the phenomenon of quantum entanglement, in which state changes made in one
location are reflected in another. To express communication in this model,
applications are concerned with the structure of the state they share with
others, and how they make, detect, and react to state changes. This project will
elaborate and formalize the semantics of the proposed model and will develop an
analytical framework to enable comparison between the three models
discussed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.