* 2234385
* Tracing Ancient Subduction in the Lithospheric Mantle via Traditional and Non-Traditional Stable Isotopes
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Jaime Barnes, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2026
* USD 505,820.00

The outer layer of the Earth is broken into tectonic plates, consisting of the
crust and uppermost mantle. Those plates move around producing volcanoes,
earthquakes, and mountains. Plate tectonics, the movement of these plates, is
unique to Earth and may be key to life on Earth. Plate tectonics likely plays an
important role in maintaining planetary habitability. It helps to moderate the
global carbon cycle which in turn affects climate. Plate tectonics affects
nutrient fluxes to the oceans through weathering of material both on land where
plates come together to build mountains, and on the seafloor where plates spread
apart. There may be a link between the start of or change in plate tectonics
between 3 and 2.5 billion years ago and the rise of oxygen in the Earth’s
atmosphere. Despite the importance of plate tectonics to Earth processes, the
question of when plate tectonics started and whether the start was sudden,
gradual, or intermittent, are highly debated. One of the major consequences of
plate tectonics is the delivery of surface material to the mantle at subduction
zones, where one plate slides under another plate and sinks back into the
mantle. Tracing subducted material in the mantle is one potential way to
constrain the presence or absence of plate tectonics at a given time in Earth’s
history. This project will use a series of geochemical tracers to identify the
presence (or absence) of subducted material in the Earth’s mantle. The team will
study pieces of the mantle (called xenoliths) which are brought to the Earth’s
surface via volcanoes. Natural radioactive elements will also be used to
constrain the ages of any identified subducted materials, which will allow
examination of subduction over time. This work will support the education,
research, and scientific training of both undergraduate and graduate students.
The graduate student will train for career opportunities in
research/curation/outreach at museums via an internship at the Smithsonian
National Museum of Natural History (NMNH). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tracking
subducted material in the mantle, and in particular in the sub-continental
lithospheric mantle (SCLM), is one potential mechanism for constraining the
presence or absence of plate tectonics in Archean and Proterozoic times. The
SCLM may provide a more robust chemical record of ancient subduction processes
than the convecting mantle because it is isolated from convective mixing, and
the oldest cratonic roots have formation ages that extend back into the early
Archean. Although crustal recycling in and of itself does not prove the
existence of plate tectonics, it is a necessary consequence of plate tectonics.
The research team will use stable isotope geochemistry (18O, 44/40Ca), in
combination with trace element and radiogenic isotope tracers, to identify the
presence (or absence) of subducted components in the SCLM as sampled by mantle
peridotite xenoliths from cratonic (Kaapvaal, Slave, Rae) and non-cratonic
(Navajo Volcanic Field) settings. Subducting lithosphere has distinct 18O and
44/40Ca values compared to normal mantle. Slab-derived melts and fluids that
infiltrate the mantle wedge can alter its oxygen and calcium isotope
composition, raising or lowering the values depending on the nature of the
subducted components. Correlations between 18O and 44/40Ca values and other
geochemical tracers will be used to constrain the origin and effects of slab-
derived melts and fluids on mantle chemistry. In addition, correlations between
radiogenic isotope systems (e.g., Sm-Nd and Lu-Hf) and stable isotope variations
will also be used to constrain the age of any identified subduction components
and their relationship to the original stabilization of cratonic lithosphere by
melt depletion. Surprisingly, very few studies have examined coupled stable
isotope and trace/radiogenic element data in mantle xenoliths and, in
particular, no prior study has coupled oxygen and calcium isotope ratios of
peridotite xenoliths in the same study. Determining the mechanism(s) by which
continental lithosphere is generated and subsequently modified, and how both of
these have varied through time, can thus shed light onto both the timing of
plate tectonics onset and on the evolving mechanisms of continental crust
production through time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.