* 2234873
* Colorimetric Lateral Flow Assay Using Unique Hollow Nanoparticles as Labels
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Xiaohu Xia, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 05/31/2026
* USD 129,974.00

Test strip assay is an accessible in-home or point-of-care testing technology.
At-home COVID-19 antigen tests are one example of this type of testing, which is
also called colorimetric lateral flow assay (CLFA). CLFA can be used outside the
laboratory, performed by a non-skilled person, and results can be read with the
human eye, without the need of any equipment. Despite the simplicity of CLFA,
its detection sensitivity is relatively low compared to other equipment-based
diagnostic technologies. The goal of this project is to substantially improve
the sensitivity of CLFA technology while retaining its simplicity through the
development of a unique type of nanoparticle. This project will engage high
school, undergraduate and graduate students in research. Activities include
mentored research experiences for undergraduate students, research experiences
for high school students through the “Highschool Summer Research Internship”
program, and the implementation of a new course “Chemical Synthesis of
Biomaterials.”&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Colorimetric lateral flow assay (CLFA) is
one of a handful of diagnostic techniques that can be used outside the
laboratory without requiring skilled personnel and equipment. The current
bottleneck for CLFA development is its relatively low detection sensitivity due
to the weak color signals from colorimetric labels. For decades, gold
nanoparticles (AuNPs) have been extensively used as colorimetric labels for CLFA
because of their good physicochemical properties, including the display of a
characteristic red color due to their plasmonic activities. Nevertheless, it
remains a challenge to substantially enhance the intensity of the red color and
thus the detection sensitivity of AuNPs-based CLFAs. This project aims to break
through the detection limit barrier of CLFA by developing Au/Ag (gold/silver)
alloyed hollow nanoparticles (Au/Ag HNPs) that can be used as alternatives to
AuNPs. Compared to conventional AuNPs, the Au/Ag HNPs possess much stronger
plasmonic activities. In addition, they have lower densities because of the
hollow interiors, which facilitates smooth migration of particles in CLFA test
strip. These distinct features of Au/Ag HNPs enable them to be sensitive labels
for CLFA that can significantly advance the power of the assay without
compromising its simplicity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.