* 2234227
* EAGER: III: Small: Green Granular Neural Networks with Fast FPGA-based Incremental Transfer Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2024
* Yanqing Zhang, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 10/31/2024
* USD 255,245.00

Currently, popular machine learning systems running on the two main types of
processing units -- central processing units (CPUs) and graphics processing
units (GPUs). These units generate a lot of carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions and
also waste energy because traditional training algorithms (e.g., gradient
descent algorithms and genetic algorithms) take huge amount of time to optimize
billions of hyperparameters, and because CPUs and GPUs are not energy efficient.
Since the estimated CO2 emission amount is proportional to the total
computational power, two major ways of effectively reducing CO2 emissions
include developing novel high-speed non-traditional training algorithms to
significantly reduce training times, and use novel computational hardware with
low CO2 emissions. An urgent challenge is developing a novel machine learning
system with high-speed non-traditional training algorithms running on green and
energy efficient hardware to significantly reduce both CO2 emissions and energy
consumption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A novel shallow software-hardware-based green
granular neural network (GGNN) with new fast, field-programmable gate array
(FPGA). FPGA-based incremental transfer learning algorithms will be developed to
reduce both CO2 emissions and energy consumption more effectively than the CPU-
GPU-based training algorithms. Since FPGA is a light-weight hardware with low
CO2 emissions and low energy consumption, the FPGA is used to quickly solve a
system of linear equations to directly calculate optimal values of
hyperparameters of the shallow GGNN. The shallow GGNN with transferred granular
knowledge can be trained incrementally and quickly to make efficient decisions
for real-time green computing applications. A new GGNN tree will be developed to
resolve the curse of dimensionality. In addition, the shallow GGNN is
explainable because it can generate interpretable granular If-Then rules. This
project is also useful for improving intelligent green computing education for
relevant courses such as artificial intelligence, computational intelligence,
data mining, and operating systems. Undergraduate students and graduate students
including underrepresented students will do research works together. Students
will be well trained to become future green machine learning workforce to
develop novel software-hardware-based machine learning algorithms to greatly
reduce both CO2 emissions and energy consumption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.