* 2234636
* PFI-TT:  Fabrication of Solid Electrolyte Thin Films with Plasma Processing to Enable Solid State Batteries with High Energy Density
* TIP,TI
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2025
* James Brown, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 03/31/2025
* USD 266,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is the production of high quality thin
films for applications in batteries. The replacement of flammable liquid
electrolytes with solid-state electrolytes in next generation batteries will
greatly improve the energy density and safety of lithium batteries. However, it
is still a challenge to fabricate high performance solid-state batteries using
commercially viable manufacturing processes. The outcome of this project will be
the development a new scalable process for fabrication of novel materials for
solid-state batteries. The proposed technology derives strengths from chip
manufacturing techniques and will enable batteries with improved safety
characteristics and energy density compared to the state-of-the-art lithium-ion
batteries. The impact of the technology will be accelerated commercialization of
the next generation of batteries for electric vehicles, drones, power
electronics, and other energy storage applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project will develop a novel deposition method that will enable high
quality thin films of lithium conducting solid electrolyte, Li7La3Zr2O12 (LLZO),
to be grown directly on substrates and electrodes. Among the solid-state
electrolytes being considered for all-solid-state batteries, LLZO is one of the
most attractive due to its high ionic conductivity and good thermal and
electrochemical stability. However, the inability to reliably form LLZO thin
films with existing physical/chemical vapor deposition methods or conventional
ceramics processing is a major obstacle to the commercialization of LLZO-based
solid-state batteries. The innovation is in using plasma-based methods for the
production of high quality LLZO thin films with low interfacial resistance and a
grain microstructure that is expected to mitigate lithium dendrite penetration.
The research will identify optimal process parameters for the film deposition
and surface treatments and establish relationships between the LLZO film quality
and mechanical and electrochemical properties. Through a close collaboration
combining expertise in LLZO materials synthesis, plasma processing, and
commercialization of battery ceramic materials and manufacturing processes,
knowledge gaps related to the correlations between LLZO thin film growth
conditions, device performance, and commercial viability will be
bridged.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.