* 2234076
* Pathways Enabling Open-Sources Ecosystems (POSE) Training Program – Supporting Collaborative Open Source Ecosystem Development
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Karthik Ram, University of California-Berkeley
* Cooperative Agreement
* Peter Atherton
* 06/30/2023
* USD 346,231.00

Research projects produce various outputs such as software, code, data, and
hardware. When these products are made available via an open-source license,
anyone can publicly access, modify, and distribute them to others. However,
ensuring that these products continue to remain useful over time can be a
significant challenge. Additionally, organizations that maintain these open
source products need to sustain themselves. Optimal management of an Open-Source
Ecosystem can help ensure that the open-source product on which the ecosystem is
based has maximum impact over the longest possible lifetime, while also
minimizing potential security and privacy risks. As part of NSF’s Pathways to
Open-Source Ecosystems (POSE) program, this project will develop a training
program to teach awardees the best practices necessary to ensure that their
open-source ecosystems are secure and sustainable. Some of the materials that
will be developed for the training program, such as case studies of successful
existing projects and recordings of talks by experts, will be made available so
they can benefit others beyond the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An Open-Source
Ecosystem (OSE) is a sustainable organization that enables the ongoing,
collaborative, asynchronous development of an open-source product that may be
based on data, software, and/or hardware, and that is designed to be publicly
accessible, modifiable, and distributable by anyone under an open-source
licensing model. The primary goal of the POSE training program is to help enable
participants sustain and maintain their open-source ecosystems. This program has
four intended impacts: 1) to help teams identify a relevant and sustainable OSE
to match their research needs; 2) to define broad societal impacts for OSEs; 3)
to develop and curate a set of best practices for building secure and
sustainable open-source ecosystems for any open-source product; and 4) to
amplify the reach and impact of materials through various outreach
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.