* 2234096
* Collaborative Research: The Individual Differences Corpus: A resource for testing and refining hypotheses about individual differences in speech production
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Jason Bishop, CUNY College of Staten Island
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 05/31/2026
* USD 203,103.00

Speaking is a surprisingly personal activity. When humans articulate the vowels
and consonants that make up words, or produce the rhythm and melody of a
sentence, they do so in ways that differ from each other – even from others who
speak the same language. And while some of the differences in a person’s
pronunciation reflect the specific region they come from or the social group
they belong to, most of the variation in people’s speech remains poorly
understood. This lack of understanding presents challenges to society –
surprisingly practical ones, such as how speech and language disorders can be
diagnosed (for example, which kinds of differences are pathological and which
kinds aren’t?) as well as how technological applications such as automatic
speech recognition operate (for example, which kinds of differences cause
problems for a speech recognition system and which ones don’t?). The goal of
this project is to produce a corpus of speech data – the first-ever publicly-
available corpus of its kind – that can be used to explore the ways and reasons
that people differ in their speech patterns. The corpus – the Individual
Differences Corpus – includes tens of thousands of words produced by hundreds of
native English speakers, providing researchers with the data needed to test
scientific hypotheses about how a range of mental skills (e.g., memory,
attention) and personality characteristics (e.g., autistic traits, empathy)
influence people’s speech, with implications for how researchers approach
speech-related differences in social, educational, technological and clinical
contexts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Speech signals are rife with variation. Some of
this variation derives from the form of the message itself (i.e., effects of
phonetic and/or phonological context), while some derives instead from the
speaking context (e.g., the need to produce faster, clearer or less ambiguous
speech). However, some of the variation found in speech has its origins in
speakers themselves – i.e., individual differences. But what aspects of speakers
and listeners cause them to vary, and what can they tell us about the language
and speech production systems? The present research aims to create the
Individual Differences Corpus, a publicly-available corpus resource designed for
approaching questions about individual differences in speech production. The
corpus is unique in that it pairs (1) thousands of words of connected speech
produced by hundreds of native English speakers with (2) a large battery of
measurement of all speakers’ cognitive and social profiles, including
psychometrically valid measurements along several dimensions of cognitive
control (e.g., working memory, processing speed, inhibition), cognitive
processing styles (e.g., autistic traits, empathy) and more. The theoretical and
empirical potential of the corpus is demonstrated in two psychometric studies of
speech production planning that investigate planning from both prosodic and
segmental perspectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.