* 2234811
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Understanding how minority dialect-speaking children use inflectional verb morphology in sentence processing and word learning.
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2025
* Jan Edwards, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 02/28/2025
* USD 16,433.00

This doctoral dissertation project investigates how dialect differences between
minority and majority dialect-speaking children 5-10 years of age impact
sentence processing and word learning. Dialects are rule-governed linguistic
systems, yet linguistic features often differ across dialects. Dialects spoken
by minority communities have been studied for its potential contribution to
longstanding academic performance gaps between minority and majority students.
One suggestion is that linguistic differences between a minority dialect and the
dialect of instruction lead to a dialect mismatch that makes learning more
difficult in the classroom. However, it remains unclear how speaking a minority
dialect is related to academic performance because the work is primarily
correlational. This study addresses that gap by investigating specific
mechanisms using measures that are sensitive to sentence comprehension and
language learning. Since the primary method of instruction in the classroom is
through oral language, it is essential to understand how minority dialect-
speaking children use the rules of their dialect to understand majority dialect
sentences of the type more commonly found in schools. These results improve our
understanding of how dialect mismatch impacts learning in real time while
creating avenues for new strategies that can support spoken language
comprehension and learning for children who speak different dialects and
languages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current research uses two experiments to
investigate how minority and majority dialect-speaking children use subject-verb
agreement, which differs between the dialects, to process majority dialect
sentences and make inferences to learn new words. A previous study completed by
the research team demonstrates that minority dialect-speaking children use their
grammatical knowledge of their minority dialect to comprehend majority dialect
sentences that were ambiguous due to linguistic differences. However, the
absence of real-time measures of comprehension raises additional questions about
what cues children rely on for sentence interpretation and how it relates to
learning. Experiment 1 tests the hypothesis that dialect mismatch impacts how
minority dialect-speaking children use dialect features marked differently than
a majority dialect to process sentences. The experiment uses an eye-tracking
task to evaluate how minority dialect-speaking children use subject-verb
agreement (e.g., was/were) to infer the subject number in ambiguous majority
dialect sentences. Experiment 2 tests the hypothesis that childrenâ€™s language
knowledge will shape how they use subject-verb agreement to make inferences
about new words. The experiment uses a verb learning paradigm containing
morphological features (e.g., was/were, is/are) that differ between the majority
and minority dialect to examine if there are differences in how majority and
minority dialect-speaking children use the morphology as a cue to make
inferences about a new word. Based on results from previous studies, minority
dialect-speaking children should use their grammatical knowledge of the minority
dialect to guide the inferences they make when processing majority dialect
sentences. By studying minority dialect-speaking children, the researchers
evaluate how children with diverse linguistic experiences process sentences and
how linguistic variation shapes what cues children attend to when processing
sentences in both a familiar and unfamiliar dialect.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.