* 2234081
* SCC-PG: Trust, transparency and technology: Building digital equity through a civic digital commons
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Gwen Shaffer, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Vishal Sharma
* 04/30/2024
* USD 147,370.00

Smart city platforms–encompassing mobile apps, cameras, sensors, algorithms, and
predictive analytics—generate troves of data on residents. Research suggests
that excessive surveillance reinforces a sense of insecurity and leads residents
to fear civil liberties violations, particularly among communities of color. Our
digital rights platform will empower community members by granting them agency
over how the City collects, uses and stores their personal data. The platform
will be designed collaboratively with hundreds of Long Beach residents
participating in a civic user testbed and other qualitative data collection. The
platform will feature text and open-source iconography that visually conveys how
the City of Long Beach uses specific technologies, what data these technologies
collect and how the City utilizes that data. We plan to strategically deploy
signage across Long Beach, physically adjacent to or digitally embedded within
civic technologies, e.g., sensors, cameras, mobile payment kiosks, a 311 app.
The platform will include a QR code or hyperlink that take users to an online
dashboard where they may learn additional details, update data collection
preferences, and share comments and concerns with local officials—giving
residents a clear understanding of how local government collects, analyzes,
shares, and retains their personal data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This digital
rights platform will feature text and the open-source iconography that visually
conveys how the City of Long Beach uses specific smart technologies, what data
these technologies collect and how the City utilizes that data. The platform
considers the technical, legal, ethical, and spatial aspects of smart
technologies. Grounded in frameworks of trust and contextual integrity, the
project is focused on the City’s vision to use data in ethical ways that avoid
reinforcing existing racial biases and discriminatory decision-making.
Specifically, we plan to strategically deploy signage across Long Beach,
physically adjacent to or digitally embedded within civic technologies, e.g.,
sensors, cameras, mobile payment kiosks, a 311 app. The platform will include a
QR code or hyperlink that take users to an online dashboard where they may learn
additional details, update data collection preferences, and share comments and
concerns with local officials. We plan to work with smart city technology
developers to create a software solution that will, ultimately, enable residents
to opt out of data collection. The project will inform novel accountability
strategies meant to ensure that wildly disparate smart city technologies—each
employed for a distinct purpose—respect residents’ data privacy and avoid
discriminatory impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.