* 2234206
* Increasing Underrepresented Minorities in STEM: The 49th NOBCChE Annual Conference  National Organization for the Professional Advancement of Black Chemists and Chemical Engineers
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Rena Robinson, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 08/31/2023
* USD 97,673.00

This award will support the participation of undergraduate students, graduate
students, and postdoctoral fellows at the national annual meeting for the
National Organization for the Professional Advancement of Black Chemists and
Chemical Engineers (NOBCChE) conference in 2022. This award is funded by
Division of Chemistry. The NOBCChE meeting has become an important conference to
recruit diverse global leaders in the Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics (STEM) fields and to create an inclusive environment in the broader
scientific community. This conference will be held in person in 2022, for the
first time since the COVID pandemic began. The PIs will use this as an
opportunity to compare student outcomes between live and virtual conferences,
providing insight that would be impactful to many other scientists and educators
in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide opportunities for
participants to engage in four major areas of focus: (1) STEM Professional and
Technical Development, (2) STEM Mentoring and Networking Opportunities, (3)
Exposure to Prestigious Minority Models in STEM, and Academic and Professional
STEM Career Advancement Opportunities, and (4) access to potential careers in
the STEM workforce. Student participants will interact with peers and
professionals from industry, government, and academia to develop collaborations
and to explore opportunities to pursue graduate degrees in the chemistry,
chemical engineering and related disciplines. NOBCChE 2022 will also serve to
enrich the technical, professional, and leadership skill sets of student
attendees and students working on committees with other senior leaders on
conference planning and execution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.