* 2234413
* PFI-TT:  Development of Novel Lens Technology for Next Generation Laser Manufacturing
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Rajesh Menon, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2025
* USD 244,017.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to enable much smaller and simpler
laser-marking and laser-welding machines, which are critical for supply-chain
management, and very widely used in all types of industries ranging from
pharmaceuticals, automobile components, aerospace, electronics, food packaging
and so on. The laser-marking machine market size was valued at $2.76 billion in
2020 and it is critical to the US national security and America’s global
industrial leadership. The technology being developed in this PFI project will
make it possible to perform laser processing over complex 3D geometries and
large step heights without expensive and complex refocusing mechanisms, which
could lead to a larger application space for laser-marking, while reducing
overall costs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will demonstrate
extended depth of focus flat lenses for high power laser applications. This
proposed flat-lens technology will improve the robustness of laser-based
materials processing by allowing for focusing high-power laser beams for
significantly extended distances than what is possible by the current art. This
will be enabled by new inverse design paradigms as well as novel optical
materials. A second innovation arises from combining programmable materials to
create additional focus tunability for these lenses, which will e.g., enable
overcoming mechanical refocusing through costly motor systems that are prone to
failure. This PFI project is aimed at developing and translating into
commercialization these new optical technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.