* 2234195
* Collaborative Research: CCRI: New: An Open Data Infrastructure for Bodily Expressed Emotion Understanding
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2026
* Jia Li, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 03/31/2026
* USD 1,832,335.00

The project goal is to unlock the wealth of information about human expression
that is already found in videos on the internet. The multidisciplinary project
team will collect videos of human movement available online and use experts in
movement analysis and non-experts to pinpoint at characteristics of the human
movement that can be used to drive algorithms that will attempt to classify the
emotion expressed by the human mover. These characteristics will form labels on
the data that include context, demographics, technical concepts from movement
analysis, and emotion. This work will take an unprecedented, multidisciplinary
approach in creating a data infrastructure for computational modeling of bodily
expression of emotion. To ensure the infrastructure's compatibility with human-
robot interaction research, the team will conduct a public-facing feasibility
study. The team will also employ advisory boards and continue to engage with
active researchers in multiple sub-disciplines of the computer and information
science and engineering research community in the designing, creation, testing,
and dissemination of the data infrastructure, and organizing annual user
community workshops and benchmarking challenges. The data infrastructure is
expected to promote technological innovations and breakthroughs in data-driven
modeling of human bodily expression of emotion and affect, a highly complex
problem with applications in healthcare, e.g., caregiving robots and diagnostic
tools for mental health, manufacturing, e.g., socially-aware autonomous
forklifts and safety monitoring systems, security, e.g., monitoring, and
consumer electronics, e.g., improved interactions with a home
robot.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bodily movement expresses important information,
including conveying emotion, which is crucial for future human-machine
interactions. As in other areas of artificial intelligence (AI), such as image
recognition, a large-scale data-driven approach holds promise for revealing new
insights into the complex, subtle, and contextual nature of human bodily
expression. However, research on computational recognition of bodily expression,
an area of affective computing, AI, and human-robot interaction, is struggling
to mature as researchers must replicate many of the same work-intensive steps,
creating divergent efforts and expense. This NSF project aims to create a large-
scale, high-quality, multifaceted, annotated, open, and extensible data
infrastructure for computational understanding of human bodily expressions in a
variety of settings. It will leverage the team's expertise in AI, computer
vision, affective computing, expressive robotics, emotion recognition,
psychology, movement analysis, statistics and data mining, data ethics, and the
arts to create (1) a data-sharing infrastructure tailored to the needs of
research into subjective experience, emotion, and bodily movement, (2) a
crowdsourced annotated video dataset, and (3) a collection of tools and software
for rigorous reliability validation, reproducibility and transparency
assessment, and content-based search and retrieval. The data infrastructure is
expected to serve applications in fields such as robotics, psychology,
performing arts, animation, and entertainment. The project also develops human
expertise in this emerging field by supporting graduate and undergraduate
students, including students from underrepresented groups, providing experience
in conducting infrastructure development, integrating knowledge from multiple
disciplines. These students will interact regularly with the team’s
international partners. Public events that create broad public engagement in the
work will focus on numerous applications to human-robot interaction. The
infrastructure will stimulate focused research projects and agendas in affective
computing, AI, including artificial emotional intelligence and human-AI
interaction, computer vision, social/assistive robotics, virtual agents,
psychiatric telemedicine, human-centered design, machine/deep learning, ethics
in computing, and related communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.