* 2234161
* I-Corps: Disposable, Continuous, Soft, Wearable Stethoscope for Monitoring Post-Acute Pulmonary Patients
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Woon-Hong Yeo, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 12/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a novel method for early detection and ongoing assessment of
chronic respiratory symptoms that are based on objective and continuous
measurements that can be used in both home and clinical settings for post-acute
patients. Approximately 25 million Americans have asthma (1 in 13 Americans).
Asthma is a chronic respiratory condition marked by reversible airflow
obstruction. The disease is caused by persistent inflammation and results in a
variety of symptoms ranging from intermittent shortness of breath with activity,
to severe, acute symptoms such as chest pain or tightness, coughing, and
wheezing. Patients who experience an increase in the frequency and severity of
asthma flare-ups owing to poor symptom perception or inadequate adherence to
medication may experience asthma attacks or exacerbations, which can be life-
threatening. The overall prevalence of asthma has been increasing over time both
domestically and globally. According to recent epidemiologic studies, the
estimated prevalence of asthma is 8.4 percent and 4.3 percent of the US and
global populations, respectively. Monitoring at home can provide an early
warning for the development of bronchospasm that can be promptly treated before
it progresses to an asthma exacerbation, thereby reducing emergency room
visits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of
a wireless, flexible, soft wearable stethoscope with gold-standard signal
resolution for increasing patient comfort and mobility in post-acute
telepulmonary care. In comparison to current rigid stethoscopes which require
visits and well-trained clinicians to operate, these characteristics will make
it easier for both pulmonologists and patients to continuously monitor the
development of pulmonary diseases. The technology is a gentle, wireless
auscultation patch with highly conformal sensing and substrate components to
maximize comfort while facilitating diagnoses of four different pulmonary
abnormal sounds: crackle, rhonchi, stridor, and wheeze. The intellectual merit
stems from two key innovations: (1) a novel electronics encapsulation method
that permits intimate and conformal contact between the skin and sensing
components, and (2) a systematically designed sensor layout to maximize
diagnostic-aiding capabilities for clinicians to remotely diagnose post-acute
pulmonary care patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.