* 2234866
* CAREER:  Synthesizing Structural Uncertainty of Sea-level Rise Projections to Improve Application in Decision Making
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Andra Garner, Rowan University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 03/31/2028
* USD 66,441.00

Coastal populations and economic assets have increased steadily in recent
decades and are likely to continue to do so. At the same time, coastal
communities are facing increasing threats from climate related sea level rise
(SLR). Thus, there is a rapidly growing need for both global and local SLR
projections with uncertainties that reflect our scientific knowledge. This
CAREER award will meet the challenge by using the wealth of information
contained in four decades of SLR science to improve the scientific community’s
understanding of sources of uncertainty within SLR projections. The project will
analyze previous SLR science to improve the scientific community’s understanding
of sources of uncertainty within SLR projections at global and local scales. The
project will support development of a publicly accessible interactive website (a
“SLR Dashboard”) that will serve as a central hub for comprehensive SLR
projection databases, allowing users immediate access to key SLR projection
data, visualizations, and statistical tools. By improving our understanding of
the uncertainty that currently exists within projections of future SLR, this
work will enhance our ability to develop adaptation and resiliency strategies in
coastal communities around the globe. Undergraduate students at Rowan University
will be engaged in development and analysis of the databases and will share
their work during events with public audiences. The project includes plans to
develop children’s book with literary and educational experts that will teach
broad audiences about rising sea levels in an engaging and accessible
format.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four decades and ~10 cm of global mean SLR since
the first global sea level projections were made, projections of future SLR
remain deeply uncertain. Although a major source of uncertainty relates to the
amount and timing of melt from the Antarctic Ice Sheet, additional uncertainty
arises from problem formulation—choices in methodology used to project future
SLR, and emissions scenarios considered. While the science behind SLR
projections is constantly improving, differences amongst the large numbers of
available SLR projections can make it difficult for decision makers to interpret
the science and decide which projections they should use. By analyzing existing
projections to better understand sources of structural uncertainty, we can
reduce the impact of problem formulation upon SLR projection uncertainty over
various time scales, improving the practical application of SLR projections in a
wide variety of settings. The scientific goals of this project are to 1) further
develop publicly-available databases that describe both local and global SLR
projections, 2) use machine learning and statistical analyses to quantify how
uncertainty manifests and evolves in SLR projections at various spatial and
temporal scales, and 3) evaluate the sensitivity of various SLR projection
methodologies to climate drivers to improve our understanding of the uncertainty
within current projections of SLR. The project will also support the training
and education of undergraduates in data analysis and sea level rise policy
issues. The project will support development of a children's book about
SLR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.