* 2234509
* PFI-TT: Decentralized, On-Demand Production of Dialysis Solutions and Similar Medical Fluids
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2023,07/31/2024
* Natasha Wright, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 07/31/2024
* USD 249,884.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is the mitigation of drug shortages
involving Large Volume Parenteral Solutions (LVPS), such as electrolyte
replacement, intravenous fluid, and dialysis solutions. Over the past two
decades, the United States drug shortages have become an unwelcome reality with
public health and national security implications. In a recent survey of 719
health system pharmacists, all reported experiencing drug shortages in the
preceding year with 52% of the shortages involving LVPS. The main mitigation
strategy, reported by 81% of the respondents, was the hoarding of available
supply. Current strategies to mitigate drug shortages are mostly focused on
reaction and recovery rather than preparedness. There is a critical need for an
alternative pharmaceutical supply for LVPS that ensures long-term resilience.
Beyond shortages, the technology has the potential to generate vital solutions
in disaster situations, in military/war zones, in low-resource settings, or
other settings where a modular solution is needed and clean rooms are not
available. The project will also provide opportunities for the lead graduate
student to participate in student pitch competitions, a value proposition design
course, leadership seminars, and regular check-ins with the team’s
commercialization and regulatory experts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project is a technological innovation that generates water-for-
injection (WFI) near the point of care, in hospitals and pharmacies, mixes the
WFI with concentrates and performs aseptic, pyrogen-free packaging within built-
in environmental contamination controls, eliminating the need for use in a
cleanroom facility. Most LVPS are over 95% water for injection (WFI) by volume,
so the proposed innovation significantly reduces the cost and energy associated
with shipping ‘water’ around the world. This PFI-TT award will enable the
implementation of the first full system proof-of-concept prototype, capable of
on-demand, hospital/pharmacy-scale (100 L/h) production of LVPS and validation
of the system’s ability to meet composition and microbiological stability
requirements in a non-clean room environment. The aims of the project include
finalizing the design of the primary water treatment train to meet regulations
and to reduce risk of biological contamination and demonstrating full-system
feasibility to meet production rate, composition, and microbiological stability
success criteria. Feasibility will be demonstrated by integrating and validating
all three modules in the production of one representative LVPS, Dianeal PD-2
with 2.5% Dextrose, a common peritoneal dialysis prescription selected following
140+ customer discovery interviews.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.