* 2234698
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: How flexible are grammars past puberty? Evidence from heritage language returnees
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2025
* Silvina Montrul, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 02/28/2025
* USD 19,000.00

This doctoral dissertation project addresses a fundamental issue at the heart of
understanding language acquisition: how flexible and malleable are grammars
after puberty? Age effects have long been discussed in the language acquisition
literature. Some have argued that native speaker attainment of a language is
impossible if acquisition starts later in life (after puberty). Research on
heritage language acquisition provides a new perspective on this debate.
Heritage speakers acquire a minority language at home from birth in a setting
where the majority language is spoken in the community. Due to the extensive use
of the majority language in the society growing up, heritage speakers often have
fewer opportunities to interact with their minority (heritage) language and
receive overall less linguistic input in the heritage language than a typically
developing monolingual speaker in the home country. As a result, non-native-like
attainment in several properties of their heritage language is common. This has
been taken as evidence that early age of acquisition is a necessary but not a
sufficient factor for native-like attainment because linguistic input received
in the heritage language in early years plays a role as well. This study
examines how age and input factors interact in language acquisition processes
and in ultimate attainment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators compare
heritage speakers across two different immigrant contexts to returnees who have
returned to their country of origin in their adolescence or adult years.
Comparing the linguistic abilities of returnees in their former heritage
language to that of heritage speakers in the host country informs whether
interrupted acquisition before puberty can result in nativelike attainment if
heritage speakers become fully immersed in the heritage language after returning
to the home country. We also investigate whether the situational factors (e.g.,
status of and contact with the former majority language, socio-economic status,
educational profile) play a role in the degree and speed of development of the
heritage language in returnees. To this end, the study obtains production and
linguistic judgment data from participants. The results of this project
contributes to the limited literature on language identity and linguistic self-
esteem in child and adult speakers of a minority language and their reinsertion
in their native language and culture. The findings also inform pedagogical
interventions in heritage language teaching and the design of teaching materials
for heritage speakers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.