* 2234541
* PFI-TT: Development of artificial substrates for growth of human stem cells suitable for clinical applications
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2025
* Luis Villa Diaz, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 02/28/2025
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to accelerate the potential benefit
of using human pluripotent stem cells and their derivatives for treating and
curing diseases. If successful, this project will allow the culture of human
pluripotent stem cells in conditions that are animal-free, defined, and
reproducible. This technology will have a significant impact on advancing
biomedical sciences since animal-free growth conditions will prevent triggering
immunological responses in transplants using cells or organs derived from the
human pluripotent stem cells. In addition, the culture of the cells in defined
conditions will provide a new tool needed to methodologically investigate
questions related to human body development as well as disease pathology and
treatment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project addresses the problem of
undefined and inconsistent conditions for the in vitro growth of human
pluripotent stem cells that also contain animal-derived contaminants. This
project will produce a synthetic substrate that supports the growth of human
pluripotent stem cells in animal-free and fully defined conditions. The research
objectives of this project are to test suitable methods for the sterilization of
substrates without affecting their properties. Secondly, the shelf-life of the
synthetic substrate will be also determined. Third, the properties of the new
substrate will be replicated using different components, and finally, other
components associated with the culture of human pluripotent stem cells with the
new synthetic substrate will be selectively defined. Overall, the goal is to
further improve and create a prototype synthetic substrate for
commercialization. This new technology, if successful, will allow biomedical
scientists to further advance the knowledge and clinical use of human
pluripotent stem cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.