* 2234039
* A Microcomparative Study of Negation in Dialectal Variation
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Paul Reed, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 08/31/2026
* USD 384,272.00

Linguistic variation, or the use of different words, sounds, or grammatical
structures to communicate the same meaning, is a fundamental aspect of language.
A well-known example is the use of "pop," "soda," and "coke" to refer to
sweetened carbonated beverages in different regions of the US. While variation
in word choice between different regions is often considered unremarkable and
even entertaining by non-specialists, other types of variation receive more
scrutiny. For example, while some speakers use sentences like, "I didn’t eat
anything this morning" to express that they skipped breakfast, others might say
"I didn’t eat nothing." From a linguistic perspective, this type of variation
has the same systematicity and legitimacy as variation between words for
carbonated beverages. However, double negatives like "I didn’t eat nothing" are
often considered by non-specialists to be incorrect, and carry social stigma.
Examples like these are present in many linguistic varieties, and studies have
shown that even speakers who do not use "mainstream forms" can easily understand
them in context. This project collects new information from a variety of
speakers of different dialects–many of whom are often excluded from academic
research. Through comparing how individuals from different regions and ethnic
groups use certain types of negative sentences, the project uncovers areas where
these groups overlap in their linguistic knowledge, and it more accurately
delineates differences that exist. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Previous experimental
research on non-mainstream forms, such as the case of double negative, which is
also known as Negative Concord, has included speakers of mainstream varieties.
It suggests that there may be more areas of grammatical overlap between
mainstream and non-mainstream varieties than one might expect based on the
sentences they produce. This project explores the extent of this overlap, by
comparing the real time comprehension of speakers of these varieties directly.
To compare and contrast the grammatical knowledge that different speakers have
of Negative Concord, the project explores two abilities considered signatures of
such knowledge: prediction of an upcoming word or structure, and the association
of social information about contexts in which a structure is likely to appear.
The researchers employ the methods of phoneme detection–a measure of prediction,
and eye tracking, which is a measurement of real time comprehension and
association, including social knowledge. The project contributes much needed
data on speakers who are not proportionally included in experimental research on
language. In addition, the project employs undergraduate and community
researchers from underrepresented minority groups, providing unique experience
and training opportunities. The research team leverages their expertise in
scientific communication for public audiences to translate project results for
broad consumption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.