* 2234046
* EAGER: New Lithium Oxy-ThioBorate Solid State Electrolytes
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Kirill Kovnir, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 08/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This EAGER project is conducting fundamental high-risk research on new
polycrystalline solid electrolytes that can be used in the development of new
all solid-state batteries that are safer and more energy dense. While lithium-
ion batteries are powerful, they present a potential dangerous fire hazard in
some demanding applications. In this new project, new solid electrolytes are
being prepared and studied that will help create a new type of all solid-state
battery that is more durable and resistant to decay and can hold 10 times more
energy than traditional lithium batteries. This research project trains graduate
students in state-of-the-art solid electrolyte and materials synthesis,
materials characterization, and solid-state electrochemistry of solid
electrolytes and as such broadens the cadre of new knowledge workers in the
critical field of energy storage. Further, the graduate students supported by
this project will conduct informal science education using the Gaffers Guild
Glass Blowing Studio at Iowa State University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At the very
core of every lithium battery is a potentially flammable organic liquid
electrolyte. If a lithium battery is overcharged, overheated, or draws too much
current too rapidly, the organic liquid electrolyte can react and cause damage.
In this new project, fundamental research is being conducted to study new kinds
of lithium thioborate (LBS) and oxygen-doped lithium oxy-thioborate (LBSO) solid
electrolytes. The project will examine the underlying structural chemistry of
mixing boron, oxygen, and sulfur to explore three hypotheses: (1) That these new
LBS and LBSO solid electrolytes will have among the highest ever reported Li ion
conductivities combined with low density and high voltage stability. (2) That
adding oxygen will improve the chemical durability and electrochemical stability
of the solid electrolytes by forming bridging oxygens between the boron atoms.
(3) That adding sulfur will increase the lithium ion conductivity by forming low
basicity BS4-1 anion sites of low binding energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.