* 2234277
* Upgrading UNOLS Academic Research Fleet (ARF) Marine Gravimeters Oceanographic Instrumentation Program Proposal 2022
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Masako Tominaga, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* James Holik
* 07/31/2024
* USD 765,000.00

The Woods Hole Oceanographic Institutionâ€™s (WHOI) Potential Fields Pool
Equipment (PFPE) Facility, operated under its Shipboard Scientific Services
Group (SSSG) recognizes that proposing and executing a BGM3 life cycle
replacement plan is central to the future of marine gravity capability in US
oceanographic research. This proposal requests the purchase of two critical
items for operating marine gravimeters onboard academic research fleet (ARF)
vessels. The PI discusses the rationale to fund one Dynamic Gravity Systems
(DGS) marine gravimeter for a UNOLS Global Class vessel, and one DGS marine
gravimeter for the research vessel N.B. Palmer. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;1) DGS
gravimeter for a ARF Global Class vessel $382,500 &lt;br/&gt;2) DGS gravimeter
for R/V N. B. Palmer $382,500 &lt;br/&gt; $765,000 &lt;br/&gt;Broader
Impacts&lt;br/&gt;The principal impact of the present proposal is under Merit
Review Criterion 2 of the Proposal Guidelines (NSF 19-602). It provides
infrastructure support for scientists to use the vessel and its shared-use
instrumentation in support of their NSF-funded oceanographic research projects
(which individually undergo separate review by the relevant research program of
NSF). The acquisition, maintenance and operation of shared-use instrumentation
allows NSF-funded researchers from any US university or lab access to working,
calibrated instruments for their research, reducing the cost of that research,
and expanding the base of potential researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.