* 2234562
* PFI-TT:  Pilot-scale demonstration of an advanced biotechnology to treat toxic wastewater produced in the biofuel industry
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2025
* Sandeep Kumar, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 02/28/2025
* USD 249,998.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to address the challenge - of
cleaning toxic wastewater produced during biofuel production. In recent years,
the production of transportation fuels from wet biomass has received increasing
attention due to its promising potential to shift society’s dependence away from
petroleum to renewable resources for the development of a sustainable industrial
society, which is also an effective way to manage the reduction of greenhouse
gas emissions. The technology demonstrates with the potential to enable biofuel
commercialization and position U.S. renewable energy at the global forefront.
This technology will advance scientific discovery of a transformative platform
to enable sustainable bioenergy production, train the next generation of
entrepreneurs, scientists, and engineers in bioenergy engineering, and
environmental engineering/science. Such an industry-university collaborative
project will deliver research outcomes useful for industrial partners to adopt
in practice, offer complementary student (graduate, undergraduate, and K-12
students) trainings in entrepreneurship, and student internships.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project seeks to demonstrate an innovative
biotechnology pilot treatment specifically tailored for the valorization of
wastewater generated during the biofuel production. A bottleneck that limits the
economic and technical scalability of biorefineries is the production of toxic
wastewater that cannot be reclaimed by conventional wastewater treatment
systems. The team’s prior bench-scale study has shown that a special type of
marine microorganism can be used an innovative bioprocess to reduce or remove
the toxins in this wastewater. However, the scalability of the technology
remains to be evaluated. To this end, the objectives of this project are to: 1)
deliver a pilot-scale bioprocess specifically tailored for the marine
microorganism; 2) optimize the productivity of this bioprocess; and 3) assess
the economic viability of the technology. It is expected that the outcome from
this project will overcome difficulties impeding the commercialization of the
biofuel production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.