* 2234071
* Agents of Change: Investigating How Partnerships between Faculty and Learning Assistants Enable Pathways for Sustainable Institutional and Classroom Transformation
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Resa Kelly, San Jose State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 06/30/2028
* USD 1,070,013.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by exploring how partnerships
between STEM faculty and undergraduate learning assistants (LAs) can enable
sustainable institutional and classroom transformation that leads to more
inclusive and engaging learning environments for students. The national LA model
describes the well-established practice of embedding LAs in courses to assist in
creating culturally responsive, student-centered, active learning environments.
The model offers support to LAs through training that consists of a course on
teaching and learning as well as weekly meetings with the course instructor to
review relevant course content and prepare for class activities. STEM
instructors will participate in novel professional development that engages LAs
as partners in the process of implementing inclusive and active learning
practices, leveraging LAsâ€™ knowledge as students. These partnerships will also
enable more accessible relational structures in the classroom. While prior
research has demonstrated increased learning gains and other beneficial outcomes
for LAs and students, it is important to fully characterize what happens on the
ground that leads to such exciting learning gains, and to institutionalize key
aspects of these programs. In this project, the researchers plan to study how
the new support structures for faculty offered by the project enable new kinds
of relationships to form between LAs and faculty. They will then model how those
relationships lead to shifts in LA and faculty beliefs about teaching and
learning, and examine which programmatic elements are necessary for
institutional transformation. LA programs necessarily require involvement of
many stakeholders, which makes them challenging to institutionalize. Therefore
the project includes the infrastructure to collaborate with necessary
administrators and learning centers in addition to faculty (tenure- and non-
tenure track) and students to identify barriers and avenues to institutionalized
change. Once completed, the critical elements of this project will be assembled
to assist other institutions who are interested in developing an LA model at
their institution or who already have an LA model and would like to further
support their LA-faculty partnerships. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theory of
change underpinning this project builds on existing models of LA-faculty
collaboration and institutional change research to hypothesize how developing
strong LA-faculty partnerships results in sustained improvements to STEM
instruction. This project will study what partnership elements are necessary for
effective and equitable changes in instruction to occur and what programmatic
structure is required to enable such partnerships. This will be carried out in a
three-phase program of research, faculty professional development, and
institutionalization with the following goals. First is to characterize the
dynamics of LA-faculty partnerships and how they impact classrooms. Second is to
iteratively design, implement, and research supports for LA-faculty partnerships
including cross-campus trainings and academies. Third, and finally, is to
institutionalize key supports for sustaining the LA programs. Using a mixed
methods approach, including iterative thematic coding of qualitative data and
descriptive statistics of quantitative data, this project will analyze and
triangulate: i) surveys and inventories for LAs, faculty, and students; ii)
interviews with LAs and faculty; iii) observations of LA-faculty prep meetings;
and iv) artifacts from the LA pedagogy course and faculty professional
development. This project will compare LA programs on three California State
University campuses, capitalizing on each of their strengths, and complementing
and extending existing knowledge on the potential benefits of LA models. This
project will compare progress across the three institutions and identify
critical factors necessary for the success, scalability, and sustainability of
LA-faculty partnership programs, contributing significantly to research on
institutional change. The NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through its Institutional and Community Transformation track, the
program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM education across
institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.