* 2234176
* Workshop on Advances in Mathematical and Theoretical Biology
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Xi Huo, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Amina Eladdadi
* 02/29/2024
* USD 27,000.00

This award supports participation in the workshop "Advances in Mathematical and
Theoretical Biology" held at Vanderbilt University, Nashville, March 17-19,
2023. The focus will be on modeling and analysis of mathematical models with
different aspects of biological applications, such as infectious diseases,
cancer and treatment, and population dynamics. The workshop will highlight
significant recent developments in these areas and provide a forum for the
participants to meet and communicate their recent work. The goals of the
workshop are to: (1) to bring together leading researchers from different areas
and backgrounds of mathematical and theoretical biology to communicate and
exchange ideas; (2) study challenging health problems, such as the COVID-19
pandemic, cancer modeling and treatment, emerging diseases, etc.; (3) expose
younger researchers (undergraduate/graduate students and postdocs) to the latest
developments in these areas; and (4) broaden and stimulate the education and
research of young, female, and underrepresented researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical and theoretical biology is an
interdisciplinary field that uses tools from analytical and numerical
mathematics to address questions related to biology. The recent two decades have
witnessed tremendous growth in this area, and emerging questions from biology
have brought forward new and exciting mathematical questions. This workshop will
bring together researchers from different mathematical areas at several academic
career stages, facilitating the initiation of collaborative research among the
attendees. The workshop will feature six plenary speakers from the USA, Canada,
France, and Mexico and forty invited speakers ranging from senior level
researchers to early-career researchers and students. A poster session will
promote undergraduate and graduate research. By bringing together a new
generation of researchers along with established experts, the workshop aims to
cultivate new collaborations and networks that can help junior researchers as
they advance their careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.