* 2234187
* Student Travel Support for the International Conference on Computational Photography (ICCP) 2022
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2022,06/30/2023
* Ioannis Gkioulekas, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 06/30/2023
* USD 10,000.00

This award supports the participation of students of all levels (undergraduate,
Masterâ€™s, doctoral) from US-based institutions in the IEEE International
Conference on Computational Photography (ICCP) 2022, to be held as an in-person
event between August 1-3, 2022 at the California Institute of Technology, in
Pasadena, California. Currently in its fourteenth iteration, ICCP is the premier
annual conference dedicated to computational photography, and is organized with
the vision of fostering a community of researchers that all converge to this
field from traditionally distinct disciplines, including: imaging and optics,
imaging and signal processing, vision and graphics, sensors and electronics. The
ICCP 2022 program includes keynote and invited talks from the above-mentioned
and other communities, paper presentations, poster and demo sessions, and
networking events. This program creates rich opportunities for cross-pollination
of ideas across research and application areas, and provides both junior and
senior researchers with an environment where they can engage in brainstorming
and mentoring discourse.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award facilitates the
participation in ICCP 2022 of a diverse group of students, including: students
from underrepresented groups; students from research labs that traditionally do
not attend ICCP but work on closely-related problems; and students that would
not otherwise have the resources to attend. The award provides travel grants for
10 selected US-based students. Applications are solicited broadly from across
the US, and recipients of travel grants are selected by the ICCP 2022 program
chairs. Each travel grant partially covers travel and lodging costs up to $1000,
and includes a conference registration waiver. Recipient students are invited
to: attend all aspects all elements of the ICCP 2022 program (paper
presentations, keynote talks, invited talks, poster and demo sessions,
reception, breaks and networking events); present their research work as a
poster at the ICCP 2022 poster sessions; and participate in a mentoring session
featuring a panel of junior and senior faculty providing research and career
development advice. Overall, the project will support the career development of
some of the brightest junior researchers in computational photography, and will
increase diversity and student participation in ICCP 2022, and the broader
computational photography community. In turn, this will help increase the number
of active researchers and educators in STEM, advance the computational
photography field, and accelerate the research and development of technologies
with broad beneficial societal impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.