* 2234543
* PFI-TT:  Commercialization of Low-Carbon Concrete Blocks at Scale
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Andres Clarens, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 08/31/2024
* USD 250,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to develop a novel cement material
that has higher performance and lower environmental impact than conventional
materials made from ordinary Portland cement. Cement manufacturing produces 8%
of total global carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions. Hence, there is a need to find
alternative chemistries for this vital building material to reduce gas
emissions. This project has three goals, the first one involves determining how
to produce these novel formulations in large scale and in a factory instead of
on laboratory benches. The second goal relates to the understanding of how
feedstock availability and manufacturing capacity can meet market demands for
commercialization. Finally, the third goal will allow the understanding of the
safety of the new materials. These research, scalability and implementation
questions will be answered in collaboration with an industrial partner, which is
one of the leading makers of concrete block in the United States. In addition to
the technical and commercialization benefits, this project will also train
students to become leaders and entrepreneurs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
project seeks to develop a minimum viable product consisting of a low-carbon
high-performance concrete block. The materials will resemble ancient Roman
cements in chemical composition but with a much higher carbon uptake potential.
Collaborative research with a corporate partner will enable the refinement of
material formulations and curing processes for manufacturability. Specifically,
this project will examine the use of blended cements to improve CO2
permeability, use of sodium bicarbonate salts to cure from within, and harness
the role of trace metals additives in the slag to enhance the strength of the
material. A quantitative sustainable design model will be developed and used to
identify important parameters for the selection of the materials to reduce
carbon emissions. The ultimate goal of the project is to make a concrete block
prototype with a compressive strength of 15 MPa and a carbon uptake (net
negative) potential of 1 kg CO2 per cement block for under $5. The current
conventional concrete block has a compressive strength of 12 MPa and carbon
emissions (net positive) of 5 kg CO2 per cement block for around $2. It is
expected, upon successful completion of the project, that the new material will
have a superior performance compared to the currently available materials that
will offset the lower cost of the current material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.