* 2234387
* CAREER: Consistent Continuum Formulation and Robust Numerical Modeling of Non-Isothermal Phase Changing Multiphase Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Amneet Pal Bhalla, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 02/29/2028
* USD 418,871.00

Numerical modeling of phase change problems is crucial to understanding many
natural and engineering processes. For example, ice formation and additive
manufacturing. A major challenge arises from the coupling of heat transfer and
fluid dynamics equations. Water, polymers, and metals all exhibit changes during
processes like melting or evaporation that must also be considered in the model.
Although several advances have been made in modeling some phase change
processes, the modeling of three phase gas-liquid-solid flows with simultaneous
melting, solidification, evaporation, and condensation (MSEC) remains an
unsolved problem. In this project, the researchers will formulate a robust
numerical scheme for simulating three-phase gas-liquid-solid flows that can
undergo simultaneous MSEC and volume shrinkage/expansion. This method would
permit realistic simulations and optimization of emerging manufacturing
technologies like additive manufacturing and thin film deposition, where all
four modes of phase change occur simultaneously. Additionally, the project
provides significant educational activities, including training students in
scientific and high-performance computing, outreach activities, and sharing of
research codes through open-source software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will develop governing equations for multi-phase gas-liquid-solid flows with
phase change that are consistent both at the continuous and discrete levels. The
project focuses on ensuring the stability of the numerical scheme when all four
modes of phase change are present. It is especially critical for flows with
significant volumetric changes and with high-density contrast. Analytical and
experimental validation are also part of this project. To validate that the
numerical scheme captures the density/volume change during phase transition, a
novel analytical model is proposed. The framework will be further validated with
experimental data from the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)
on metal solidification and evaporation. This project will result in an
experimentally validated framework that will assist in simulating and
understanding metal additive manufacturing processes such as selective laser
melting and powder bed fusion. Advanced computer simulations will allow the
manufacturing industry to optimize process parameters, such as laser scan speed
and gas flow rates, to ensure high-quality and defect-free printed parts. The
numerical methods of this project will be made open source with user-friendly
documentation via IBAMR software. In order to increase student participation in
computing, the researcher will offer: (1) a new project-based course on Applied
Scientific Computing; (2) organize summer workshops on high-performance
computing (HPC) in partnership with the San Diego-based HPC industry; and (3)
work with SDSU programs to recruit students from local high schools and
community colleges to provide summer internship
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.