* 2234288
* Conference: on Emerging Research Opportunities at the Intersection of Statistics and Internet Measurement
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Paul Barford, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 03/31/2024
* USD 95,246.00

Empirical study of the Internet provides a foundation for understanding how the
infrastructure is deployed, operated and used, and enables improvements in
systems, protocols and processes. However, empirical study is fraught with
challenges in the collection and analysis of data. Addressing these challenges
is crucial to on-going empirical study of the Internet and to broadening the
scope of measurement-based research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
plan and direct a two-day workshop that will bring together about 30 experts
from the fields of Internet measurement, statistics and mathematics to discuss
current challenges and identify important and promising future research
directions and opportunities. This workshop is motivated by the new NSF Internet
Measurement Research: Methodologies, Tools, and Infrastructure (IMR) program,
which is a collaboration between Computer and Information Science and
Engineering (CISE) and Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) to “support
methodologies, tools, and research infrastructure for Internet measurement
spanning access (both wireless and fixed broadband) and core Internet.” This
workshop will provide a forum for researchers who work on different aspects of
Internet measurement to communicate and interact with statisticians and
mathematicians. Specific opportunities for information exchange and
collaboration between these communities include avoiding pitfalls in managing
and analyzing large, diverse data sets, and creating novel methods for
collecting, anonymizing, modeling, and analyzing Internet measurement data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The in-person workshop will be organized around keynote
talks, focus group sessions and working group discussions. During the workshop,
statisticians and mathematicians will have opportunities to learn about the
current topics in Internet measurement research and the challenges and practical
issues related to Internet measurement research. Likewise, Internet measurement
researchers will have the opportunities to learn about the latest developments
and advances in statistical models, algorithms and methodologies for collecting
and analyzing large and complex datasets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop
aims to facilitate interactions and encourage future collaborations between
participants. This will pave the way for research projects and will have a
significant impact on the theory and practice in Internet measurement research,
and will drive the development of new statistical and learning-based techniques.
The workshop will also benefit the education and training of next-generation
researchers and practitioners by exposing participants to new ideas and
techniques spanning Internet measurement, statistics and mathematics. A report
summarizing the workshop will be published after its conclusion. A website for
the workshop will be available at
http://imrworkshop22.cs.wisc.edu/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.