* 2234356
* PFI-RP: Development of a Temperature-Sensitive, High-Adhesion Medical Tape for Reducing Pain, Skin Injury, and Dislodgement of Critical Devices for Children in Hospitals
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Eric Seibel, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 03/31/2026
* USD 550,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation –
Research Partnerships (PFI-RP) project is reducing medical adhesive related skin
injuries and device dislodgement events. Medical adhesives are used to secure
wound care dressings and other critical devices to the skin. Although stronger
adhesives can provide a higher level of securement, they are difficult to
painlessly remove from the skin and may cause medical-adhesive-related skin
injuries, which include skin tears and an increased risk of infection. This
project will develop higher adhesion medical tapes, whereby the adhesion can be
reduced for removal with the application of heat. This ability to remove easily
will significantly reduce the risk of skin injury and subsequent infections
while simultaneously providing the high adhesion required for secure attachment
of medical devices during hospital care, reducing device dislodgement events and
improving the quality of care. If successful, this solution will save over $1
billion annually in healthcare by preventing skin injury and critical device
dislodgement. The project will train promising technical professionals in
translational entrepreneurship with close mentorship from industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will provide a chemical and physical
understanding of temperature responsive adhesives required for high adhesion
medical tape that can avoid both skin injury during tape removal and accidental
device dislodgement. Current medical tapes do not have a temperature sensitive
component to enable higher adhesion coupled with easier release. Initial
prototypes have demonstrated an adhesive tape with a substantial temperature-
responsive release attribute. Fully understanding the mechanism for this release
could impact the development of stimuli-responsive adhesives that could be used
for a wide range of medical and nonmedical applications. The major goals of this
project are the following: (a) gain a fundamental knowledge of the release
mechanism, (b) transfer to a high-volume manufacturing process to demonstrate
scaling feasibility, (c) verify these high-volume manufacturing prototypes
retain performance after storage with several pilot studies, (d) gain approval
for testing in a nearby children’s hospital, and (e) train promising
professionals in entrepreneurship and translational team science. This project
will facilitate the fabrication of prototypes in a high-volume manufacturing
environment that will outperform the current state-of-the-art medical tapes. In
addition, highly skilled emerging professionals will receive training in the
transition from pilot to high-volume product manufacturing and
packaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.