* 2234344
* Understanding How Mentoring Can Disrupt the School-to-Prison Pipeline and Promote Positive Youth Development
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Tia Andersen, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Naomi Hall-Byers
* 06/30/2026
* USD 403,569.00

The school-to-prison pipeline is a metaphor used to describe the ways in which
educational policies and practices funnel youth out of public schools and into
the juvenile and criminal justice system. Exclusionary school discipline, such
as school expulsion, is an important component of the school-to-prison pipeline
and associated with youth drop out, delinquency, and justice system contact.
Mentoring interventions for expelled students may represent a key, untapped
potential lever of change for preventing and reducing risk behaviors, while
promoting positive youth development, and disrupting the school-to-prison
pipeline from a midstream vantage. However, research is needed to determine the
most effective structure of mentorship programming for this population of youth.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will be conducted on participants in the
University of South Carolina Adolescent Mentoring Program (USC AMP). Developed
in 2017, USC AMP is a university-community partnership program that matches
trained university student mentors who are planning to pursue a career in a
criminal justice, human services, or law-related field with youth who have been
expelled from their traditional high school and currently attend a disciplinary
alternative school. To explore whether alternative school-based mentoring
programs promote positive youth outcomes, the researchers will use a mixed
methods experimental design and draw upon quantitative survey data and
qualitative interview data collected from mentor-mentee pairs. The researchers
will evaluate differences in 9- and 18- month educational, vocational, and
delinquency outcomes between expelled students receiving one-on-one mentoring
alone and those receiving a supplemental structured curriculum. The researchers
will also examine the impact of the mentorship experience on the university
student mentors, particularly their perceptions of cognitive, personal, and
interpersonal skill growth. This project will advance the scientific
understanding of the impact of mentoring programs and has the potential to
provide a scalable blueprint for reducing the school-to-prison pipeline and
illuminate a curricular experience that allows undergraduate students to move
beyond skill competency to develop emotional intelligence, personal, and
interpersonal professional skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by the Law &amp; Science, and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR) programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.