* 2234426
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Evaluating Seasonality and Migration as Ecological Drivers of Technological Transition in Human Evolutionary History
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2023,05/31/2024
* John Faith, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 05/31/2024
* USD 30,700.00

This interdisciplinary project integrates geochemistry, ecology, and archaeology
to understand what drove the transition from the Middle Stone Age (MSA) to the
Later Stone Age (LSA). This technological transition, which occurred around
50,000 years ago, is one of the most prominent behavioral changes observed in
human evolutionary history. Possible environmental drivers of the MSA-LSA
transition have been proposed, but establishing robust links between
environmental and behavioral change has been challenging due to the lack of
appropriate datasets. This project will quantify the degree of precipitation
seasonality, dietary seasonality, and large animal movement through this key
period while fostering research links and providing a foundation for
undergraduate training in a collaborative environment. In addition to providing
funding for the training of a graduate student in anthropology in the methods of
empirical, scientific data collection and analysis, the project would enhance
public understanding of science and the scientific method broadly disseminating
its findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project advances our
understanding of the MSA-LSA transition by addressing the question: Did seasonal
changes in resource availability influence human behavior across the MSA-LSA
transition? Three objectives will be used to address this question through
stable isotope analysis of serially-sampled fossil herbivore teeth from
Pleistocene fossil sites: (i) using strontium isotopes to reconstruct
Pleistocene migratory systems; (ii) using carbon and oxygen isotopes to evaluate
how migration relates to precipitation and dietary seasonality; and (iii)
assessing how seasonality and migration have shaped human foraging strategies
and technological change during the last glacial period. Understanding the
ecology of animals during glacial periods through these methods is essential to
grasping the full picture of the evolutionary ecology of both living and extinct
species, with implications for human evolution, biology, and conservation.
Furthermore, this study will be the largest ever to evaluate serially-sampled
strontium isotopes in this research context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.