* 2234666
* A Contextual Analysis of Peer Experiences during Early Adolescence
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2026
* Julie Bowker, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 02/28/2026
* USD 601,615.00

Teenagers’ relationships with their peers greatly affect their well-being.
Studies have shown that being bullied leads to several psychological
difficulties whereas friendship can foster well-being. Although there is much
research on bullying and friendship, it is rare to find studies that (1)
investigate multiple online and in-person locations where bullying occurs and
friends interact; (2) contrast the impact of bullying and friendship experiences
that occur during the summer and the school year; and (3) compare the impact of
bullying and friendship experiences that occur in different locations and
different times (e.g., bullying that occurs during the week versus the weekend,
during the school year versus the summer). Research conducted during the summer
months is especially rare as is work that fully captures the online worlds in
which youth reside today. This project is among the first to thoroughly evaluate
how location (both online and in-person locations) and time (summer months and
the school year) impacts young adolescents’ friendship and bullying experiences
and their impact on psychological health. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study design
entails online data collection via survey and daily diaries from 300
socioeconomically and ethnically diverse young adolescents at three time-points
during a single school year and summer. There are three aims. The first aim
evaluates the features of adolescent friendship and bullying experiences in
different locations and during different time periods. The second aim tests
whether the impact of such friendship and bullying experiences on positive and
negative psychological outcomes depend on the location and time during which
they occur. The third aim examines effects of gender, socio-economic status, and
ethnicity on the peer experiences. The work captures important contextual
differences in the features and impact of adolescents’ friendship and bullying
experiences. Findings validate core developmental theories and facilitate new
understanding about the where, when, and what of friendship and bullying
experiences. Future researchers can use the findings to develop new intervention
efforts that focus on reducing risk for victimization and encouraging positive
exchanges with friends to have the greatest impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.