* 2234261
* PFI-TT:  Plastic Electronic Gas Sensors for Health Monitoring via Mobile Devices
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2023,07/31/2024
* Howard Katz, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 07/31/2024
* USD 249,998.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to develop flexible electronic
materials for mobile devices that can detect gases, identify them, and report
the results to users. The materials and circuits will be designed so gases
related to human health conditions can be monitored precisely, allowing the
general population to take greater control of their health status. The new
material functions will add to the scientific understanding of how gas sensors
work, and what designs will fit best with ongoing advances in mobile device
technologies. The innovations of this project stem from recent advances in
plastic-based electronics to reach an extensive market of device users with
metabolic and respiratory issues. An additional societal benefit will be the
education and training of undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students in
the electronics and materials technologies and pathways to commercialization.
Some of these students will be recruited from an historically Black college,
thus broadening representation in the technology translation
ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project addresses the lack of
electronic circuits that respond selectively to gases in the environment or
breath. The proposed sensors will be integrated with commonly used mobile
devices, are inexpensive to manufacture, and do not require high temperature
cycles that stress the capacities of mobile device powering and thermal
management. The objectives of the research are to prepare polymers with chemical
functional groups and morphologies to recognize gases with moderate chemical
reactivity, use these polymers in circuits and arrays to create a set of
responses to specific gases even in the presence of interfering gases such as
water vapor, and configure the circuits so they are electronically coupled to
the power and information transfer circuitry of mobile devices. The outcome will
be the designation of small sets (4-6) of polymers that give response patterns
to gases of greatest interest at health-relevant concentrations (e.g., 1 part
per million) and circuit designs that maximize longevity, repeatability, and
mobile device compatibility. The main methods are polymer synthesis, polymer
film and electrode deposition, electronic property characterization, and gas
response evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.