* 2234594
* PFI-TT:  Enhancing Manufacturing with Real-Time Defect Detection using mm-Wave Antenna Sensors
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Wei-Chiang Lin, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Debora Rodrigues
* 03/31/2025
* USD 266,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project is to increase semiconductor package
production yield, reliability, and cost-effectiveness by introducing an in-situ
or in-line sensing mechanism with real-time production corrective actions. The
detection of issues during manufacturing is enabled by mm-Wave antenna sensors
that can detect hidden process defects based on embedded metal and dielectric
features in real time. One of the goals of this project is to overcome key
manufacturing bottlenecks in high-density wiring substrates with several
component integrations for advanced packaging. Another goal is to reduce, and
perhaps, eliminate waste impact and carbon footprint on the environment via
intelligent Additive Manufacturing. The proposed manufacturing path will
generate new manufacturing tool business opportunities across the electronics
supply chain. Upon successful completion of the project, the new sensing
technology will be licensed. The project will also provide an ideal opportunity
to prepare the next-generation workforce with strong technical and communication
skills as well as experience in manufacturing challenges and market trends.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop a unique, noncontact,
real-time detection system for hidden manufacturing defects in electronics with
the goal of achieving in-line process control for reproducibility, tolerance and
yield, eventually leading to high-density electronics integration. This
technology will be achieved through an innovative mm-Wave antenna array sensing
system to reveal hidden metal-dielectric features through backscattering.
Detection of spectra and amplitude shifts will be classified or mapped into
defect categories through machine learning algorithms for real-time corrective
actions. The advancement of antennas with smaller Radar Cross-Sections (RCS) has
allowed the design of mm-Wave sensors with a broad impact in several areas,
including 6G communications, healthcare, safety, and security products. In this
PFI-TT project, the mm-Wave noncontact probing system will be integrated into
production-scale 3D printing systems to achieve defect-free manufacturing by
collaborating with a technology partner. The proposed mm-Wave sensing brings
precision impedance-matched Radio Frequency (RF) interconnects and antennas, all
coupled with advances in wiring design for active embedding. Further, continuous
remote in-line monitoring for scalable high-volume manufacturing can lead to
solutions for the self-healing of manufacturing defects. Overall, this new
technology may have a pervasive role in future heterogeneous system
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.