* 2234409
* PFI-TT: A Novel Device for Improved Mobility for Blinds and Persons with Visual Impairment
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Lei Xu, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Jesus Soriano Molla
* 06/30/2025
* USD 249,358.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Partnerships for Innovation -
Technology Translation (PFI-TT) project will lead to significant improvement in
the mobility of over eight million Blinds and Persons with Visual Impairment
(BPVI) in the United States. As seventy percent of this community is unemployed,
and the majority do not attend college, any device beyond the current simple
devices or financially prohibitive services, that can improve their ability to
navigate the outside world without human assistance will increase their
mobility, freedom, and independence. Their increased participation in the labor
force improves their quality of life and the overall economic base. The proposed
device provides auditory information about the environment allowing them to
navigate unknown environments with more safety and confidence. Continuing
development of our prototype will afford additional customer discovery and
technical refinement to produce a final device that is practical and provide
sufficient marginal utility for adoption by BPV individuals that desire to
increase their opportunity. The previous customer discovery undertaken under the
NSF I-Corps Team program suggests that the proposed product could reach a
significant market adoption rate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will
advance the development of affordable yet effective equipment to help to improve
the mobility of the BPVI community. The device uses a novel way that combines
both artificial intelligence (AI) and human helpers to provide useful guidance
information for BPV individuals. Specifically, the protocol embedded in the
device leverages AI to convert captured image information to auditory guidance
when the AI engine is highly confident and automatically seeks help from a
caregiver if the captured information is ambiguous for the AI component. Besides
this core protocol, the project will develop a series of supporting technologies
to make the device more user-friendly, which are critical for its wide adoption.
These engineering efforts include: reducing the weight of the device to make it
easy to carry, integrating the new device with existing equipment like a white
cane to make the adoption seamless, extending battery life to meet the
requirement of normal use, and controlling the cost.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.