* 2234479
* FuSe-TG: Electro-Thermal Co-Design Center for Ultra-Wide Bandgap Semiconductor Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Sriram Krishnamoorthy, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 07/31/2025
* USD 450,484.00

Nontechnical Description: &lt;br/&gt;Ultra-wide bandgap semiconductor devices
based on beta-phase gallium oxide offer the potential to achieve higher power
switching performance/efficiency and lower manufacturing cost than today's wide
bandgap electronic devices. However, one of the most critical challenges to the
commercialization of this ultra-wide bandgap device technology is to overcome
adverse thermal effects that impact the device performance and reliability. This
project develops a university-industry-national laboratory partnership that
ultimately leads to the formation of an ultra-wide bandgap device electro-
thermal co-design center. The outcomes of this work facilitate the development a
new class of kV-range gallium oxide power switching devices that will support
existing and new applications that require high peak power, harsh environment
operation, and low system size/weight; especially given the national shortage of
semiconductor chips. The educational goal of this project is to create a multi-
disciplinary educational model for university students and industry researchers
that combines device and thermal engineering concepts, keeping abreast of
current trends in these fields. This new interdisciplinary education model
supports training a globally engaged workforce that realizes breakthroughs in
the semiconductor device industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:
&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this project is to create a gallium oxide device
architecture with minimized thermal resistance realized by a bonding pad over
active area approach and diamond-incorporated flip-chip integration. The
principal investigators demonstrate the use of an electro-thermal co-design
technique to realize a thermally aware device architecture that allows the full
exploitation of the benefits offered by the ultra-wide bandgap semiconductor. A
co-design modeling framework is developed that links energy conversion and
electronic/thermal transport within ultra-wide bandgap electronics. This
modeling framework helps identify the electrical and thermal design trade-offs
at the material, device, and system levels. Novel laser-based pump-probe methods
and optical/electrical thermography techniques are used to provide feedback to
validate modeling results and improve the material synthesis and device
integration processes. Since the proposed device integration method is material
agnostic, it can be applied to existing wide bandgap and other emerging ultra-
wide bandgap (e.g., aluminum gallium nitride) device technologies that are known
to suffer from overheating and thermal instability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.