* 2234956
* Selective Visual Attention and Motivated Misperceptions in Social Information Processing
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Shana Cole, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Allen McConnell
* 06/30/2026
* USD 499,064.00

It is very common for people to be exposed to visual imagery. Nightly news
broadcasts and social media feeds often include imagery associated with poll
results, economic projections, and people taking positions on various social
issues. Much of that imagery communicates a particular set of cultural beliefs
and values, and often in a very emotional or evocative manner. Although such
ideologically-charged imagery is common, it is not clear that people view these
images similarly. Past research has shown that a person’s own ideology (cultural
beliefs and values they share with others) provides a psychological lens through
which information is interpreted and conclusions drawn. Indeed, people can reach
very different conclusions from the same information depending on their own
ideological perspectives and their motivations to maintain them. This project
tests whether people’s ideological values not only shape their judgments but
also influence how they attend to and perceive visual information in the first
place.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research integrates many disciplines in the
social and behavioral sciences, including social psychology and vision science,
to test a model that accounts for how ideological threats affect early-stage
attentional and perceptual processes. Across several contested societal issues,
this work explores threat-based differences in how people visually represent
information, examines attentional mechanisms underlying these processes, and
demonstrates downstream consequences of threat-based misperceptions for emotion
regulation and behavior. In concert, several studies explore early-stage
attentional and perceptual processes that help regulate emotions (when efficacy
is low) and promote defensive action (when efficacy is high). In an era in which
people increasingly encounter visual information, studying how people perceive
the information they encounter provides new insights into the processes that
drive social behavior. Understanding how people perceive and interpret
information contained in graphs and figures helps to improve educational
curricula and the design of media literacy courses that aid individuals in
evaluating and interpreting media messages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.