* 2234534
* PFI-TT: Kits for Developing Aerial 3D Display Technology
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2023,08/31/2024
* Daniel Smalley, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 08/31/2024
* USD 265,368.00

The broader impact of this Partnerships for Innovation - Technology Translation
(PFI-TT) project is to create a commercialized version of an optical trap
display (OTD) kit. The OTD is an emerging display technology with the ability to
create full-color images in air. This PFI project will produce aerial 3D
displays from scratch. This technology will also create an open database
allowing students and entrepreneurs to collaborate globally to access a free
flow of ideas, practices, and data related to building aerial 3D displays. This
research will inform the second- and third-generation prototypes, provide
customer validation, and drive the demonstration to potential investors and
licensing partners; all critical steps toward a future in which the sci-fi
displays are commonly available.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will
result in a set of novel, scalable, market-ready optical trap display (OTD) kit
prototypes. Research will be conducted to overcome the challenges of optimizing
the trapping process for introductory particle collection to achieve a Knudsen
number close to 1 and a trap rate greater than 99% at the lowest achievable
laser power. Scalable materials and construction techniques will be incorporated
for lab-to-kit translation and an associated student curriculum will be
developed in partnership with Utah STEM Action Center. The prototypes will
expand the understanding of three OTD parameters: optical power, particle
dimension (and its relation to the Knudsen number), and critical lens alignment
by back-reflection. The kits will enable an automated, networked exploration of
these parameters by new citizen-scientists as they share their experimental
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.