* 2234891
* Collaborative Research: Learning Microstructure- and Temperature-Dependencies of Grain Boundary Plastic Deformation Localization via Multi-modal In situ Characterization
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Darren Pagan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 04/30/2026
* USD 91,805.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Numerous failure mechanisms in
engineering alloy parts are correlated to how deformation is transmitted across
the boundaries between the microscopic crystals (grains) that comprise the part.
Despite extensive study, definitive experimental evidence of the conditions at
which deformation will and will not transmit across grain boundaries is elusive,
particularly at extreme temperatures in conditions found during space travel or
hypersonic propulsion. New electron microscopy and X-ray measurements, which can
look in detail at and below the sample surface, are being used together to watch
how deformation is transmitted across grain boundaries as it occurs. Using these
measurements and machine-learning techniques, a set of rules are being
established describing how deformation is transmitted as a function of
temperature in a range of model atomic crystal structures representing various
forms of commonly used structural alloys. These rules can then be used to
improve the usage of existing alloys in the field and to design new high-
performance alloy systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;State-of-the-art in situ characterization
techniques are being taken advantage of to learn the temperature-dependence of
microstructural conditions governing plastic deformation localization at and
near grain boundaries (GBs) in cubic engineering alloys. A complimentary
combination of in situ characterization techniques (high-resolution digital
image correlation in the scanning electron microscope and synchrotron X-ray-
based 3D reconstructions) capable of probing micromechanical response and
microstructural state simultaneously are being used to interrogate the high-
dimensional space of microstructural configurations that can exist across GBs in
model face-centered cubic (FCC) and body-centered cubic (BCC) alloys. Existing
machine-learning (ML) tools are also being used to perform automated
classification of the large number of microstructural pairings probed during
each in situ experiment and learn criteria for predicting the evolution of
plastic deformation localization behaviors at GBs with temperature and
associated deformation mechanism activation. In this effort, activation of
twinning through cryogenic deformation and its effects on GB plastic deformation
localization are being used to create a generalized framework with which the
effect of activation of other deformation mechanisms, such as climb, cross-slip,
and GB sliding, can be evaluated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.