* 2234510
* SBP: The Role of Apologies in Promoting Intergroup Relations
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Karina Schumann, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Allen McConnell
* 04/30/2026
* USD 409,197.00

Black Americans are aware of the legacy of racial discrimination in the United
States and how inequalities persist with undesirable consequences. Indeed,
intergroup interactions can carry racial overtones and incorporate distrust. One
context where this distrust might be especially problematic involves
interpersonal conflict situations. If left unresolved, these conflicts can
jeopardize people's relationships, home and work environments, and physical and
psychological health. Although decades of research have demonstrated that an
apology is often the key to resolving these conflicts, apologies are only
effective if they are perceived by victims as sincere acts of remorse -- a
perception that suffers under low levels of trust. Thus, apologies from majority
group transgressors to minority group victims might be less effective at
promoting reconciliation because they are perceived as untrustworthy and
insincere. The current project systematically examines how interpersonal
apologies function in intergroup situations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program
of research examines when apologies are more effective at promoting intergroup
reconciliation, whether trust in the apologizer and perceived apology sincerity
help explain intergroup differences in apology effectiveness, and whether the
benefits of cross-group apologies can be increased by contextual features that
reduce victims' expectations of racial bias. This work studies whether majority
group transgressors can convey apology sincerity, and in turn enhance cross-race
conflict resolution, by offering sincere apologies. This research sheds light on
whether, when, and why apologies function differently in cross-race dyads, thus
contributing to our understanding of barriers to reconciliation in important
intergroup contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.