* 2234718
* CyberCorps Scholarship for Service (Renewal): Interdisciplinary Scholarship for Service for the Intermountain West
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Minhaz Zibran, Idaho State University
* Continuing Grant
* Li Yang
* 06/30/2028
* USD 1,295,235.00

In 1998, Idaho State University (ISU) was among the country’s first National
Security Agency (NSA)-designated Centers of Academic Excellence in Information
Assurance (now Cyber Defense). ISU has offered the Scholarship for Service (SFS)
continually since 2003 – over which time it has produced 100 cybersecurity
professionals for federal government organizations. ISU SFS graduates have gone
on to become Chief Information Security Officers (CISOs) in executive branch
agencies, entrepreneurs, and academics, contributing to a robust cybersecurity
ecosystem that supports national security and scientific community. This project
extends ISU’s commitment to defend national security by producing qualified,
adaptable and interdisciplinary graduates for federal employment over the next
five years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to achieve its goal, ISU will select
highly motivated, high-performing students from diverse academic backgrounds.
Selected SFS scholars will engage in a cohort-based, education-professional
experience. They will be engaged in solving complex cybersecurity challenges,
including planning, designing, and carrying out an annual cybersecurity
competition in regional institutions of higher education. SFS scholars will
learn cybersecurity strategy, federal policy, risk management, and incident
response from qualified faculty and staff in formal classroom settings. SFS
scholars will be able to apply their knowledge to solve current and future
challenges through research opportunities, cybersecurity competitions, and a
final cybersecurity project. SFS scholars will interact regularly with ISU SFS
alumni, who can provide scholarship recipients with relevant and timely insights
about federal service in the cybersecurity field. SFS scholars will prepare for
and take externally validated professional certification exams, such as
Security+ and CISSP. ISU SFS scholars will serve as interns for and accept
employment in the federal executive branch. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is supported by the CyberCorps® Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which
funds proposals establishing or continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity
and aligns with the U.S. National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior
cybersecurity workforce. Following graduation, scholarship recipients are
required to work in cybersecurity for a federal, state, local, or tribal
Government organization for the same duration as their scholarship
support.  &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.