* 2234908
* Collaborative Research: CCRI: Planning-C: A Community for Configurability Open Research and Development (ACCORD)
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2023,11/30/2024
* Myra Cohen, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 11/30/2024
* USD 50,001.00

Most software today is configurable, meaning it can be customized for different
user purposes. While configurability makes software flexible, it can have an
impact on software reliability, correctness, usability, performance, and
security across all stages of development. Hence, a large community of
researchers are studying ways to explore, sample, predict and reason about
configurable systems in multiple sub-disciplines of computer science. This
collaborative planning proposal brings together researchers from Iowa State
University and the University of Central Florida to lay the groundwork for a
collective research collaborative, A Community for Configurability Open Research
and Development (ACCORD), that will help to centralize research on
configurability and to create shared approaches, tools and
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal includes activities to survey the
research community, create awareness across different sub-disciplines, and
document common goals and needs via interaction through workshops and outreach.
In addition, activities will develop a common framework, set of tools, and
vocabulary, including exemplar artifacts that embody the nature of ACCORD. The
final ACCORD infrastructure will provide software tools, models, and solutions
that work across different communities, along with tutorials and meta-data
information that is not obtainable by only searching the literature. Benchmarks
for different types of configurable systems will highlight functional, security
and performance challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Concepts on configurability and
preliminary ACCORD artifacts will be used in the classroom. Both graduate and
undergraduate students will be involved in the prototyping of designs and
artifacts and will help to build a survey of existing research in
configurability. Workshops will be held for different sub-disciplines. Students
from the Iowa State first-year honors undergraduate program and the University
of Central Florida K-12 Camp Connect will be involved in activities related to
this project. The planning will include outreach to non-CISE disciplines, e.g.
researchers in the Bioinformatics community, who can benefit from the eventual
development of ACCORD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project website can be found at:
https://faculty.sites.iastate.edu/mcohen/accord. It will be retained past the
lifetime of this grant. All significant artifacts will be archived with a
permanent digital object identifier (DOI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.