* 2234970
* RAPID: Measuring host competence across wild bird species during outbreaks of highly pathogenic avian influenza
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Nichola Hill, University of Massachusetts Boston
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2024
* USD 199,999.00

This RAPID will study the current outbreak of highly pathogenic avian influenza
(HPAI) in North American birds, focusing on host competence as a way to estimate
which species are primary reservoirs and sources. The spread of HPAI in North
America in the past year poses catastrophic consequences for the health of wild
birds and poultry. The virus can readily jump the species barrier leading to
concerns that continued spread of HPAI in animals could start a pandemic in
humans. The scale of the current North American outbreak is unprecedented both
in terms of the number of infected birds, and the geographic area impacted. This
strain of HPAI is a multi-host pathogen that within North America is
demonstrating transmission back and forth between wild birds and poultry. The
spread of HPAI in the U.S. has involved a wider diversity of birds than
previously observed - well beyond the traditional poultry reservoir. There are
over 1,000 wild bird species in the U.S. and over 100 species have become
infected with HPAI in the last 6 months. Depending on the wild bird species,
HPAI can cause disease ranging from mild to severe, or in extreme cases death. A
rapid response to the outbreaks is crucial to identify how wild birds are
contributing to transmission in the U.S. with the goal of developing models to
predict the risk of the virus jumping to novel hosts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently there are challenges with predicting how wild
birds will influence HPAI transmission due to a lack of information about their
host competence, defined as the ability of an individual to become infected and
cause infection in other hosts. Characterizing host competence requires a
systems approach to unify host traits (disease severity, body condition) and
pathogen traits (replication dynamics, pathogen viability). This study will
capitalize on an extensive and well-developed network of collaborations with
wildlife managers and rehabilitation clinics to ensure sampling of a wide
diversity of birds in the North Atlantic, a region that has emerged as a
geographic hotspot for HPAI. This study will characterize the range of host
competence of wild birds and will integrate ecological and life-history traits
of wild birds into models of disease prediction by testing whether aquatic
foraging and predation on aquatic species are linked to transmission.
Information gained will be critical to develop a mechanistic understanding of
HPAI dynamics, allowing for more informed decision-making about animal and human
health as the outbreak unfolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.