* 2234302
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: An Examination of Aging and the Elderly in Bioarchaeological Contexts
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Jennifer Byrnes, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 03/31/2025
* USD 20,131.00

Older adults represent the shared history of communities and play important
roles in societies both past and present. In bioarchaeological research,
however, they are typically underrepresented. This doctoral dissertation
research project focuses on elderly adults in the archaeological record to
examine this important source of past biocultural information. The project is
framed in terms of a bioarchaeology of aging. This research has potential to
inform both historical and clinical understandings of health across the lifespan
by connecting interdisciplinary theories of aging from anthropology and public
health. The project supports the research of a woman in STEM, provides research
and training opportunities for students, and engages with local communities in
science outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project integrates evolutionary and
social theories into a broader biocultural theory of aging, to reconstruct the
experiences of elderly individuals in the past and provide a broader, historical
and biocultural context for understanding the aging. Specific pathological and
degenerative changes to the skeleton, as well as the Skeletal Frailty Index, are
utilized in order to estimate the biological age of skeletons. These changes
include those utilized in the estimation of chronological age-at-death (i.e.
degenerative changes to the pubic symphysis and auricular surface of the ilium)
but also include other changes (i.e. dental wear, antemortem tooth-loss, and the
development of osteoarthritis and degenerative joint disease). Severity of
degeneration is taken into consideration in addition to the complexity of
degeneration experienced (e.g. how many different categories of degenerative or
pathological changes are observed). All adult individuals from the site are
included in the study sample to provide additional context by which to interpret
findings related to frailty and resilience observed among elderly individuals.
This research can advance existing methods and definitions for age estimation
from skeletal data and proposes a theoretical platform by which
bioarchaeologists might better interpret the lived experiences of the elderly
from a biocultural perspective.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.