* 2234411
* Center: IUCRC Phase I UNorth Dakota: Center to Stream Healthcare In Place (C2SHIP)
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Kouhyar Tavakolian, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Mohan Kumar
* 06/30/2026
* USD 149,999.00

As our population ages and regional health disparities grow, significant
financial and emotional burdens are imposed on our society, patients, and their
families. Advances on many fronts are needed to impact the needs of these
patients and assist them in prolonging their autonomy by keeping them in their
homes longer and providing a higher level of health monitoring. The Center to
Stream Healthcare In Place (C2SHIP) has been established to address these
challenges and the six university sites for C2SHIP are University of Arizona,
Baylor College of Medicine, University of Southern California, California
Institute of Technology, University of Missouri, and the University of North
Dakota (UND). C2SHIP brings together leading experts in academic medicine and
the biomedical industry to research, develop, and promote in-place care
technologies for managing chronic diseases in the home. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;C2SHIP has three major thrusts: 1) promoting in-place care
technologies, 2) academic-industry partnership &amp; resource sharing, and 3)
educating a workforce with the capacity for promoting wellness. In the first two
thrusts, C2SHIP's trans-disciplinary innovation and research teams focus on
developing new material-based sensors, reconfigurable designs, and system
integration with data mining, machine learning, and artificial intelligence. By
using the "Internet of Things," technological approach, patient data can be
streamed in real-time to medical professionals in remote locations, creating a
mobile hub for vulnerable patients in their homes. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In
addition to the first two thrusts, UND contributes expertise to C2SHIP in two
unique areas: 1) an innovation-based learning (IBL) model for transdisciplinary
student development and 2) indigenous health graduate education. In innovation-
based learning, student learning is assessed by developing value from
fundamental principles of their discipline while working on transdisciplinary
teams. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As with industry 4.0 skill sets, education 4.0
skill sets are distributed across the professional, innovation, and STEM
categories using tools such as epistemic network analysis, big data, and
learning analytics. Student engagement in the proposed research/innovation
projects will create opportunities for multidisciplinary participation at C2SHIP
conferences and workshops. UND also adds value to C2SHIP with an important
connection to Indigenous people through collaborations with the Indigenous
Health Department at UND. Graduate students from this program are our “human-in-
the-loop” in the indigenous community looking for health gaps that can be used
to inspire solutions within the C2SHIP and IBL process that engenders a
knowledgeable workforce for promoting wellness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.