* 2234032
* Collaborative Research: MoDL: Graph-Optimized Cellular Connectionism via Artificial Neural Networks for Data-Driven Modeling and Optimization of Complex Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Ganesh Venayagamoorthy, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 05/31/2026
* USD 275,904.00

This collaborative project between University of North Carolina at Charlotte
(UNCC) and Clemson University (Clemson) aims at addressing significant national
challenges and needs, namely in the fields of artificial intelligence and clean
electric power and energy systems. While growing in popularity and diversity of
applications, deep learning (DL) methods nonetheless confront challenges
especially for modeling complex systems. These include lack of robustness,
scalability, and composability. The research outcomes of this collaborative
project will be: i) mathematical tools for understanding and designing a graph-
optimized Cellular Computational Network (CCN) for complex system modeling and
optimization; CCN suggests a composable modularity that can divide a large
system into small subsystems with corresponding computational cells and ii)
empowering the operation of carbon-free electric power distribution systems
(EPDSs), with goals of improving energy sustainability (while avoiding climate
disasters), energy security, and electricity infrastructure reliability.
Furthermore, this collaborative project will provide unique research training to
graduate and undergraduate students in the disciplines of artificial
intelligence, machine learning, and power systems engineering at the two
institutions. The state-of-the-art smart grid equipment at Real-Time Power and
Intelligent Systems Lab at Clemson and high-performance computing systems and AI
equipment at Synergistic Human+AI Research lab at UNCC will be used to impact
outreach activities to high school students. Underrepresented minority and women
groups will be recruited to participate in the research at the two institutions.
Therefore, this project contributes to the creation of a new, diverse workforce
knowledgeable in machine learning and AI, smart grid/power system technologies,
and renewable energy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Our approach to address
the challenging problem of complex system modeling and optimization constitute a
novel blend of interdisciplinary study in statistical learning theory, graph
theory, control theory, and optimization theory that will lead to novel dynamic
system modeling. The project proposes a principled framework and mathematical
validation to 1) automatically infer a graph topology from data, 2) develop
multi-resolution graph evaluation for reinforcement learning (RL)-based
refinement, 3) provide novel and stable reward function design principle for a
continuously evolving CCN model, and thus 4) optimize the voltage profile in an
EPDS with distributed energy resources. Overall, our principled mathematical
tools for graph-optimized CCN models will broaden the scope of theory and
applications in an electric power distribution system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.