* 2235790
* Collaborative Research: Using Machine Learning to Improve Visual Problem-Solving in Chemistry Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Sarah Hansen, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 06/30/2026
* USD 107,941.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by increasing student success
and confidence in solving chemistry problems, which is of vital importance to
encouraging students to pursue STEM degrees. Chemistry learning materials are
filled with a variety of visual information (chemical symbols, mathematical
representations, graphical information and text) that students must understand
and process in order to solve problems. Knowing where and how to look at this
visual information is critical to forming new ideas, recalling required
knowledge, and performing the steps necessary for problem solving. Machine
learning will be utilized to investigate the link between where a student looks
and their resulting success in solving a problem by tracking their viewing
behavior with a novel eye-tracking system. The resulting software will support
students during the learning process by providing real-time feedback if they are
not viewing relevant features of a problem. The project team aims to expand to
additional STEM disciplines once the benefits in chemistry education has been
demonstrated. As a result, this project has the potential to provide a more
accessible and high-tech method for carrying-out STEM education research while
also having a substantial impact on student learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
cross-institution collaboration aims to engage in foundational work to create an
intelligent tutoring system that uses webcam eye-tracking data and artificial
intelligence to provide chemistry learners with real-time feedback during
problem solving activities. The study will be executed in three phases: 1)
traditional screen-based eye tracking methods will be compared to webcam-based
eye tracking methods, 2) data collected in phase one will be used to train and
evaluate a machine learning model to predict student outcomes, and 3) the team
will investigate the ability of early cues to change the viewing patterns of
students actively engaged in problem solving. Through the systematic development
of a machine learning model that uses eye tracking to predict achievement
outcomes of problem solving in chemistry, the development of a feedback model
for early intervention is possible. This individualized feedback has the
potential to support students to engage with problem solving in more productive
ways, build confidence, and provide valuable insights into how students solve
problems. By providing immediate, individualized feedback, this research has the
potential to support a large number of students in a chemistry problem solving
context, including those who may not exhibit traditional help-seeking behavior.
Further, comparing web-cam eye tracking to traditional monitor-based approaches
has the potential to provide the chemistry education community with a valuable
new tool for engaging in research. Findings from this project will be shared
through conferences and publications for undergraduate STEM educators as well as
to specific communities interested in eye-tracking methods. The NSF IUSE: EDU
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.