* 2235457
* EAGER: ADAPT: Time-Domain Study of the Dynamics of Relativistic Jets
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Manel Errando, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 08/31/2024
* USD 299,131.00

Relativistic jets from active galactic nuclei are beams of particles and
radiation powered by accretion of interstellar gas onto a supermassive black
hole at the center of active galaxies. Jets are observed across the
electromagnetic spectrum, from radio waves to gamma-ray energies. Their presence
in galaxies has been shown to correlate with the formation rate of new stars.
Limited knowledge of the structure and evolution of relativistic jets in active
galactic nuclei at present has been described as “a major bottleneck in
understanding the evolution of galaxies” in a recent report by the National
Academy of Sciences. Jets are very dynamic astrophysical objects. The light
emission observed from jets is often seen to drift slowly over years. Fast
changes in intensity that can last weeks, days or even hours are also observed.
Changes in the jet emission over time carry information about the energy of the
particles (mostly electrons, positrons, and protons) that the jet plasma is made
of, opening a window to understand the physical processes that make relativistic
jets the most powerful particle accelerators in the Universe. This project will
leverage the combined expertise of researchers in the fields of statistics,
observational astrophysics, and theoretical plasma physics at Washington
University in St. Louis to develop a framework of new statistical and artificial
intelligence tools, computer simulations, and analytical physical models that
characterize the evolution of relativistic jets over time as seen by radio,
optical, and gamma-ray telescopes, and will connect it to the physical processes
powering the jet dynamics. The research could enhance the understanding of the
physical mechanisms underlying relativistic jets and impact physics and other
disciplines. The project will have broader impacts on undergraduate and graduate
teaching, the development of human resources with training and skills in
astronomy and data science, and outreach activities targeting local students
from underrepresented minorities in the fields of mathematics, statistics,
physics, and astronomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the last decade, facilities such
as the Owens Valley Radio Observatory and Very Large Baseline Array at radio
frequencies, the Zwicky Transient Facility (optical), and the Fermi-LAT
observatory (gamma rays) have produced and continue to deliver light curves with
unprecedented high cadence and time coverage for bright jets from active
galactic nuclei. Alongside, theoretical efforts have also progressed rapidly in
recent years, increasing physicists’ understanding of the mechanisms of particle
acceleration that can produce the observed high energy emission from jets,
particularly through plasma simulations. Despite the progress in first-
principles theoretical modeling, there is a significant gap between outputs of
theoretical models and observational data. This project seeks to develop and
make use of novel statistical and artificial intelligence tools to understand
the main sources of the discrepancy and combine observed light curves with the
state-of-the art particle-in-cell simulations to narrow the gap. As a first
step, a library of simulated light curves will be generated and a novel set of
new diagnostic tools for time series analysis of multivariate, irregularly
spaced time domain data will be developed. Next, important features from the
multi-band time series analysis will be used to characterize properties of both
simulated and observed light curves, which will help to discriminate among
different classes of theoretical models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.