* 2235006
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Cross-platform Election Advertising Transparency Initiative
* SBE,SES
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Erika Franklin Fowler, Wesleyan University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 09/30/2024
* USD 260,201.00

Nearly $2 billion was spent on digital advertising in the presidential general
election in 2020, and online advertising is only expected to grow. Campaigns’
rapid shift to digital, however, has caused headaches for those who track
political advertising. The data provided by online platforms, such as Facebook
and Google, come in different formats, contain different collections that are
not immediately comparable, and lack metadata necessary to find all ads related
to a specific campaign for office, all ads featuring a specific candidate, or
all ads within either set that discuss a specific issue. The sheer volume of
content requires the use of computational methods to extract the information
necessary to answer even basic descriptive questions such as how much money was
spent online in a particular race or across all federal races. This project
provides the infrastructure necessary to answer critical questions about the
role of digital advertising in American democracy, including the extent to which
“dark money” dominates campaigns, and the spread and reach of misinformation in
campaigns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team is building expandable
infrastructure to acquire, process, integrate, label, and distribute digital
election advertising data from two large online platforms. The result is a
centralized repository that provides robust documentation of all procedures and
code such that they can be modified to apply to other platforms and contexts for
expansion. Cross-platform integration and standardization of digital election
advertising data through human and state-of-the-art computational methods
reduces costs to individual researchers, provides parallel procedures already in
place for analyzing TV advertising (and thus maximizing comparability to
existing data), provides linkage information to other data sources, and produces
accessible data to benefit the community. Accomplishing this aim is a high risk-
high reward endeavor. For instance, new approaches or methods are needed to
capture and label relevant advertising by focus, especially when the true
sponsor is unclear or disguised.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.