* 2235130
* Mechanisms of Facial Stereotyping
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Jonathan Freeman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Allen McConnell
* 04/30/2026
* USD 704,044.00

When people encounter others, they quickly infer personality traits from their
faces such as how trustworthy or competent they appear to be. These initial
impressions are formed instantaneously, and although they are typically
inaccurate, they strongly guide people's behavior and predict real-world
outcomes (e.g., job offers, prison sentences). Recently, researchers have mapped
specific facial features that drive particular impressions (e.g., downward-
turned lips are untrustworthy) with incredible precision, but this work has
focused on homogenous targets (e.g., White male faces) and generally ignored
gender, race, and other group memberships. Separately, researchers have long
known that stereotypes related to gender, race, and other group memberships
strongly bias impressions regardless of any role of facial features. These
group-based biases have profound consequences and can drive social inequities
such as gender and racial disparities in society. However, little is known about
how people’s mappings of facial features to specific impressions change across
group boundaries, such as when encountering individuals who vary in gender,
race, or are members of an ingroup or an outgroup. By examining the mutual roles
of both facial appearance stereotypes and group stereotypes, this project
develops an integrated model of how social judgments are initially formed and
the neural mechanisms underlying these judgments. By integrating insights and
techniques from across social psychology, cognitive neuroscience, and vision
science, this project can help identify effective interventions to reduce
harmful social biases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, explicit ratings,
speed of judgment, and brain activity measures test how people cognitively
integrate facial appearance stereotypes and group stereotypes, which results in
their social judgments reflecting trade-offs between the two factors. Brain
imaging helps identify the neural basis of this integration process with a
hypothesized role of the anterior temporal lobe, a region of the brain involved
in storing and retrieving social concepts. These findings advance new
theoretical perspectives of a dynamic, rather than fixed, cognitive and neural
architecture for forming impressions of others that varies by context, who is
judging and who is being judged, and it is sensitive to social learning and
experience. Facial appearance stereotypes determine real-world outcomes in many
domains (e.g., legal, business, social), and group stereotypes foster a variety
of societal inequities. The overarching goal of this project is to develop a
precise understanding of how specific facial appearances, together with learned
stereotypes about gender, race, or ingroup and outgroup membership, bias
people’s behavior toward others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.