* 2235625
* RAPID: Visualizing Epidemical Uncertainty for Personal Risk Assessment
* SBE,SES
* 01/01/2022,07/31/2023
* Enrico Bertini, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 07/31/2023
* USD 67,085.00

COVID-19 is one of the most deadly and fastest transmitting viruses in modern
history. In response to this pandemic, news agencies, government organizations,
citizen scientists, and many others have released hundreds of visualizations of
pandemic forecast data. While providing people with accurate information is
essential, it is unclear how the average person understands the widely
distributed depictions of pandemic data. Prior research on uncertainty
communication shows that even common visualizations can be confusing. One
possible source of inappropriate responses to COVID-19 is the lack of knowledge
about personal risk and the nature of pandemic uncertainty. The goal of this
research is to test how people understand currently available COVID-19 data
visualizations and create communication guidelines based on these findings.
Further, the researchers develop an application to help people understand the
factors that contribute to their risk. Users are able to interact with the
application to learn about the impact of their actions on their risk. This
research provides immediate solutions for teaching people about their personal
risk associated with COVID-19 and how their actions influence the risks of
others, which could improve the public's response and decrease fatalities.
Additionally, this work supports decision making for future pandemics and any
subsequent outbreaks of COVID-19 or other
viruses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the research team empirically
examines how people in high and low impact regions reason with pandemic
uncertainty by testing the effects of currently available visualizations on
personal risk judgments and behavior. By studying how changes in factors
influence risk perceptions, the research can contribute to understanding how
people conceptualize compound uncertainties from different sources (e.g.,
uncertainties associated with location, time, demographics and risk behaviors).
The researcher then use this information to produce a visualization application
that allows people to change the parameters of a simulation to see how the
resulting changes affect their risk judgments. For example, users in one city
are able to see the pandemic risk to individuals of their age in their zip code
and then see how that risk would change if the infection rate increased or
decreased. The aim is to promote intuitive understanding of the epidemiological
uncertainty in the forecast through participantsâ€™ experimentation with the
application. While in line with current recommendations for intrinsic
uncertainty visualization, this work is the first of its kind to test the effect
of user interaction to convey uncertainty through
visualization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.