* 2235600
* Creating Text-based Automated Assistants for Laboratory and Writing Assignments in the Teaching of  General Chemistry
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2025
* Thomas Holme, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 02/28/2025
* USD 290,844.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing automated
assistants (chatbots) that enhance the ability of chemistry students to make
connections between the concepts taught in general chemistry and potential
solutions to problems faced by society. Chemistry has often been called “The
Central Science” because chemical ideas are used by many other STEM fields.
Introductory students benefit in their learning of chemistry when they are able
to see the connections between chemistry and other courses they are taking. In
addition to science content, students in introductory courses are also learning
ways to locate reliable information that is relevant to their learning and to
their interests. Automated assistants to be developed in this project will
assist students in this form of learning in several ways. These chatbots will
use maps of the science content that include extensive connections that are
developed by content experts as “decision trees” so that when students use the
chatbots, the information they find has been assessed for quality. The nature of
the mapped connections can prompt students to explore areas of the content they
are studying to broader concerns of society, enhancing their understanding of
their future roles in solving problems that society faces. Finally, the software
that powers chatbots includes machine learning, so analysis of how the software
learns to respond to students and guide their engagement with contributions of
chemistry to society will provide data that can inform improved communication
strategies, both those automatically generated and those carried out by
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key communication challenge in introductory
college science courses is the number of participants involved. With 100,000s of
students enrolled in these courses every year, the ability of instructional
staff to engage with students often presents a daunting task. Using the expert
knowledge of instructors to construct content networks with extensive
interconnections as decision trees for automated assistants will allow students,
even those in large introductory courses, to engage dialogically with material.
Recent advances in machine learning have made such dialogs seem natural in many
areas of human endeavor, but academic conversations about science content within
the context of societal concerns has yet to be studied and advanced. First-year
college chemistry represents an ideal venue to conduct research about building
automated assistants capable of directing student engagement. This goal includes
not only traditional course content, but also direct connections of chemistry to
other fields and larger societal issues. Because the interactions students have
with chatbots generates data in the form of logs that can subsequently be mined
for key patterns, this project will provide information about inherent student
habits of engagement, and ways that automated conversations help students to
explore new aspects of chemistry, including how different fields of science in
collaboration provide pathways to broad societal improvements. The NSF IUSE:EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through its Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.