* 2235916
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track H: Convergent, Human-Centered Design for Making Voice-Activated AI Accessible and Fair to People Who Stutter
* TIP,ITE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2024
* Nihar Mahapatra, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 11/30/2024
* USD 749,996.00

Disfluencies in speech are common artifacts in conversation, but they are
especially prevalent in individuals who stutter, a community of more than 70
million people worldwide. It is well-documented that people who stutter
consistently experience employment discrimination, diminished labor market
outcomes, and societal stigma. The increasingly pervasive use of exclusionary
voice-activated artificial intelligence (AI), which are designed, trained, and
tested without considering communication that varies from societal norms, can
act as a barrier to daily life participation and employment access for
communities such as individuals who stutter. Worse, such technology can actively
discriminate against people with speech differences in employment contexts.
Therefore, there is an immediate and compelling need for efforts to reduce these
barriers and empower people with communication differences and disorders to
fully and equitably access all forms of speech recognition systems, including
personal voice assistants, automated phone interfaces, and job-preparation and
hiring software. This Convergence Accelerator project proposes a
multidisciplinary, use-inspired approach that leverages cutting-edge advances in
AI, as well as deep understanding of the nature and experience of stuttering,
and the legal, ethical, and labor market implications of increased use of voice-
activated systems. In partnership with diverse stakeholders, the project will
develop and distribute high-impact solutions to a major national and global
challenge: accessibility and fairness of voice-activated AI for disfluent
speech. Improving the ability of voice-activated AI to appropriately parse and
decode disfluent speech will increase quality of life, equality of opportunity,
and access, not just for people who stutter, but also for other vulnerable
populations and for society at large because all speakers are disfluent to some
extent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this Convergence Accelerator
project is to resolve limitations in voice technology by developing and
implementing policy-, advocacy-, and AI-based solutions to make voice technology
accessible and fair to people who stutter. The project will contribute to
advancing knowledge through development of inclusive training and test datasets
as well as annotation for accessible automatic speech recognition (ASR) and
development of novel ASR deep learning models. Proposed research studies will
establish a convergent and holistic understanding of how the nature and
experience of stuttering impacts and intersects with AI accessibility and
fairness in voice-activated technology, identify barriers and facilitators of
access to existing voice-activated AI among people who stutter, and evaluate the
effectiveness of guidelines and audit tools. Finally, this activity will engage
a multidisciplinary and multisectoral network of partners to ensure
participatory research design with a focused plan to recruit diverse
participants, widespread dissemination of findings, and uptake of new,
accessible technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.