* 2235553
* Roles of galectins in viral infection of mucosal epithelia using the zebrafish model system
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Gerardo Vasta, University of Maryland at Baltimore
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 02/28/2026
* USD 215,156.00

Viral diseases can have a severe impact on both human and animal populations,
including farmed and natural fish populations. Viruses such as influenza A
virus, rabies, respiratory syncytial virus, coronaviruses (COVID19), use a wide
variety of strategies to attach to and enter their hosts’ epithelial cells. In
many of these examples, however, the detailed mechanisms still remain unclear
and urgent research is needed to gain the key information that would enable the
development of innovative preventive and therapeutic strategies for viral
disease. This research project uses the zebrafish model system to address
questions about the mechanisms involved in viral infection, with focus on the
role(s) of sugar-binding proteins (galectins) in viral adhesion. Several
galectin types are present in both fish and humans, and function in defense
against viral infection. A recent study by the investigators revealed that a
particular galectin type (galectin-9) promotes viral infectivity. These
observations established a new paradigm for the role of galectins as anti-viral
defense factors, as they suggest that some viruses have evolved to “hijack”
galectins to facilitate viral host entry. By the use of innovative experimental
approaches and state-of-the-art molecular tools, this project is aimed at
elucidating the molecular mechanisms by which galectin-9 promotes viral
infection. The research will provide critical and useful information for viral
infections relevant to human and veterinary medicine, including commercial
aquaculture. Importantly, these studies will also contribute to the education
and hands-on training of graduate, undergraduate, and high school students,
including students from underrepresented minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
infectious hematopoietic necrosis virus (IHNV) is one of the most important fish
pathogens in natural and farmed populations worldwide. Environmental stress and
high-density aquaculture can lead to catastrophic IHNV outbreaks. Infection by
IHNV involves interaction of the viral envelope glycoprotein spikes with
glycoprotein receptor(s) on the fish epithelia, but the mechanisms remain
unknown. The investigator’s lab addresses structural/functional aspects of
sugar-binding proteins expressed by the host, such as galectins, in infectious
disease using both murine and non-mammalian models, such as zebrafish. Several
structurally different galectin types have been described (e.g. galectin-1,
Gal1; Gal3; and Gal9). While the zebrafish Gal1 and Gal3 hinder IHNV viral
adhesion, Gal9, which houses two sugar-recognition domains, promotes viral
infectivity. This led to the hypothesis that zebrafish Gal9 enhances viral
attachment by crosslinking the viral envelope glycoprotein to fish epithelial
glycans, and that under environmental stress the protective role of epidermal
mucus is diminished. The hypothesis will be tested by investigating though
state-of-the-art biochemical, molecular, and genetic experimental approaches the
mechanism(s) involved in Gal9-mediated enhancement of IHNV entry into the host
epithelial cell, and potential increase of viral replication, the epidermal
mucus’ protective role, and the detrimental effect of stressful environmental
conditions. This research will be examine the long-held concept of galectins as
defense factors against infectious disease, and will unravel basic infection
mechanisms pertinent to other enveloped viruses (e.g. influenza, rabies, and
coronavirus) of human and veterinary relevance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.