* 2235012
* Collaborative Research: CCRI: New: An Open Source Simulation Platform for AI Research on Autonomous Driving
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2026
* Bolei Zhou, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jie Yang
* 02/28/2026
* USD 960,327.00

Autonomous driving is transforming daily life and economy, with promised
benefits like safe transportation and efficient mobility. Much of today’s
research on autonomous driving experiments on expensive commercial vehicles. It
is costly and risky to evaluate AI and machine learning methods on physical
vehicles in real world. Driving simulator provides a cost-effective and safe
alternative for the development and evaluation of new AI algorithms. However,
existing driving simulators with limited assets and complexity cannot
accommodate the needs of the rapidly progressing AI fields. This project aims to
develop an open-ended driving simulation platform that fosters innovations in
various aspects of autonomous driving from perception to decision-making. This
platform will support realistic driving simulation with a diverse range of
traffic assets and scenarios imported from real world. It will become a common
experimental ground for researchers in academia and industry to develop new AI
methods, share data and models, and benchmark the progress. The platform will
grow into a community research infrastructure and have significant impacts on
the blooming autonomous driving industry. Additionally, it will provide
interactive teaching toolkits for STEM education, particularly for students from
underserved communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, investigators
will develop an open-source simulation platform called MetaDriverse for AI
research on autonomous driving. This platform will serve as a research
infrastructure and facilitate compelling research opportunities in various
disciplines, including computer vision, computer graphics, machine learning, and
human-machine interaction. MetaDriverse will feature realistic visual
appearance, interactive real-world scenarios and assets, and intuitive human
control interface, allowing for the simulation of real-world driving
experiences. It will also provide a wide range of tasks and benchmarks and the
flexibility to design new ones, which will gauge the community’s collective
effort and accelerate the research progress. The key features and capabilities
of the platform include (i) realistic visual perception and neural rendering,
(ii) interactive simulation of real-world traffic scenarios, (iii) comprehensive
benchmarks and model zoo, and (iv) community’s collective effort. This
infrastructure will foster a wide range of opportunities and collaborations in
the autonomous driving and intelligent transportation industries and bring
significant societal and economic impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.