* 2235545
* Reconstructing rapid, post-migratory biological adaptation using ancient dental calculus
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Laura Weyrich, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 04/30/2028
* USD 450,000.00

As humans migrated across the globe in the past, new diets, environmental
exposures, and lifestyle practices likely influenced health in different ways
and simultaneously impacted the beneficial microorganisms that live within the
human body – the microbiome. Understanding how the human microbiome adapted to
new pressures is critical for understanding human health in the past and
uncovering the origins of chronic diseases like obesity, cardiovascular disease,
and poor oral health. In this project, the research team uses ancient calcified
dental plaque to reconstruct the history of microorganisms that were part of
Ancestors’ human oral microbiome and estimate how these microorganisms changed
over time with shifts in lifestyle and environment. The research advances
understanding about how past histories, exposures, and arrivals in new areas
around 1,000 years ago may have contributed to human health. The project
supports graduate student training and mentoring and international research
collaborations. Community-engagement and student exchanges throughout the
project ensure that findings from this study are translated into practice in
academic journals and local outlets. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research team
reconstructs ancient human microbiomes using ancient DNA sequencing from
calcified dental calculus. They test how shifts in diet, (i.e., the use of new
food sources), changes in environment or landscape (i.e., settlement in high or
low altitude), and interactions with new people (i.e., arrival of other
populations to the area) influenced the diversity of microorganisms in these
Ancestors. More detailed analyses identify the specific genomic adaptations and
rearrangements in individual microbes that accompanied these community-based
shifts. These microbial adaptations are examined in the context of past human
health to understand how these mechanisms may be related to the development of
modern chronic diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.