* 2235207
* FuSe-TG: Ultra-low-power and Robust Autonomy of Edge Robotics with 2D Semiconductors
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Amit Trivedi, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 04/30/2025
* USD 299,999.00

This project develops foundational semiconductors and co-design methodologies
for risk-aware inference at the edge. Risk-aware inference procedures for deep
learning such as Bayesian inference of deep neural networks (DNNs) can extract
both prediction and prediction risks but also demand overwhelming computations.
The inference procedures operate on random numbers and statistical density
functions instead of real numbers for their higher expressivity. Meanwhile,
their unique workload presents critical complexities for traditional
semiconductors and microelectronics designed for digital workloads. To meet the
distinct processing challenges, this teaming grant proposal explores the
concepts of novel devices based on two-dimensional (2D) materials and co-design
methodologies that can process predominant inference operations using an ultra-
low-power non-von Neumann execution. A cross-layer simulation tool will be
developed to actively bridge the material and device-level novelties to
computing model and architecture design space and to explore unconventional
system design concepts. Especially our various co-design initiatives will be
intersected into exploring autonomous navigation of insect-scale drones as a
test platform. Autonomous insect-scale drones can engender unprecedented
applications, e.g., our project can potentially enliven a typical internet-of-
things into a flying internet-of-things where the sensors riding on insect-scale
drones can continually self-organize in space against the changing environmental
conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The data-driven learning of deep neural
networks (DNNs) significantly simplifies the complexity of model abstraction for
many decision-making problems. Yet, the generated DNNs act like a black box and
do not offer theoretical guarantees on the accuracy of the predictions.
Significantly as our reliance on DNN-based predictive models is increasing for
mission and safety-critical applications, it has become necessary to assess when
DNNâ€™s predictions are likely inaccurate. This teaming grant project explores
concepts for future semiconductor technologies where more expressive DNN
inference, where both the prediction and prediction risks, can be extracted
while operating within the time and energy bounds of edge devices. Additionally,
we will develop workshops on emerging co-design methodologies to address the
workforce and talent demand for future semiconductor technologies and designs.
We will instill co-design skills among undergraduate and graduate students by
developing interdisciplinary course lectures and senior design projects. We will
also foster a community of researchers on co-design space exploration by
creating an online hub of resources such as open-source design kits, device
models, and co-design exploration tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.