* 2235139
* Collaborative Research: Research Infrastructure: CCRI: New: Distributed Space and Terrestrial Networking Infrastructure for Multi-Constellation Coexistence
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2026
* Carl Dietrich, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 02/28/2026
* USD 1,699,997.00

This collaborative project brings together investigators from Virginia Tech,
George Mason University, and the University of Surrey to develop a hardware-in-
the-loop (HIL) platform that facilitates the research, development, and
experimentation with adaptive communications for multi-constellation space
network coexistence. The main contribution is SpaceNet, the first-of-its-kind,
fully open-source HIL space network testbed that is able to emulate a fast-
changing network topology with changing connectivity and latencies, challenging
routing, transport protocols, and re-architecting applications.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The testbed will uniquely support multiple networks of distributed
heterogeneous platforms in multiple domains, addressing challenges in adaptive
communications for multi-constellation coexistence, emulating what has been
called the “internet of space things”. Direct connectivity allows for the
exploration of how satellites and constellations might interconnect without
revealing proprietary information of each constellation, creating the equivalent
of interdomain routing for space networks. Additional capabilities examine
behavior in the face of disruptions such as large solar storms. Achieving these
new capabilities requires merging lab-based spacecraft hardware with a large-
scale state-of-the-art wireless radio testbed to create more flexible and higher
fidelity rendering of the satellite links, resulting in a networked HIL
development and a testing environment that accurately models the network and
dynamics; routing and re-routing data link tables on the fly, scaled to
multiply-redundant algorithms and architectures; satellite-like lab hardware for
testbed nodes; and virtual nodes and remote access for government, industry, and
academic researchers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The expected outcome is a remotely-
accessible, multi-domain network and cybersecurity research infrastructure, and
a validated first-of-its-kind adaptive and assured space network communications
emulator. In addition, students will be involved in class projects covering
technical concepts on space communications, TN/NTN co-existence, and hands-on
experiences with SpaceNet. Project outcomes will be widely disseminated via
workshops, tutorials, software repositories, peer-reviewed conferences, and
scholarly archival journals. The broader wireless communications communities
will be engaged in the design, development, use, and maintenance of the proposed
CISE infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project repository will be linked
from the proposal and milestones page at https://space-net.org at least through
the duration of the project, and will be used for sharing research updates,
workshop livestreams, dataset, code, and preprints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.