* 2235325
* The probiotic potential of symbiotic partnerships: Can contact between aquatic animals enhance the anti-pathogen potential of protective microbiomes?
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2026
* Frank Stewart, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 03/31/2026
* USD 431,067.00

Social interaction is a major driver of animal health, fitness, and evolution,
affecting processes such as resource acquisition, mate choice, and the spread of
animal-associated microorganisms. This project examines the effect of marine
animal social interactions on beneficial microbiomes and how this influences
defense against pathogens. The project includes support for educational and
outreach activities in Montana, a landlocked state with limited resources for
ocean science research and education. It includes research training for at least
five undergraduate students and provides hands-on research experience and
curriculum development opportunities for high school teachers from rural
Montana.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The microbiomes of marine animals provide critical
'ecosystem' services to their hosts, such as protection from pathogens via
antimicrobial production or competition. Microbiomes have been studied almost
exclusively as isolated entities, but many marine animals engage in repeated
physical contact through social interactions, which may shape microbiomes in
unknown ways. Using the clownfish-anemone model and a combination of live animal
experiments, culture-based microbial inhibition assays, and genomic approaches,
this project tests the hypothesis that social interaction between marine animals
provides a microbial benefit to the interacting partners, optimizing each
animal's beneficial microbiome to protect against pathogens. The research
advances knowledge of how social interactions shape microbiomes, improves
understanding of symbiotic relationships, and lays the foundation for exploring
the microbial benefits of animal-animal interaction in other marine
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by Biological
Oceanography and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.