* 2235583
* CAREER: Transactive Resilience: Uncovering the Effects of Social Network and Communal Capacity on Disaster Community Resilience
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Xiaochen Zhang, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 08/31/2028
* USD 520,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project seeks to examine disaster
resilience via relationships among non-profits, community groups, government
agencies, and built environment in disaster-affected communities. By better
understanding of these relationships, it will shed light on how distributed or
decentralized networks can bolster disaster resilience, resource allocation, and
emergency management in high-risk regions by enabling intra-organizational and
peer-to-peer interactions, rather than top-down responses. The project will
further explore how efficiency and equity in disaster response may be improved
by encouraging the participation of historically marginalized communities in the
planning and response processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Effective, efficient, and
rapid distribution of information and resources is the foundation of disaster
response and infrastructure resilience. It becomes even more prominent due to
disastersâ€™ increasing intensity and frequency in a changing climate.
Traditional, hierarchical systems, though effective, tend to be less efficient
and less rapid than other forms of distributed networks as they rely on longer,
cumbersome communication chains for key information to reach key decision-makers
and inform decisions and policies. Furthermore, vulnerable citizens and
traditionally marginalized groups may be underrepresented in, and thus further
excluded from, these disaster response and recovery modes. This research plans a
revised model by defining, developing, and implementing a Transactive Resilience
Model oriented around peer-to-peer connections among community organizations,
non-profits, and government agencies. The project will explore these
decentralized networks as a potential complement to traditional, linear response
models via analysis of historical data, quantitative and qualitative assessment
of practitioners, and subsequent interventions aimed at cultivating transactive
resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by Humans,
Disasters, and the Built Environment (HDBE) and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.