* 2235913
* Spatial and Temporal Distribution of Dust Events across the United States over Twenty (20) Years, Insight into Their Meteorological Causes and Conditions
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Karin Ardon-Dryer, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Yu Gu
* 12/31/2025
* USD 480,039.00

Dust events, which impact millions across the US, are an important and complex
constituent of the atmospheric system and are one of the main natural
contributors to atmospheric Particulate Matter (PM). Atmospheric dust particles
affect the climate, economy, and environment, as well as human well-being and
health. There is a major concern regarding dust events, as multiple climate
model studies indicate that as climate change progresses, more dust events are
expected across the US. Dust events in the US can be of varying intensities
(blowing dust vs. dust storm) and types (synoptic vs. convective), but their
distributions (spatial, temporal, or type) and impacts across the US are
unclear. Therefore, there is a need to better understand dust events, spatial
and temporal distributions, the meteorological conditions that initiate them,
and those measured during them. The project will include several broader impact
activities including the recruitment of undergraduates and graduate students
with a focus on recruitment of students from underrepresented minorities groups,
hands-on activity for undergraduate students, general public lectures as part of
the Texas Tech Climate Center, as well as sharing the information and database
retrieved from this project with the scientific community as part of the Dust
Alliance for North America (DANA) community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will create the first national wide dust event database that will include
blowing dust events as well as dust storms that occur across the US for the last
20 years. Identification of dust events will be made using meteorological
stations spread across the US. Different tools (including changes in PM,
satellite images, IMPROVE, AERONET, etc.) will be used to confirm these dust
events. Using multiple tools including weather pressure maps, satellite images,
and radar images, each dust event will be identified for the meteorological
conditions that caused it. Comparison between the meteorological measurements
and conditions during and those that initiate dust events as well as changes in
larger climatology scales including drought and climatological indices will
advance our fundamental knowledge of dust events by providing a detailed view of
their spatial and temporal changes, the common types, and the meteorological
conditions that cause them. The database created from this project could improve
the understanding of the potential impact of dust events on climate (e.g.,
radiation, cloud microphysics, and precipitation processes) and impact on air
quality and human health. It could also be used for better prediction methods
and may serve as the basis for a national alert dust
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.