* 2235121
* I-Corps: Artificial Intelligence (AI)-Based Sensing and Data Efficient Sampling, Transmission, Storage, Analysis and Cloud Computing
* TIP,TI
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Soundar Kumara, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is to improve
data from sensors that have become ubiquitous in daily life, including personal
devices, smart homes and infrastructure, industrial machines and factories,
autonomous machines, and the natural environment. Sensor-based ‘big data’ offers
real-time visibility into a variety of systems. However, the volume, speed, and
variety of this data will soon overwhelm the ability to ingest, refine, and
analyze all the data. This project seeks to develop modeling methodologies that
will improve the way data is collected, processed, and analyzed in a variety of
industries involving embedded systems such as Internet of Things (IoT), space
exploration, and biotechnology. Remote monitoring of industrial machines and
distributed sensing in the oceans and the biosphere are some application
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of
a novel sensor data modeling methodology. Sensor-based data generation is about
to reach 73+ trillion gigabytes by 2025. Contemporary data collection and
analysis pipelines are inefficient and uneconomical for this scale of data. This
technology investigates undersampling for several orders of magnitude savings in
data collection, transmission, storage, cloud computing, and analytics. Some
application areas include the Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT),
environmental and ocean monitoring, and autonomous drones and vehicles. The
novel methodology in the post-Nyquist era information extraction pipeline
centered around undersampling, low-dimensional latent representations, and
machine learning, with several orders of savings in the data and engineering
complexity of IIoT systems. The insight on undersampling-based learning of low-
dimensional latent representations and using them to solve different downstream
tasks is the intellectual contribution of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.