* 2235508
* CAREER: Illuminating O-GlcNAc-Driven Functions of the Human Proteome
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2028
* Charlie Fehl, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 06/30/2028
* USD 674,127.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Charlie Fehl from Wayne State University is developing tools that can
be delivered specifically and rapidly and can elicit information on the effect
of sugar modifications on any protein of interest. Currently, it is known that
one third of the proteins in human cells are temporarily coated in sugars after
eating carbohydrates, but the functions of those sugars are known for only about
3% of all human proteins. The elucidation of the functions of these proteins
could be possible if one has the ability to determine the effects of high sugar
on cellular proteins. This new knowledge is highly significant for the
understanding of human metabolism and how our metabolism is regulated. The
chemical tools being developed in this research could enable advancements in the
study of sugar biology. Dr. Fehl’s work will focus on training students at
multiple levels, from graduate and undergraduate students who will carry out the
research as well as high school students whose participation in the project will
enable them to become aware and informed about STEM career pathways. A key
educational development is a “Lecture Exposure/Analysis of Data” (LEAD) modules
that train undergraduates in hypothesis formation and hypothesis testing skills
in the classroom using the data generated in the proposed
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project aims to build protein-
specific assays that respond to high and low sugar levels using the “CRISPR”
gene tagging system. Specifically, the Wayne State team will manipulate the
sugar O-GlcNAc (O-linked N-acetylglucosamine), the major glucose- and nutrient-
sensing molecule in all human cells. The three proposed assays are expected to
reveal the stability, subcellular location, and overall cellular functions,
respectively, of high vs. low O-GlcNAc on specific proteins tagged in these
assays. Stability assays will focus on a set of O-GlcNAcylated kinases, which
are major drivers of cell signaling that potentially responds to nutrient
levels. Location assays will focus on a set known O-GlcNAcylated transcription
factors, which are involved in regulating cellular functions. The “GlycoTag”
system is expected to elevate O-GlcNAc levels on specific proteins in cells,
making possible the measurement of the effects of these sugar modifications on
cell metabolism, signaling, and survival. The results of these three new assays
will be compiled into a functional database shared with the public and the
scientific community. The data generated in this project are expected to rapidly
advance knowledge of sugar-driven protein functions and provide new insights
into how metabolic activities and homeostasis are regulated in human
tissues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.