* 2235572
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social and environmental influences on inflammation
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2025
* Jada Benn Torres, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Bernstein
* 02/28/2025
* USD 28,483.00

This doctoral dissertation research project investigates how social and
environmental factors that create stress ‘get under the skin’ through the
process of inflammation, to influence biological outcomes that impact well-being
over the life course. Chronic inflammation can be a cause or sign of disease,
and inflammatory responses are precursors of poor health outcomes and offer
insights into understanding disease onset. This project contributes to a clearer
understanding of the ways in which social and environmental factors serve as
mechanisms that induce inflammation, linking stress to disease. By focusing
analysis on variation in the biomarker C-reactive protein (CRP), a well
validated biomarker of inflammation, in relationship to variation in indices of
environmental and psychosocial stress, the results of this study can contribute
to better identifying the underpinnings of the links between stress,
inflammation, environmental drivers, and biological outcomes. This is a
community-centered project which provides research training to participants and
sets the foundation for future research in this emerging area.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Epigenetic pathways act as channels between social factors
and disease risk throughout life, and epigenetic modifications can impact
inflammatory responses. In clinically oriented research, variation in outcomes
related to human health is often grouped into census-level categories that may
not be informative with respect to understanding human biological variation.
Incorporating environmental information and evidence of potentially linked
epigenetic modifications can offer a more nuanced understanding of variation
across the full pathway of causation, from mechanism to outcome. This project
aims to 1) understand how variation in social and other environmental factors
relates to variation in CRP concentrations, both within and across populations,
and 2) to understand how social and environmental factors influence methylation
in areas of the genome related to stress physiology and stress response. Taken
together, results generated from this project can advance understanding of the
underlying mechanisms involved in the transduction of environmental and lived
experience to biological outcomes and inform theoretical frameworks regarding
the evolution and trade-offs involved in these mechanisms within and across
human populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.