* 2235101
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The acquisition of anaphoric direct objects in a third language: A variationist perspective
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2025
* Patricia Amaral, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 02/28/2025
* USD 11,571.00

When bilingual speakers are learning a third language, the two previously
learned languages may influence this learning in various ways under different
linguistic and social conditions. This doctoral dissertation investigates the
influence of first and second language in third language acquisition. By
acknowledging the inherent variability in language use by multilingual speakers,
this study facilitates public understanding of language uses that are deemed
"non-standard" in formal education, to increase understanding of multilingual
speakers. This study further benefits language education in that findings help
language educators identify learning difficulties specific to bilingual and
multilingual speakers learning an additional language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
doctoral dissertation study elicits third language learners' judgments on the
naturalness of sentences with either expressed or omitted anaphoric direct
objects in each of the three languages L1, L2, and L3. In the following
conversation, "him" is an anaphoric direct object referring to "John": "-Did you
see John? -No, I didn't see him." To establish points of comparison, judgment is
elicited for the same sentences by native speakers, as well as those whose L1
and L2 are the L2 and L3 of the experimental group, respectively. The research
design allows the researchers to tease apart the predictions of several existing
hypotheses about factors that influence L3 acquisition. These include influence
from the first language, influence from the second language, influence from the
language that is more typologically similar to the third language, and influence
from the language primarily used in daily life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.