* 2235476
* An Investigation of Synergistic Effects of Discipline-based Growth Mindset and Effective Learning Strategies Interventions in Gateway Chemistry Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Li Ye, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 06/30/2026
* USD 165,933.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving undergraduate
students’ mindset beliefs, learning strategies, and persistence in gateway
chemistry courses. Students’ early success and skills learned in science gateway
courses are integral to their success in completing science degrees. Research
has reported that implementing the Growth Mindset (GM) or Effective Learning
Strategies (ELS) interventions can improve student learning in Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) courses. However, very few have
studied the combination of these two related interventions. This Level 1 Engaged
Student Learning project will investigate the synergistic effects of two
chemistry-based online modules (GM and ELS) implemented with students in
introductory and general chemistry courses at two Hispanic Serving Institutions.
The coupling of GM and ELS modules will explicitly teach students how to respond
to challenges in specific contexts of the chemistry courses and adopt effective
learning strategies necessary for improving their learning skills and academic
success. The project is expected to produce online materials, including
interactive videos and reflective writing activities, to teach GM and ELS in
chemistry courses and advance understanding of coupling GM and ELS modules
broadly in STEM curricula. The long term goals of the project include impacting
students’ mindset and learning skills, improving student success and retention
in gateway chemistry courses, and improving diversity in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the project are to develop two
chemistry-based GM and ELS modules for the introductory and general chemistry
courses in two institutions, and to examine their effectiveness using a
randomized controlled trial (RCT). Student participants will be randomly
assigned to one of four study conditions: control, use of GM only (with
control), use of ELS only (with control), and use of both modules. The
effectiveness of these interventions will be evaluated by measuring: i) changes
in students’ mindset beliefs, ii) changes in using effective learning
strategies, iii) comparing exam performance between the study conditions in the
courses, and iv) differential impact for underrepresented minority students
(URM) in the introductory and general chemistry courses across the two
institutions. The long-term impact of the project will be examined by comparing
completion rates in subsequent chemistry courses. Additionally, focus group
interviews will be conducted to explore and explain the synergistic effects of
the two modules. The project team will disseminate findings by creating a
website with training and tutorial materials for potential adopters of the GM
and ELS modules, training instructors in the host institutions, organizing
workshops at regional and national conferences, and through conference
presentations and publications in chemistry/science education journals. The NSF
IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through its Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.