* 2235703
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Shared food sources and microbial transmission in primates and bats
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Jason Kamilar, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 04/30/2025
* USD 17,994.00

Understanding the factors that influence nonhuman primate (NHP) biology and
health is essential for human global health efforts because NHPs are models for
human evolution, play key roles in global ecosystems, and can transmit diseases
to humans. Commensal microbes in the gut play an important role in immunity, and
both microbes and microbial genes involved in host defense can be acquired from
the environment. Microbes that colonize hosts carrying zoonoses (diseases which
can be transmitted to humans) may evolve defenses against these pathogens that
can be transmitted to other hosts in the same ecosystem. This doctoral
dissertation research project investigates the transmission of commensal
microbes (and their genes) between three groups of organisms known to play roles
in zoonotic transmission: bats, baboons, and fruits. The results of this study
can have important implications for primate health and conservation, scientific
understanding of the ecology and evolution of pathogen transmission and
immunity, and global health efforts for humans and animals. The project supports
K-12 science outreach and undergraduate training and mentoring opportunities in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ecology of Kinda baboons, a species that often
serves as a model system for understanding human evolution, provides a natural
experiment for examining microbial transmission. The home range of one
habituated Kinda baboon troop overlaps with swamp forest within which 5-10
million straw-colored fruit bats (Eidolon helvum) roost during their seasonal
migration between late October and December. During this roosting period, both
Eidolon and Kinda baboons feed on local swamp figs and waterberries. Due to
Eidolon’s aerial position during roosting and flight, feces, saliva, and urine
are dropped to the ground creating opportunity for exposure to these bodily
fluids by Kindas either directly or indirectly via the consumption of
contaminated fruits (which may act as vectors). The researchers analyze the gut
microbiomes of Kinda baboons and fruit flesh microbiomes before, during, and
after the migratory arrival of Eidolon, and assess Eidolon gut microbiomes
during their roosting period, to address three specific questions: Q1: Does the
migratory arrival of Eidolon into KNP alter Kinda baboon gut and fruit flesh
microbiomes? Q2: Does the migratory departure of Eidolon from KNP (January-early
February) alter Kinda baboon gut and fruit flesh microbiomes? Q3: Do host
evolutionary relationships or the environment better explain Kinda baboon gut
microbiome structure during the Eidolon roosting period? Both the variety of
microorganisms that comprise the microbiomes of each host as well as the
functions of microbial genes utilized by the microbes are assessed. The research
team then tests for differences in microbiome taxonomic and functional
diversity––as well as differences in microbiome structure––across time, across
host species, and across Kinda baboon troops with different proximity to
Eidolon.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.