* 2235601
* Scaffolding Computational Thinking in Introductory Computer Science through a Conversational Agent
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Anita Sarma, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 12/31/2025
* USD 195,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by investigating how virtual
assistants called conversational agents can help students to learn computer
programming. A key challenge of teaching introductory programming lies in how to
translate students' initial programming solutions that are written in informal
language (also known as "pseudocode") into a form the computer can understand.
The project team plans to design and evaluate a conversational agent prototype
to improve students' programming skills. The conversational agent will enable
students to express each step of an algorithm in natural language, then will
guide students toward generating, understanding, and evolving expressions into a
formal programming language. The project has the potential to change education
settings so that students will get individual and contextualized attention when
students learn computer programming concepts and computational thinking. The
conversational agents can adapt code generations to match studentsâ€™ needs. The
proposed work has the potential to lower the hurdles faced by students and to
provide instructors with a better understanding of students' challenges and
expectations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed conversational agents will help
students to express their initial algorithmic thinking in natural language, and
then guide students toward generating, understanding, and evolving more formal
programming codes. The project will help students to produce better solutions,
develop programming skills, and increasingly engage in the learning process. The
project team will evaluate the effectiveness of the conversational agent in
helping students to learn computer programming through a set of labs and field
studies. The project intends to compare and contrast how students will produce
codes with and without the agents, how students will perceive the proposed
approach, and how students will learn programming concepts. The NSF IUSE: EDU
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through its Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.