* 2235606
* Developing a Digital Platform for Providing Scalable and Actionable Feedback to Support Students' Development of Professional Skills
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2026
* Suzanne Ruder, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 02/28/2026
* USD 444,348.00

This project serves the national interest by developing a digital platform and
classroom strategies for instructors to improve student professional skills
across the fields of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM).
The explicit development of these skills (also known as transferable, process,
21st century, or soft skills) is of critical importance to prepare students for
successful careers in science and technology. Skills such as critical thinking,
problem solving, collaboration, and communication have been identified as
essential for a modern national workforce by the National Academies of Sciences,
Engineering and Medicine as well reports from many industries and employers.
These reports further identify that increased proficiency in student
professional skills will ensure undergraduates a more successful launch as they
begin their careers. In this project, a digital platform will be developed that
leverages the Enhancing Learning by Improving Process Skills project, a novel
and widely available feedback-based skills rubric. This project will provide
strategies for instructors in classrooms of all sizes to help them develop and
evaluate student professional skills. The digital platform and classroom
strategies will also allow instructors to provide students with rapid feedback
and effective coaching on how to improve their professional skills. This
innovative project brings attention to the development of student professional
skills as it will increase students’ insights into the importance of these
skills for scientists and advance their preparation for future STEM careers.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will help students develop and improve their
professional skills in STEM classrooms by using a scalable digital platform
based on novel feedback-based skill rubrics from the Enhancing Learning by
Improving Process Skills project (ELIPSS.com). This project will conduct
research on how feedback and self-assessment can help students improve their
professional skills, as well as examine how external and tailored feedback can
help students become self-regulated learners. The project team will design and
pilot a digital platform to streamline assessment and actionable feedback
delivery to students, using a multidisciplinary team of STEM instructors from a
range of class sizes and institutional settings to ensure the application’s
utility and adoptability. Through interviews and survey responses, instructional
team members will identify optimum strategies for generating and delivering
feedback to students that is both impactful and timely. Data will be collected
on the ways in which students interact with the suggestions for improving skill
development; these data will be analyzed to gauge how they responded to this
feedback and whether it helped them improve their skills. Students will complete
a validated science motivation questionnaire to collect their insights on how
their development of professional skills may further motivate them towards STEM
majors and careers. Five culminating goals and outcomes provide a framework for
the execution of this project. First is the creation of a digital platform,
which is preloaded with customizable professional skills rubrics that were a
product of the NSF-funded ELIPSS project. Second, a team of instructors from a
range of STEM disciplines and institutions across the country will implement and
subsequently disseminate these materials. Third is the development of a set of
materials and training protocols to train additional instructors to use the
skill-building rubrics and digital platform. Fourth is the assembly of a
collection of best instructional practices to optimize student interaction with
feedback on their professional skill development. Fifth, and finally, is an
advanced understanding of how these efforts impact students - promoting their
skill development, their perception of the importance of these skill for
scientists, and their preparation for future STEM careers. Overall, the broad
scope of this project will enable greater integration of professional skill
development into undergraduate STEM programs - the digital platform and
classroom strategies are designed to be used in all disciplines, class sizes and
institutional settings and will rapidly impact a large number of students. These
students will enter the STEM workforce with key preparation in valued
professional skills that will better ensure their success. Even more broadly,
the tools and classroom strategies developed through this project will support
the advancement of STEM education on multiple levels: they support active
learning pedagogies, support skill-based programmatic assessment, and provide a
data-collection mechanism for future education research. The NSF IUSE: EDU
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through its Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.