* 2235258
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track J: Accelerating commercial marine fish production in US: developing sustainable feeds, establishing feed suppliers and enhancing market acceptance
* TIP,ITE
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2023
* Md Shah Alam, University of North Carolina at Wilmington
* Standard Grant
* Michael Reksulak
* 11/30/2023
* USD 244,974.00

With the global population projected to reach 10 billion by 2050, and global
demand for protein projected to rise, aquaculture holds the key to a sustainable
way to feed the world. U.S. demand for seafood exceeds domestic supply, so it
imports seafood (50% from aquaculture), resulting in a trade deficit. The U.S.
can help to ensure global food security, respond to the economic challenges of
the Covid-19 pandemic, and shortage of food supply in the world by strategic
expansion of aquaculture. For this to happen, it will require the development
and demonstration of sustainable aquaculture technologies and practices.
Sustainable finfish mariculture will mitigate depletion of wild fish
populations, create jobs in rural and economically depressed coastal
communities, increase regional food supply and nutrition security, reduce
seafood trade deficit, and provide safe and nutritious seafood to the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;Currently, rapid aquaculture development is heavily dependent on
conventional protein sources such as fishmeal and land-based agriculture
products (commodity grains) are commonly used in aquaculture feeds, comprising
up to half of the diets. However, fishmeal being a finite resource is expensive
while commodity grains will have a supply threat in future being the main source
of human and livestock food. As the mariculture industry in U.S. continues to
expand, this work will test the most promising, eco-friendly and cost-effective
diets that combine optimized levels of different non-conventional alternative
protein sources, to establish market-driven regional feed suppliers, to apply
these novel diets on commercial farms, and to evaluate the effects of these
feeds on product quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The spawning and culture
techniques of the commercially important, high value marine finfish black sea
bass Centropristis striata are already developed by the researchers at
University of North Carolina Wilmington (UNCW). In phase 1, to develop the
concept for the phase 2 work, the nutritional value of two non-conventional
protein sources, single cell protein and Salicornia, (a salt tolerant halophyte)
will be evaluated for black sea bass juvenile diets in controlled laboratory
scale feeding trial in recirculating aquaculture system at the UNCW-Aquaculture
Facility. A second trial will be conducted to find the best diets in combination
with the findings of trial 1 and all alternative protein studies previously done
at UNCW. Fishmeal and soybean meal will be replaced gradually by a combination
of glandless cottonseed meal, poultry by-product meal, single cell protein, and
Salicornia meal and other essential nutrients. The evaluation of growth, feed
efficiency, and fish body composition will be analyzed. Data from phase 1 will
be used to select the best diets to be tested at a commercial scale in phase 2.
Cost-benefit, feed utilization, fish growth performance and fish fillet
biochemical quality (e.g., omega 3 fatty acids) will be
monitored.&lt;br/&gt;This proposal consists of interdisciplinary team members.
Project results will establish key input components needed by commercial farmers
- i.e., sustainable diets, domestic non-conventional ingredients, feed
suppliers, and improved market value related to product derivation and taste.
This research-based information will help to improve public perception of
aquaculture as a clean industry in U.S. While this project focuses on black sea
bass, the results will serve as a model for sustainable feed development to
support the expansion of marine finfish production throughout the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.