* 2235348
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social and ecological influences on brain anatomy
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2025
* Christine Drea, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Bernstein
* 02/28/2025
* USD 32,200.00

Some of the most defining features of primates, including humans, are their
large brains and complex social systems. Comparing brain structure – or
neuroanatomy – across primate species that live in a wide variety of social
organizations can suggest how the brain and sociality are related. Previous
studies of primate brain evolution have not included the full extent of social
diversity in primates, limiting the conclusions that can be drawn from them.
This Doctoral Dissertation Research project combines existing data on
neuroanatomy and hormone receptor distributions in the brain from well-studied
mammal species and generates new data from species not previously included in
prior studies, to better understand how these traits relate to sociality. Beyond
sharing data with the scientific community and providing educational
opportunities for K-12 students, generating the results from this study allows
for advanced training of undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hormones, such as
testosterone, estradiol, oxytocin, and vasopressin act in the brain, and must
bind their receptors to exert any effects on behavior. In rodents and some
primates, the distributions of these hormone receptors in the brain are linked
to differences in social behavior; however, previous work from a sample of lemur
species shows that the patterns may not be the same across all mammalian
species. This project expands prior work through three main objectives: 1) to
characterize neuroanatomy in thirteen lemur species and broadly compare it to
that of better-studied mammalian species, including rodents and other primates,
2) to investigate sex differences in lemur neuroanatomy in relation to androgen
and estrogen receptor expression and variation in female aggression, and 3) to
explore the relationship between oxytocin and vasopressin receptor distribution
and social bonding. Understanding the neuroanatomical and neuroendocrine
correlates of sociality in these unique primate species can advance our
knowledge of primate brain evolution, and the interplay between the brain and
social behavior more broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.