* 2235143
* FuSe-TG: Atomically Precise Graphene Nanoribbon-based Transistors: Materials, Devices, Circuits, and Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Zafer Mutlu, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* George Janini
* 04/30/2025
* USD 330,000.00

Professors Zafer Mutlu of the University of Arizona, Michael Crommie of the
University of California, Berkeley, Selcuk Kose of the University of Rochester,
Ulya R. Karpuzcu of the University of Minnesota, Twin Cities, and Mehmet E.
Belviranli of Colorado School of Mines are supported by the NSF Future of
Semiconductors (FuSe) Program to assemble a multidisciplinary team of experts
from five institutions to identify and investigate the challenges facing
graphene nanoribbon-based field effect transistor (GNRFET) computing system at
the material, device, circuit, and system levels. Graphene nanoribbons (GNRs), a
one-dimensional (1D) material with superb electrical, electronic, thermal, and
power consumption properties, have recently emerged as a promising candidate to
replace silicon-based transistors. The road to large-scale production of GNR
materials, transistors, and associated devices could take decades using existing
scientific processes and educational models. In this team-building effort, the
interdisciplinary research team will accelerate this process through a holistic
model based on co-design principles. The initial planning phase focuses on
seeding synergy and establishing research connections with new stakeholders from
academia and industry. The research activities are complemented by a
comprehensive educational and workforce development plan addressing skilled
labor needs at all levels and stages of the semiconductor industry. Workshops
are planned to facilitate the involvement of students and teachers from diverse
populations and institutions, including community colleges, and professionals
from the semiconductor industry. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this project, a
thorough exploration of the post-silicon semiconductor technology will be
undertaken at different layers of abstraction. The short-term goal is to advance
GNRFET technology, design basic logic gates, and benchmark circuits through
discovery of nonconventional semiconducting materials suitable for processing
and integration in devices. The specific targets are to improve the growth of
GNRs and the single-device performance of GNRFETs, to develop n-type GNRFETs,
and to build and demonstrate simple GNR circuits. Capacitive and inductive
coupling challenges, as well as certain thermal characteristics of GNRFETs, will
be investigated. A design space exploration towards GNRFET-based computing
systems will be performed. The performance, energy and thermal behavior of
potential applications will be theoretically modeled.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.