* 2235558
* Travel: SICB Conference Symposium: Daily Torpor Across Birds and Mammals: Recent Progress and How Do We Advance the Field
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Liam McGuire, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 08/31/2023
* USD 9,964.00

This award supports travel for participants in a symposium, Daily torpor across
birds and mammals: Recent progress and how do we advance the field?, at the
January 2023 annual meeting of the Society for Integrative and Comparative
Biology (SICB). Animals that experience unpredictable or energy-scarce
conditions have evolved a variety of strategies to survive them. One such
strategy is the use of torpor, by which animals lower their metabolic rates,
heart rates, and/or body temperatures to minimize energy expenditure. The
symposium focuses on recent research on daily torpor in birds and mammals, an
area that has advanced quickly and expanded rapidly across animal taxa in the
past decade. It will include research on the genetic mechanisms underlying daily
torpor, and the main unanswered questions in the field will be summarized. The
eleven invited symposium speakers represent a range of career stages, including
a majority of early-career scientists, and use many different approaches to
study torpor in birds and mammals globally (from tenrecs and primates to
hummingbirds and bats, in Africa, North and South America, Asia, Europe, and
Australia). Currently, there is very little consensus on common metrics that can
be used to measure torpor across taxa, and a goal of the symposium is to develop
useful metrics to advance the field. The symposium’s overall goal is to share
recent knowledge and foster a discussion on future research on daily torpor
across vertebrate taxa. Results from the symposium will be disseminated by
publication in the SICB journal, Integrative and Comparative
Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Daily torpor is a growing research field, due in
part to technological advancements (e.g., increasingly portable respirometry,
higher-resolution thermal cameras, smaller and more advanced physiological
dataloggers) and expanded taxonomic scope. As a result, many researchers the
world over have developed their own approaches to measure and describe the use
of daily torpor in a range of species, but there has been little cross-talk
between people who study mammal torpor and those who study bird torpor. The goal
of the symposium is for early-career researchers to come together with more
established researchers to discuss recent advances and approaches in the field
and to discuss the gaps in knowledge to be addressed in future work. The
speakers will present their research, followed by a round-table discussion
involving the speakers and the audience. Future directions that the symposium
will address include the use of genomic and transcriptomic data to understand
the genetic mechanisms underlying the evolution of torpor. Some of the broader
impacts of studying torpor will also be addressed, including the potential
impact on medical science, including induced hypothermia for safer surgeries and
safe organ transplant by induced cooling, as well as developing induced
hibernation for potential space travel. The symposium speakers will contribute
papers for a special issue of the SICB journal, Integrative and Comparative
Biology, which will include a future-oriented paper about unifying principles
and future directions in the field based on the discussion at the end of
symposium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.