* 2235134
* CCRI: Planning-M: Midwest Pivot Array for Autonomous Agricultural Sensing at Scale
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* James Krogmeier, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 05/31/2025
* USD 175,000.00

The Midwest Pivot Array is to be a shared platform for the advanced
cyberinfrastructure research needed to help future farms, both large and small,
use land, water, nutrients, and energy in more efficient ways to provide
sustainable, healthy food and fiber for the world. The Pivot Array will be a
rotating, center-pivot gantry able to provide autonomous, gigabit per second
networking access over a large area (~100 acres) so that dozens of researchers
can control experiments and receive the resulting data over an Internet
connection. To cost-effectively provide operator-free access in all weather,
24x7x365, the Pivot Array is based upon a modern center-pivot irrigation gantry
which will be upgraded with high-speed fiber networking and computing. It will
provide plug-and-play connections for experimental agricultural sensors, sensor
communications, software-defined radios, robotic devices, and machine learning-
capable processors to support research on distributed computing, embedded
systems, control of large-scale systems, networks, signal processing, wireless
power transfer, and wireless communications. Applications include micro-
meteorology, soil health, hydrology, crop breeding, phenotyping, and cropping
systems management. The work of the Midwest Pivot Array planning grant is
focused on community building among diverse stakeholder groups, including (1)
university researchers and students; (2) industry partners working in
networking, computing, wireless, and agricultural machinery; (3) agricultural
input and service providers; (4) research farm managers; and (5) farmers. The
project will capture the needs related to sensing and automation research that
impact all aspects of wide-acre and specialty crop farming.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This integration of a movable pivot gantry, fiber
networking, and computing will result in the world's largest autonomous
agricultural robotic sensing platform and overcome many bottlenecks that limit
capacity for agricultural cyber-physical systems research today. In addition, by
solving problems of data backhaul and precision field access, the Pivot Array
will allow research on sensor systems, signal processing, and machine learning
to proceed independently of innovations in autonomous unmanned aerial and ground
vehicles. The sheer scale of the instrument and the data it will autonomously
generate will help to democratize research by making sensing experiments and
their data available to many stakeholder groups that do not have the resources
to carry out field-scale agricultural research with present technology. Finally,
the Pivot Array could pave the way for vastly expanded sensing capabilities for
pivot systems that water more than 50 million acres in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.