* 2235447
* FuSe-TG: Monolithic Heterointegration of GeSn and SiGeSn Alloys with Silicon Platforms
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Jose Menendez, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 04/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

PART I: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Future of Semiconductors
(FuSe) project focuses on developing infrared light sensors based on alloys of
silicon, germanium, and tin, all of which belong to the fourth group of the
Periodic Table. These group-IV materials are chemically compatible, making it
possible to integrate light detection and signal processing capabilities (the
latter based on pure silicon) on a single, monolithic chip. By contrast, current
infrared technology is mainly based on expensive materials that are incompatible
with silicon and sometimes even toxic. The grant enables the formation of a
team, which consists of investigators from three different universities, to
pursue key scientific challenge for the integration of heterogeneous materials
is accommodating the difference in size between the atomic blocks that make up
their crystal structures. This size mismatch can induce atomic misplacements
that degrade the performance of detector devices. The solution requires
collaborative work between physicists, chemists, materials scientists, and
device engineers. The multidisciplinary character of the team provides a unique
educational experience for the future workforce by integrating many different
perspectives around the co-design ideas of the FuSe program. The team members
have a very diverse and complementary expertise, from circuit design to fully
microscopic quantum-mechanical simulations, including the development of new
synthetic strategies beyond conventional methods. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART II:
TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team is building research
collaborations aimed at overcoming the very large lattice mismatch between
silicon and infrared GeSn or SiGeSn alloys (which exceeds 4% and limits the
critical thickness for defect-free growth to one or two atomic monolayers) for
monolithic integration of detectors and readout components, understanding the
ultimate dark current limits of diodes based on GeSn or SiGeSn, and designing
readout circuitry matched to these diode characteristics and to the growth of
the infrared devices. Within these general research targets, the initial team-
building effort is carried out with the purpose of determining the structure of
misfit dislocations between GeSn alloys and Si substrates, performing detailed
spectroscopy of point defects, understanding dislocations and point defects
using first-principles calculations, and eliminating surface defects that
contribute to the dark current. During the FuSe Teaming Grant period the team
addresses these challenges using a multidisciplinary approach by fully
characterizing the structural properties of the alloys and their interface with
Si by performing Rutherford Backscattering, Raman, x-ray diffraction, atomic
force microscopy, and electron microscopy studies. In particular, the latter
makes it possible to determine the nature of the dislocations that control the
strain-relaxation progress. The team also evaluates electrical and optical
properties of novel passivating dielectrics, antireflection layers and oxides
for GeSn or SiGeSn alloys, and the researchers perform systematic spectroscopy
studies of defects that can be associated with observed dark currents in GeSn
and SiGeSn diodes. These preliminary investigations along with large-scale
first-principles theoretical simulations of the defected interfaces and point
defects to interpret the observed structural and electrical properties of the
alloy devices and the general team-forming activities lay the foundation for
future focused, research-intense projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.