* 2235161
* CAREER: Molecular-level Understanding of Conductive Polymer Properties
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Matthias Young, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2028
* USD 165,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how electricity and
charged species (ions) flow through polymer materials is necessary to support
the development of materials for improved water treatment technologies, chemical
sensors, and batteries. Certain charged polymers are interesting in this area
because they both conduct electricity and undergo electro-chemical reactions to
bind ions from solutions. Theoretically, with improved understanding and
refinements, charged polymers in this class could conduct electricity as well as
metals, and store as much charge as materials used in lithium-ion batteries. But
currently, these materials fall short of these theoretical limits. To date,
scientists do not fully understand the fundamental factors limiting these
polymers from achieving their theoretical potential. In this project,
researchers at the University of Missouri will work to understand the molecular
origins of electronic and ionic conductivity in these charged polymers. To
accomplish this, University of Missouri researchers will use a new way of making
these polymers that allows for the rapid generation of precisely controlled
sequences of molecular building blocks (monomers) within the polymer chains.
They will measure how different monomer sequences lead to interaction effects
between monomers and drive changes in the flow of electrons and ions. This
research will fill a critical gap in understanding the molecular-scale origins
of electronic and ionic conductivity in charged polymers and is expected to help
researchers develop improved materials for a range of applications including
water treatment, chemical sensors, and battery technologies. These research
activities will be complemented with the development of hands-on interactive
learning modules to make the concepts surrounding the flow of electrons and ions
through polymers tangible and engaging for elementary school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will establish structure-property
understanding connecting local and short-range (&lt;5 nm) structure of
conjugated hetero-atom-containing copolymers with their electronic and ionic
conductivity. Researchers will employ gas-phase oxidative molecular layer
deposition (oMLD) synthesis to control the monomer sequence within copolymers
containing two or more monomers of pyrrole, thiophene, furan, aniline, and
related monomers, coupled with in situ characterization to monitor electrical
properties during synthesis and chemical post-processing. Ex situ synchrotron
and electron microscopy measurements will provide further insights into
molecular structure origins of observed electronic and ionic transport
properties. This project's overall goals are to: (1) understand mechanisms of
electronic transport along copolymer chains, (2) understand mechanisms of anion
transport through varying polymer coordination sites, and (3) engage the public
and inspire young scientists with polymer research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.