* 2235472
* FuSe-TG: Regaining the Edge
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Marios Papaefthymiou, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 03/31/2025
* USD 450,000.00

This project brings together a diverse community of experts from academia and
industry to explore technologies for designing the edge computers of the future.
These computers will be capable of untethered operation for weeks or months
while providing advanced features such as artificial intelligence, seamless
interfacing with humans, multiple sensing modalities, high-speed communication
with the cloud, and robust security. Realizing this vision calls for
breakthroughs in energy efficiency, security and privacy technologies, and the
integration of computing, communication, and sensing. Current design practices
are unlikely to yield these breakthroughs, as their siloed paradigm that coerces
materials scientists, device engineers, computer architects, and algorithm
designers to work in relative isolation from each other and across rigid
interfaces has reached its limits. The research team will leverage its wide-
ranging expertise to explore the co-design of novel materials, devices,
architectures, and algorithms, relying on fluid interfaces and cross-level
simulators to uncover potentially orders of magnitude in energy efficiency
improvements that enable next-generation application, security, sensing, and
communication features for edge computers. It will also explore workforce
development programs at the masterâ€™s level that yield industry-bound graduates
with co-design expertise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will come
together around a series of quarterly workshops on energy-efficient devices and
architectures, security technologies for privacy protection, hardware-software
co-design for adaptive operation, and distributed processing for high-bandwidth
communication and sensing. In collaboration with application-domain experts from
industry, these four themes will be explored in the context of two specific use-
inspired cases that occupy different parts of the edge-computer design spectrum:
distributed wearables and deeply embedded implants for health, and distributed
autonomous agents (e.g., vehicles, drones). In addition to exposing the
potential for significant synergies across the design abstraction layers, the
workshops and ensuing interactions are expected to yield a curated data and
software framework that consists of existing data sets, interfaces, tools, and
simulators and includes examples of design activity that exercises the framework
within each abstraction layer as well as across abstraction
layers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.