* 2235920
* CAREER: What's Past is Prologue: Seamless Assimilation of Past Observations into Simulations of Future Ice Sheets
* GEO,OPP
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2028
* Alexander Robel, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Allen Pope
* 12/31/2028
* USD 780,880.00

Awareness of sea level rise and its potential to impact coastal communities is a
pre-requisite for informed decision-making at all levels of government and
private industry. However, most of the uncertainty in future ice sheet
contribution to sea level rise under particular emissions pathways comes from
incompletely constrained ice sheet models. In practice, differences in
calibration data and procedures between models lead to large uncertainties in
sea level projections at 2100 and beyond. To make optimal use of the benefits of
both modern and geological observations of ice sheet change, the proposed
project will adapt state-of-the-art computational methods from applied
mathematics and computer science to assimilate many different types of
observations into ice sheet models. Ultimately, these methods will be used to
produce gapless estimates of past glacier state over multimillennial time scales
and improved projections of future ice sheet change. The educational component
of this project will extend an existing standards-based curriculum on sea level
rise through high school computer science courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
main focus of the research component of this project is the development of an
open-source software package for applying transient ensemble Kalman filtering
techniques to a wide range of ice sheet models, enabling the seamless
integration of glaciological and geological observations with physical models.
Two initial case studies will focus on reconstructing past glacier changes and
using these reconstructions to initialize future predictions of change at Sermeq
Kujalleq (aka Jakobshavn Isbrae) in Greenland and Thwaites Glacier in West
Antarctica. The final part of this project will add these data assimilation
capabilities to a cloud-based ice sheet model with a browser-based interface so
that it can be used to directly assimilate data from a community repository of
ice sheet observations during simulations of past and future glacier behavior.
The educational component will develop a new high school curriculum focused on
data-based exploration of past and future sea level rise and its driving
processes, in alignment with existing Georgia (and national) standards in
Computer Science and Statistics courses. This curriculum will be developed in
collaboration with an Atlanta-area teacher and an experienced education
researcher at Georgia Tech, and piloted at a local high
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.