* 2235385
* FuSe-TG: Reconfigurable Threshold Logic via Flexible Thin Film Electronics: A Pathway to Semiconductor Workforce Development
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2025
* Tara Sheffer, Ohio University
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 05/31/2025
* USD 299,999.00

Modern electronics can form novel wearable devices and systems, thanks to
advances in printed and flexible electronics in the last two decades. These
flexible systems can facilitate many advances in critical areas such as
preventive medicine, environmental monitoring, low-cost supply-chain management,
or smart packaging. We have also been able to utilize compact logic controller
chips, so-called edge-computing elements, that can be thinned down and included
in such devices and systems to take advantage of signal processing and wireless
connectivity. The next generation of these smart wearable systems must now
develop an ability to incorporate specialized low-power and reconfigurable logic
elements that can harness the full power of machine-learning and artificial
intelligence. Known as neuromorphic computing elements and neural accelerators,
these added computational elements can lessen the load edge-computing will face
when billions of these wearable elements could overload the networks and cloud
computing, each demanding to run neural inferences otherwise remotely. Here, we
propose to explore and develop threshold logic gates (TLGs) that can be utilized
to build such neural circuitry for flexible electronics. Using our expertise in
metal-oxide (MOx) thin-film transistors (TFTs) and logic circuit design, we will
explore novel TLGs that will implement reconfigurable, secure and ultra-compact
neuromorphic computing elements that can address the impending bottleneck in
truly revolutionary wearable electronics of the next decade. The added benefit
of working with flexible electronics is its unique potential to serve as an
accessible and ‘flexible’ technology platform to learn, explore and test
integrated devices and systems. Since such integral experiences are no longer
affordable or practical at the undergraduate level within state-of-the-art
semiconductor engineering, flexible electronics can become a true enabler for
introducing students to heterogenous integration. Hence, we also plan to expose
students in a community college, in prime position to train technicians and
engineers for the upcoming Intel chip fab to be opened in central Ohio, to
flexible electronics via an accessible and hands-on course to be developed.
Thus, we propose a novel and timely program that addresses both practical and
immediate needs of semiconductor electronics that will expand with the impact of
flexible and wearable devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is intended to
identify and demonstrate that edge-computing implemented via MOx TFTs on
resource-constrained flexible systems is an ideal ‘breeding ground’ for the
development of reconfigurable neural accelerators. It is also a natural platform
to excite and captivate students of engineering and technician degrees to become
interested in the semiconductor industry. To this end, we first explore the most
appropriate TLGs circuit topologies as well as optimal device parameters to
implement capable logic building blocks by an iterative computer modeling, TFT
process refinement, SPICE parameterization and logic circuit simulation cycle.
This methodology will allow us to progressively obtain more stable and finely
tuned TLGs. Products of this iterative loop (i.e. capable, stable and novel TFT
devices) will be put to use in the final phase of the project to implement a
six-input reconfigurable TLG example that can be applied to adaptive and secure
logic system design, along with a compact full-adder circuit crucial for the
design of efficient arithmetic units. The third basic circuit to be implemented
is a simple 3XOR artificial neural network that can illustrate TLGs neuromorphic
capabilities. Finally, the insights gained from this work and general promise of
flexible electronics will be used to usher students to careers in the
semiconductor industry that will be expanding in the next
decade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.