* 2235078
* Travel: NSF Student Travel Grant for the 2022 ACM Conference on emerging Networking EXperiments and Technologies  (CoNEXT)
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Janise McNair, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2024
* USD 19,675.00

The 18th International Conference on emerging Networking EXperiments and
Technologies (CoNEXT) will take place from December 6 to December 9, 2022 in
Rome, Italy. This award assists 15-20 US-based graduate students to attend this
conference. Participation in conferences such as CoNEXT forms a central part of
the graduate school experience as it provides students with an opportunity to
interact with more senior researchers and exposes them to leading-edge research
in the field. ACM CoNEXT emphasizes interactions among networking researchers at
an international level and attending CoNEXT presents an excellent opportunity
for US graduate students to connect with a thriving international research
community. As CoNEXT 2022 will return to an in-person conference, it will
include a special student workshop that will enable students to present and
obtain feedback on their work in progress. This award enables students to attend
the main conference and associated CoNEXT 2022 workshops and includes an N2Women
(Networking Networking Women) event. The program and workshops will expose
students to new ideas and allow them to interact with other researchers. These
students would otherwise be unable to attend the conference. The travel grant
chair is committed to the participation of women and underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates research and education
of students through exposure to a premier technical meeting in computer networks
and communications. Students will have the opportunity to observe high-quality
presentations and interact with senior researchers in the field both in the main
conference and the associated workshops. In particular, the student workshop
focuses on providing students an opportunity to present their work in progress,
receive feedback on their work, and obtain valuable experience in writing and
presenting technical papers thus having a positive impact on the quality of
their research. The CoNEXT conference has developed into a top-tier
international conference, presenting a tremendous opportunity to students to
expand their breadth of ideas, research skills, and technical perspective, as
well as to help prepare these students to be the next generation of leaders in
the research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.