* 2235705
* Supporting STEM Student Retention through Development of a Sense of Belonging and Self-Regulated Learning Strategies
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Alison Conway, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 09/30/2026
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by creating educational
materials designed to support students in completing degrees in Engineering. A
cross-disciplinary team of practitioners and researchers seek to accomplish this
by addressing students’ sense of belonging and self-regulation of learning both
of which are known to have a key impact on keeping students enrolled in STEM
programs. These two strategies address individuals' behavior around their
perception of themselves as members of a community who are valued, accepted,
included, and involved. These strategies also impact students’ perception of
themselves as independent and effective learners. Eight modules will be
developed, implemented, and refined for second- and third-year college students
that engage students in activities centered on building sense of belonging and
self-regulated learning strategies. These modules can either be embedded in
engineering courses or used informally as optional activities. The eight new
modules will be piloted in two required civil engineering courses and the impact
of the activities on student development will be evaluated. This project has the
potential to advance knowledge of how STEM post-secondary educators can take
steps to increase completion of STEM degrees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
aims to improve the student experience and performance in STEM courses, and
ultimately have an impact on the retention of STEM majors. To accomplish this,
the project will draw upon published research and the findings of a pilot study
to develop and refine a set of on-line learning modules that synergistically
interweave the learning of STEM topics with the building of sense of belonging
and the development of effective self-regulation of learning skills. The
objectives of the project are to: 1) design eight on-line modules, 2) implement
modules for two cohorts of students in the second and third year of college, 3)
monitor student learning and development during implementation of modules, 4)
refine the modules with student-partners using monitoring data and evaluator
feedback, 5) evaluate the efficacy of the modules in other STEM courses and on
reducing attrition, and 6) develop instructor and student guidance. The project
will take place within the Civil Engineering program of a large minority-serving
public university system. Project activities will be accomplished
collaboratively by a team of civil engineering and educational psychology
academics, and numerous student researchers. An external evaluator will collect
data from multiple sources and use qualitative and quantitative methods to
discover patterns to inform the formative and summative evaluations and ensure
that revisions to the work are data-driven and comprehensive. The work will be
disseminated using multiple platforms across academic, research, and university
communities. The project has the potential to provide the STEM education
community with strategies that can be embedded directly in courses that increase
retention and completion of STEM degrees across diverse student populations. The
NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through its Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.