* 2235489
* Connecting Undergraduates to Biodiversity Instruction through Citizen Science
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Robert Gegear, University of Massachusetts, Dartmouth
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 01/31/2026
* USD 599,926.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by establishing teaching
practices that support active engagement with real-world scientific research to
increase student retention in the sciences. Community participation in formal
scientific research, or citizen science, has tremendous potential to be a
transformative social innovation for undergraduate science education and
learning. Students engaged with citizen science projects are active partners in
their learning, providing them with a deeper understanding of the importance of
science to the community and increasing the likelihood that they will maintain a
career path in the sciences. One major obstacle to bringing citizen science-
related curriculum to undergraduates is that faculty lack the educational
training needed to translate their scientific expertise into classroom
activities that fully engage students. This work will remove this obstacle by
creating a community of faculty among diverse institutions in the South Coast
region of Massachusetts that will work together to develop citizen science
projects, monitor how they execute their projects, and assess the impacts on
their students. Using citizen science projects related to biodiversity and
climate change, this project will test a model for how to shift faculty
participants from traditional lecture to active involvement of students in real-
world data collection and analysis, resulting in the development of a blueprint
for expanding citizen science-based undergraduate curriculum to other regions of
the country and to other scientific subject areas. Thus, in addition to making a
quantum leap in improving retention in undergraduate science at a regional
scale, this project’s novel educational approach will make a significant
contribution to scientific research efforts aimed at conserving and restoring
native biodiversity threatened by human-induced environmental change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research has shown that teaching innovations that involve
active participation in real-world science exploration improves undergraduate
student attitudes, achievement, and retention. Yet, most science faculty, while
content experts in their discipline, often lack pedagogical training needed to
translate their scientific expertise into curriculum that fully engages their
students. The goal of this project is to provide this type of support for
college science faculty through the incorporation of community-based or
‘citizen’ science into their undergraduate classrooms. The means to accomplish
this goal will be a series of professional development workshops (Summer
Institutes) where faculty from the South Coast region of Massachusetts will
gather to learn how to create, contribute to, and maintain biodiversity- and
climate-focused citizen science projects in their undergraduate courses. By
providing the tools for faculty to shift from a traditional lecture format to
the active involvement of students in real-world data collection and analysis,
this project expects to effect a substantial increase in student retention at a
regional scale. This project will be thoroughly documented by a research plan
that investigates the transformational nature of the project through a mixed
methods design. It includes rigorous assessment and an experienced advisory
board. Educational data collected in this project will be used to elucidate the
best methods to develop socio-scientific issues-based citizen science projects
and demonstrate a means to improve retention in science. The projects will be
coordinated and supported by the PI team through the Kaput Center for Research
&amp; Innovation in STEM Education which has the infrastructure and expertise
needed for widespread coordination and dissemination to connect the public with
scientists. The NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports research and development projects
to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through its
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.