* 2235945
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track I: Sustainable Topological Energy Materials (STEM) for Energy-efficient Applications
* TIP,ITE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Susanne Stemmer, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 11/30/2023
* USD 750,000.00

The discovery of a new class of materials, known as topological quantum
materials, over the past decade represents a major new frontier in condensed
matter physics and materials science. In topological materials, the quantum
states of electrons are described by, and protected by, topology, which
describes robust global properties that local perturbations cannot change.
Topological materials are of interest for applications, such as in quantum
information science, energy harvesting, and microelectronics. However, despite
promising lab demonstrations, environmentally friendly topological materials
that are ready for room-temperature deployment are scarce. This project aims at
catalyzing research in sustainable topological quantum materials, with a
particular emphasis on energy efficient applications. To realize these
applications, the project seeks to identify promising material candidates,
assess their performance, and design suitable devices architectures. The
research team will systematically search for, investigate, and benchmark
topological materials that are environmentally sustainable and that have the
required topological properties through complementary expertise in topological
materials theory, material informatics and machine learning, materials
synthesis, characterization, and device fabrication. To bridge existing gaps
between different research fields and between academia and industry, the project
will develop resources and activities, such as a data-sharing infrastructure
with industry partners, and cultivate a future workforce for a topological
material industry. The team consists of pioneers in topological materials
research from different disciplines (physics, material engineering, electrical
engineering, data science) along with industry partners interested in
topological materials opportunities for microelectronics and energy
applications. This research will create industry internship opportunities for
undergraduate and graduate students, encouraging them to pursue industry-
relevant problems. The research team will train a diverse workforce of
topological material industry and data science through virtual-reality-augmented
interactive learning and bring resources to high-school and K-12 teachers and
mentors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research builds on the recent discovery of
topological diode effects. Contrary to the conventional diodes, where the
rectification requires heterostructures or regions with different doping, a
topological diode is based on the intrinsic Berry curvature dipole, which offers
new principles in photodetection and thermoelectric energy harvesting with much-
improved efficiency. In Phase I, the overarching goals include: (a) A
topological materials database, which includes crystal structures, topological
invariants, synthesis pathways, and most importantly, performance indicators for
topological diodes. The database targets not only physicists, but also solid-
state chemists, materials scientists, and semiconductor industries to accelerate
large scale production. (b) Identify proper descriptors that can effectively
link the structures of topological materials to functionalities, and identify
the most environmentally sustainable candidates for energy-efficient topological
applications. Such descriptors, enabled by data-driven methods, will serve as
the cornerstone for future topological materials discovery. (c) Building the
foundation for a Center for Sustainable Topological Energy Materials, based at
MIT, that will bring together experts in topological materials and energy
applications from academia and industry through meetings, forums, and workshops.
The goal is to engage semiconductor and clean-energy industries to collaborate
with forefront scientists in academia to foster a topological materials
solutions that will contribute to addressing critical needs energy efficient
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.