* 2235244
* Identifying and Promoting Mechanisms by which Learning Assistants Foster Belonging and Self-efficacy in Underserved Student Populations
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Cynthia Brame, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Kalyn Owens
* 06/30/2026
* USD 280,806.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by increasing equity in STEM
education through a Learning Assistants (LAs) approach designed to support
diverse student populations in large introductory STEM courses. Through this
design, the project seeks to improve the impact of LAs on students’ sense of
belonging, self-efficacy, and science identity as they move through the first
term of introductory biology and chemistry. LAs are undergraduate students with
prior experience in a course who work with an instructor to provide support for
their peers currently in an active learning classroom. While LAs have been found
to increase students’ belonging in gateway science courses on average, it is not
known whether or how LAs can specifically support belonging and confidence for
students from underserved groups. This project will advance understanding of
practices that enhance the impact of LA programs for students in three groups:
women, students in racially and ethnically marginalized groups, and first-
generation students. Importantly, gaining a deeper understanding of how to
structure an equitable LA program that serves students in large introductory
courses has the potential to have a positive impact on overall student retention
and success in these courses. Moreover, providing the STEM education community
with equitable approaches within an LA program is likely to have implications
across STEM disciplines and institution types.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project will pursue a multi-staged effort within the chemistry and biology
programs of a large university to address the call for equity in STEM education.
The project team will pursue three specific aims. The first is to assess the
impacts of incorporating Learning Assistants (LAs) on students’ sense of
belonging, science self-efficacy, and science identity across student
populations in gateway STEM courses. The second is to characterize the
mechanisms students from groups that have been underserved describe as important
for LA impacts on belonging and science self-efficacy. The final aim is to adapt
the LA program to support mechanisms that promote belonging and science self-
efficacy in students from groups that have been underserved. The project will
use a mixed methods approach that includes validated surveys, regression
approaches to determine whether incorporating LAs has different impact on
different populations of students, focus group interviews, and thematic analysis
to identify patterns. Using the results from the focus group interviews, the LA
program will be adapted to support structures and behaviors likely to be
impactful for students from groups that have been underserved. The incorporation
of these changes will be assessed using instructor reports and LA field notes.
The project will be evaluated by the leadership team in collaboration with an
external advisory board. Findings will be shared through conferences and
publications for undergraduate STEM educators to allow the adoption and
adaptation of these practices. This project has the potential to expand
knowledge about mechanisms by which LA programs can reduce social and
psychological barriers for students from groups that have been underserved,
thereby increasing belonging in gateway courses and STEM more generally. The NSF
IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through its Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.