* 2235366
* FuSe-TG: FAB: A Heterogeneous Ferroelectronics Platform for Accelerating Big Data Analytics
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Santosh Kurinec, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 04/30/2025
* USD 600,000.00

Data generated over social media, biomedical monitoring, and the Internet-of-
Things are increasing exponentially. The ability to extract useful information
from this big data is critical towards advances in varied domains. The enormity
of the data is outstripping the ability for electronic systems to process,
communicate and store the data that is being generated. While historically
transistor scaling helped address the growth in computational needs, with
scaling now reaching its limits, new approaches are needed. To this end, this
project brings together experts for realizing a new ferroelectric-based platform
that can provide unprecedented opportunities to scale chip designs in the third
dimension, to blur the gap between memory and logic functionality through
seamless integration to accelerate big data analytics. We have gathered together
researchers with cross-layer expertise from materials to systems to create a
ferroelectronics platform to provide transformative impetus towards accelerating
big data analytics. The teaming exercise will help draw in additional expertise
and engagement in workshops and pilot projects. Our cross-layer strategies will
lead to concurrent advances such as novel multi-gate devices that leverage the
polarization for compact implementation of complex functions, new architectures
that harness the intrinsic properties of ferroelectrics, such as polarization
domains and optical sensitivity, to support novel security and sensor features.
and in-storage computing to support in-place analysis of large amounts of
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Novel ferroelectric systems will have transformative
impact on energy efficiency of computing infrastructure from large data centers
to the Internet-of-Things. A highly capable workforce will be the foundation of
global leadership in this emerging area. Consequently, strategies for workforce
development in partnership with community colleges, four-year institutions and
industry will be a key focus. Our planning effort will also invest in pilot
cross-institutional projects to accelerate engagement of individuals from
underrepresented communities. Planned workshops will assess the educational
structure and training programs along with process integration and technology
ramp-up to rapidly establish the United States as the center of ferroelectric
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.