* 2235231
* CPS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Robust Sensing and Learning for Autonomous Driving Against Perceptual Illusion
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Qiben Yan, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 06/30/2026
* USD 700,000.00

Autonomous driving is on the verge of revolutionizing the transportation system
and significantly improving the well-being of people. An autonomous vehicle
relies on multiple sensors and AI algorithms to facilitate sensing and
perception for navigating the world. As the automotive industry primarily
focuses on increasing autonomy levels and enhancing perception performance in
mainly benign environments, the security and safety of perception technologies
against physical attacks have yet to be thoroughly investigated. Specifically,
adversaries creating physical-world perceptual illusions may pose a significant
threat to the sensing and learning systems of autonomous vehicles, potentially
undermining trust in these systems. This research project aims to deepen our
understanding of the security and safety risks under physical attacks. The
project endeavors to bolster sensing and learning resilience in autonomous
driving against malicious perceptual illusion attacks. The success of the
project will significantly advance the security and safety of autonomous driving
in the face of emerging physical-world threats, paving the way for the safe
deployment of autonomous vehicles in next-generation transportation
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to investigate
advanced sensing and learning technologies to enhance the precision and
robustness of autonomous driving in intricate and hostile environments. The
team’s approach includes: (i) a comprehensive framework to evaluate key
vulnerabilities in software/hardware components of autonomous driving systems
and devise effective attack vectors for generating false and deceptive
perceptions; (ii) a real-time super-resolution radar sensing technology and a
data fusion approach that integrates features from various sensor types at both
the middle and late stages to effectively bolster the robustness of each sensing
modality against illusions; and (iii) a systematic framework to enhance the
algorithmic generality and achieve robust perception against multi-modal attacks
using multi-view representation learning. The presented solutions will undergo
rigorous testing using simulations and experiments to validate their
effectiveness and robustness. These solutions contribute to the development of
more secure and robust autonomous driving systems, capable of withstanding
perceptual illusion attacks in real-world scenarios. The project will also offer
research training opportunities for underrepresented students across diverse
levels and age groups. The resulting novel technology will be shared as open-
source for broader dissemination and advancement of the knowledge developed
through this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.