* 2235308
* CAREER: Hydrogeologic implications of permafrost thaw - Developing a process-based understanding of biophysical controls and educational tools for rural communities
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2024,12/31/2028
* Sarah Evans, Appalachian State University
* Continuing Grant
* Hendratta Ali
* 12/31/2028
* USD 301,933.00

Increasing air temperatures in the Arctic are causing frozen ground known as
permafrost to thaw. As permafrost thaws, liquid water can more easily travel
below ground, increasing fresh groundwater availability. For the millions of
people who live above permafrost, increase groundwater availability is
beneficial as groundwater is less susceptible to contamination than surface
water. Despite this known link between permafrost thaw and groundwater flow,
permafrost regions are often excluded or oversimplified in large-scale
groundwater studies, creating a critical gap in our knowledge of how climate
warming will impact water resources. This project will integrate data collected
across permafrost landscapes, numerical models, and statistical analyses to
generate a conceptual framework on how warming air temperatures in the Arctic
impact groundwater availability. Results will be used to create a permafrost
hydrology educational module for rural Alaska Native middle school students as
part of the Alaska Native Science and Engineering Program, to produce a
children’s book about hydrology to increase a child’s sense of science identity,
and expose undergraduate students at a public primarily undergraduate
institution in the rural southeastern US to permafrost hydrology through the
development of new courses, course modules, and training undergraduate
researchers from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Predicting future
groundwater availability in the Arctic is complex due to nonlinear and
unconstrained feedbacks between permafrost thaw and biophysical changes that
affect snow distribution and ground temperatures, such as shifting rainfall
extremes, subsiding microtopography, and shrub expansion. To address these
challenges, this research will (1) determine the role of biophysical changes on
groundwater flow in permafrost, and (2) quantify groundwater flow and
availability in response to current and future climate perturbations by
combining statistical analyses with an advanced groundwater-permafrost numerical
model informed by existing spatially distributed hydrologic and remotely sensed
data sets. In addition to increasing knowledge on groundwater availability in
the Arctic, findings from this project will enhance understanding of saturation-
controlled carbon dioxide and methane export hotspots and aid in anticipating
at-risk Arctic infrastructure collapse due to groundwater flow. Project results
will also be used by rural education partners in Alaska and the southeastern US,
a K12 education specialist, and undergraduate students majoring in STEM, fine
arts, and education to design and disseminate educational activities for rural
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Hydrologic
Sciences and Artic Natural Sciences programs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.