* 2235658
* Engaging Autistic STEM Undergraduates in Creating Supportive Learning Environments
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Lynn Cominsky, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 05/31/2025
* USD 359,877.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by identifying the needs of
autistic STEM students across three campuses within the California State
University (CSU) system and designing campus programs to improve the learning
experiences of students on the autistic spectrum. This project will partner with
autistic STEM majors enrolled on partner campuses and empower them to design
campus resources, with the help of STEM faculty and student services staff.
These new resources will deepen their engagement with their STEM fields, provide
opportunities to develop and pursue their STEM career interests, and establish
meaningful and lasting peer and mentor relationships. The number of autistic
young people seeking college degrees continues to increase and universities are
not prepared to harness the strengths and interests that autistic students can
contribute to their campus communities. This project is significant because it
employs and fully involves autistic STEM majors from the design through the
implementation of this project. A collaborative team of researchers, campus
faculty and staff, and autistic undergraduates will develop and pilot campus
programs and activities aimed at better supporting autistic students on campus,
and evaluate the effectiveness of these programs and activities after a
semester-long pilot period. A broader impact of this project includes the
dissemination of programs and activities to other campuses nationwide,
specifically public institutions similar to those within the CSU who serve a
diverse array of students, many of whom are low-income and first-generation
college degree seekers. Of note, this project will use identity-first language
(i.e. “autistic person”) throughout as autistic self-advocates and recent
research indicates that this is preferred by the autistic community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of this project is to improve the
undergraduate learning experience for autistic students pursuing STEM majors.
Not only will the programs produced by this project directly benefit autistic
students, but autistic students at three CSU campuses will be employed as
research partners and co-developers of programs on their campuses throughout the
project. Driven by student needs and interests identified during interviews and
focus groups held in Year 1, a team of researchers, campus faculty and staff,
and autistic undergraduates will develop and pilot programs aimed at improving
student learning and engagement in Year 2. Project staff will conduct pre- and
post-intervention interviews and surveys to evaluate semester-long pilot
programs, generate recommendations for future program development, and
disseminate findings with the goal of improving undergraduate education for
autistic STEM students within the CSU and beyond. Four objectives will guide
this two-year project. First is to understand the existing support landscape for
autistic STEM undergraduates at three partner CSU campuses. Second is to
identify gaps in available CSU campus programs from the perspective of autistic
students, faculty, staff, and administrators and make recommendations to fill
these gaps. Third is to iteratively develop, implement, and evaluate pilot
campus programs and experiences for autistic STEM students and professional
development for faculty and staff. Fourth, and finally, is to prepare to expand
campus partnerships to additional universities by synthesizing recommendations
based on findings from pilot program implementation. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through its Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.