* 2235569
* DynamicsLab: Interactive Physics Simulations for Intermediate Classical Mechanics
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Boyd Edwards, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 01/31/2026
* USD 299,649.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by helping physics students
develop deep conceptual and mathematical understanding of physical phenomena.
This project is in the Engaged Student Learning track Level I. Decades of
physics education research show that students struggle to connect complex
physical phenomena to mathematical formalism, which can limit their
opportunities to innovate. Especially in advanced physics courses, these
connections are dynamic: mathematical formalism can grow understanding of
physical phenomena, and the complexity of physical phenomena can drive
development of mathematical formalism. This project will develop two specific
software simulations for intermediate classical mechanics, a core physics course
that is the first course to integrate high-level mathematics with physics. These
simulations -- called DynamicsLab -- will guide students in acquiring a deep
conceptual understanding of both the mathematics and the physical representation
of physical phenomena through linked, interactive visualizations of two physical
phenomena and associated mathematical representations. Additionally, this
project will use design-based research to build deeper understanding of how to
improve student learning of mathematics in physics
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to iteratively develop, refine,
and evaluate two interactive, browser-based, software simulations of mechanics
concepts, specifically projectile motion with drag and the motion of a bead on a
spinning hoop. The simulations are transformational in that they are the first
to allow students to interactively explore the connections between the observed
phenomenon and mathematical forms without requiring computer programming
expertise. The simulation software will be developed through design-based
research, supporting the iterative refinement of both the simulations and
scientific understanding of how the design supports learning. Each of three
iterations of the software will undergo usability testing through think-aloud
interviews with individual users in order to refine the simulations and study
their influence on student learning. Mixed-methods summative assessment will be
conducted on the final version of the software using students enrolled in two
intermediate mechanics courses. An additional aim is to investigate how students
blend physical knowledge with mathematical form using analysis of the interviews
and software log data through the lens of various epistemological frameworks.
The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve
the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through its Engaged
Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.