* 2235566
* Molecular mechanisms of cerebellar ontogeny
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2028
* Martin Riccomagno, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 03/31/2028
* USD 799,998.00

The mammalian brain is composed of millions to billions of neurons that form
several billions of intricate connections to regulate bodily functions and
behavior. Generally, neurons are not born in their proper place, but must travel
(migrate) long distances to find their final destination before they can carry
out their essential functions. To get to their destination they need to adhere
to the proper road (substrate) while being guided by external signals. Along
their way they will also interact with different partners, like glial cells,
that aid in the process of migration. This proposal is aimed at understanding
how neurons interact with their environment to choose the proper road and find
their final location focusing on the development of a brain region called the
cerebellum, which is essential for movement coordination and precise movement
execution. The experimental plan involves performing genetic experiments using
the mouse, an extensively used mammalian development model, to investigate how a
family of proteins with important roles in cell adhesion (Cas family)
participates in the establishment of cerebellar circuits. The proposed studies
will combine mouse genetics with novel imaging techniques to address how these
proteins help neurons and glia interpret external signals during neural
migration. It is anticipated that the results from these experiments will
provide unique insights into neuronal circuit development and the etiology of
certain neurodevelopmental disorders. The educational and outreach program will
improve STEM-career recruitment and retention by promoting early exposure of
high school and undergraduate students to hands-on research in neural
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The simple laminar architecture and largely
postnatal development of the cerebellum make it a highly tractable model for
understanding the cellular mechanisms that direct neuronal migration and
lamination. Migration and lamination provide a foundation upon which functional
neural circuits can be assembled. During these early developmental events,
neurons and radial glia actively interact with each other and the extracellular
matrix (ECM). These processes involve the precise and timely regulation of
adhesion and detachment of neural cells from their substrates. Preliminary in
vivo loss-of-function studies identify Crk-Associated Substrate (Cas) adaptor
proteins as central players in cerebellar development: Cas gene ablation results
in severe lamination phenotypes. Cas proteins are known to act downstream of
adhesion-signaling, and differential phosphorylation of Cas proteins regulates
Integrin Adhesion Complex (IAC) dynamics. Thus, the study of Cas protein
function provides a unique opportunity to understand how modulation of the
attachment of cells to their substrates participates in cerebellar circuit
formation. The driving hypothesis is that Cas adaptor proteins play essential
roles during cerebellar lamination and foliation by regulating IAC remodeling.
Task 1 uses Cas triple conditional knockouts to test the roles of Cas adaptor
proteins during cerebellar development. Task 2 leverages these mouse models to
investigate whether Cas genes participate in cerebellar lamination and foliation
by acting neuronal-autonomously or glial-autonomously. Task 3 tests the
hypothesis that regulation of Cas function controls key steps in cerebellar
ontogeny by participating in IAC dynamics. The education plan will integrate the
proposed experiments in coursework and hands-on undergraduate
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.