* 2235243
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track H:  Bridging the Fragmentation of Information Access - An Integrated, Multimodal System for Inclusive Content Creation, Conversion, and Delivery
* TIP,ITE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Nicholas Giudice, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 11/30/2023
* USD 749,685.00

Lack of access to information in a readily available, refreshable format is one
of the most pressing challenges faced by persons with disabilities (PWDs) today.
Consider the various data representations that were shared during the COVID-19
pandemic to inform the public on population spread; the numerous charts, graphs,
and equations that flood Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math (STEM)
textbooks in U.S. classrooms; or the barrage of visual presentations that are
given in professional, social, or news media outlets. Much of the information
presented through today’s technologies is visual, widening an already persistent
information access gap that is not inclusive to individuals relying on nonvisual
access, such as those with blindness or visual impairments (BVI). The fall-out
of the information-access problem is starkly evident from the independence,
education, and employment statistics of this community: 30% of individuals with
BVI do not travel independently outside of their home, only around 11% of the
BVI population have earned a bachelor’s degree, and the under/unemployment rate
of working age BVI individuals has hovered between 60-70% for decades. These
unacceptable statistics are not limited to the BVI community but are widespread
across the PWD community, which encompasses approximately 61 million adults in
the United States. While there are many contributing factors, one of them is a
fragmented accessibility model that has only provided sporadic access to
specific information, in specific situations, using specific (and often
expensive) approaches. This project breaks down existing accessibility silos,
converging across ideas, approaches, and technologies, to create the AIMS
(Automated, Integrated, Multimodal Software) system that provides inclusive
content creation, conversion, and delivery in a unified, integrated framework
across various platforms and file formats. This project serves national
interests by advancing inclusive approaches to information access and ensuring
the inclusion of PWDs in the rapid digital transformation of content across
educational and professional settings. The societal impacts of this work support
PWDs in being independent and active contributors in highly underrepresented
STEM domains.&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together a first-of-its-kind team to
address information access as a consolidated initiative from beginning to end,
including leading academic researchers in the accessible information domain,
cutting-edge startup companies in multisensory information access, an industry-
leading hardware manufacturer of tactile graphics, a leading publishing and
assessment company, and consultants from the world's largest private nonprofit
educational testing and assessment organization. In Phase I, the team will build
on partner innovations to create a unified framework for authoring accessible
materials; converting inaccessible materials into accessible equivalents; and
delivering the accessible materials in an inclusive method that is agnostic to
underlying tasks, contexts, platforms, and modality. Using this integrated
framework, the team will develop a proof-of-concept AIMS system with a focus on
individualswith BVI in Phase I. The output of the AIMS system will generate both
a digital, multimodal rendering and a physical, embossed rendering which can be
printed on commercially available embossers already deployed within educational
and vocational settings worldwide. This proof-of-concept will be iteratively
evaluated with educational stakeholders and will be scaled across partners in
Phase II toward developing an access ecosystem that works across tasks,
contexts, hardware, and modalities and extends beyond individuals with BVI to
the broader PWD community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.