* 2235647
* Cultivating the Future Soft Robotics Workforce through Integrated Undergraduate Research and Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Wei Xue, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 06/30/2026
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by cultivating the future soft
robotics workforce through integrated undergraduate research and education. The
project will remove the barriers between soft robotics research and education
and expose critical concepts and skills to a significant number of undergraduate
students. The soft robotics educational modules developed in this project will
be inexpensive and can be easily accessed, adopted, and implemented by educators
from other institutions, especially those from low-resourced institutions. In
addition, these modules will benefit students in both engineering and
engineering technology programs. The project will lead to the creation of an
education-focused website, which will be available to viewers worldwide and
allow other educators to evaluate and implement soft robotics modules in their
courses. The website will allow a community of soft robotics educators to share
ideas to help improve the quality of education in soft robotics. The project is
significant as its education, training, and dissemination activities will have
long-lasting beneficial effects for future students who are interested in soft
robotics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite its short history, soft robotics has
gained significant momentum and may represent a paradigm shift in robotics that
can revolutionize modern industry and society. Soft robotics, with its
unprecedented capabilities, will play a significant role in Industry 5.0, which
has a human-centric approach. This project will explore innovative methods for
soft robotics education to prepare students for upcoming industrial
technological transitions. To improve soft robotics undergraduate education, the
project will pursue three main objectives: (1) bring together soft robotics
research and education, (2) develop a cutting-edge soft robotics undergraduate
curriculum, and (3) broaden the exposure of soft robotics modules to other
institutions. Novel soft robotics educational modules, conceptualized and
created by student and faculty partnerships, will be used to educate the next
generation of holistic and well-rounded engineers and technologists who are
capable of solving complex problems. The integrated research and education
activities will inspire and engage undergraduate students to work on cutting-
edge soft robotics research, empowering them with experiences and critical
skills needed for the challenges and opportunities in the future job market. The
outcomes from this project are expected to transform soft robotics education for
undergraduate students and benefit a broad community that is interested in
cultivating the future workforce in soft robotics. The NSF IUSE: EDU Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.