* 2235079
* CAREER: Mitochondrial Transcellular Communication in the Nervous System: Mechanisms of Action and Student Training Opportunities
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Martha Bhattacharya, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 03/31/2028
* USD 800,000.00

Most neurons in your brain are irreplaceable and must function in their circuits
for life. To maintain the brain health, stressed or damaged neurons must receive
support from surrounding cells to increase their chances of survival. To
communicate with each other, both neurons and non-neuronal cells called glia
release molecules that communicate their health status and elicit appropriate
responses. Remarkably, one of the communication strategies that glia and neurons
use involves the transfer of entire cellular organelles called mitochondria
whose primary job is to produce energy. While the transfer of healthy, intact
mitochondria improves neuronal function, the transfer of faulty mitochondria is
toxic. How glia and neurons coordinate requests for and deliveries of
mitochondria to ensure brain health is an unanswered question but one of vital
importance. This project will elucidate the triggers for mitochondrial transfer,
the cellular machinery used in their release, and the uptake mechanisms that
integrate mitochondria into recipient cells. In doing so, the research will
provide a window into a key process that could in the future be exploited to
improve brain function throughout life. To perform aspects of this project,
undergraduate students will participate in a unique credit-bearing, team-based
research experience focused on neuron-glia communication and using the fruit fly
as a model system. Undergraduate students will also participate in an outreach
event to local elementary and middle school students. Taken together, the
project will reveal new modes of cellular communication that underlie brain
health and will provide training opportunities for the future scientific
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will establish the mechanisms and
regulation of mitochondrial trans-cellular transfer (mitoTCT) in vivo by
deploying an innovative combinatorial strategy of genetics, 3D microscopy, and
imaging flow cytometry (iFACS) in the Drosophila nervous system. Using dual
binary expression systems, neuronal and glial membranes and mitochondria will be
labeled with four colors, facilitating unambiguous identification of the sources
and directions of mitoTCT. In Aim 1, the project will elucidate key regulators
of mitoTCT rate in vivo. This aim will test the hypothesis that nerve injury
and/or excess neuronal activity can trigger mitoTCT from glia to neurons. In Aim
2, the project will determine the mechanism(s) by which mitochondria are
transferred between glia and neurons. Three proposed modes of transfer
(tunneling nanotubes, extracellular vesicles, and release of free mitochondria)
will be evaluated by inhibition of each mechanism in a cell type specific
manner. In both aims, the health status of mitochondria will be evaluated using
genetically encoded redox sensors, which will determine whether the mode of
action is leading to rescue or toxicity of recipient cells. This research will
advance fundamental knowledge of neuron-glia communication via mitochondria and
will illuminate how we might harness mitochondrial transfer for the benefit of
neuronal health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.