* 2235734
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Relationships between diet and tooth wear in primate evolution
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2023,12/31/2024
* Kieran McNulty, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Robin Bernstein
* 12/31/2024
* USD 18,237.00

Teeth are among the most plentiful remains in the fossil record. They provide
information about diet and environment, behavior, and evolutionary
relationships. This Doctoral Dissertation Research project uses new and emerging
techniques to better understand the relationships among tooth shape, function,
and diet as teeth change across the course of primate maturation. Because many
analytical methods require teeth with little wear, many fossil teeth are
excluded from study due to levels of wear. This project leverages data across
all stages of tooth wear and characterizes the diets of individual primate
species represented in the fossil record, providing a more comprehensive
framework of ecological context, diversity, and adaptive significance to be
built for the study of early ape communities. In addition, this project provides
research opportunities for undergraduates from groups underrepresented in STEM.
The investigator also hosts community outreach and engagement events through the
local natural history museum and a nonprofit science and social studies
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to improve resolution of Early
Miocene primate dietary behaviors by combining updated methods of whole-crown
dental topographic analysis with cutting-edge surface shape segmentation into a
new approach for characterizing and differentiating (macroscopic) tooth wear
among primates with different dietary behaviors. Importantly, specimens across
the spectrum of wear stages are used to inform reconstructions of dietary
behaviors and variation. The research is motivated by three specific questions:
1) How do differences in tooth crown wear correlate with different diets in
extant primates? 2) Does wear on individual cusps reflect different degrees of
resolution for dietary differentiation in extant primates? and 3) What do
patterns of wear in Early Miocene catarrhines indicate regarding their dietary
breadth? To address these questions, a sample of extant and fossil specimens are
characterized using variables from dental topographic analysis: ariaDNE,
3D-OPCR, and RFI. Advances in surface segmentation techniques enable these
aggregate variables to be efficiently assessed not only on whole crowns, as is
typical, but also on individual cusps. This novel approach and its application
across stages of tooth wear can greatly improve resolution of how tooth function
varies over time and across the crown surface. Moreover, the individuation of
cusps can provide important insights regarding the distribution of dietary
signal across the tooth crown surface, with implications for assessing dental
function and evolution in hominins, other primates, and other
mammals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.