* 2235750
* Collaborative Research: Transport and mixing processes in turbulent boundary layers over ground-elevated surface roughness
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Marc Calaf, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 03/31/2026
* USD 268,436.00

Flows over heterogeneous surfaces and over different types of roughness have
been extensively studied primarily for drag purposes. However, very little is
known about the transport of mass momentum, heat and associated drag occurring
in flows over ground-elevated surface roughness, named e-type roughness. This is
critical for numerous engineering applications and of particular interest in
solar photovoltaics. This is because convective cooling plays a critical role in
controlling solar photovoltaics efficiency, and accounting for the right wind
loads is important when designing new installations. The goal of this project is
to investigate how different spatial arrangements of the ground-elevated surface
roughness control mixing processes and flow structures in the flow. The ultimate
question is whether it is possible to manipulate the mixing and drag
characteristics in the flow through the proposed arrangements. Results of this
project will enhance solar photovoltaics energy harvesting efficiency, thereby
directly impacting the solar energy community and helping transition the U.S.
into meeting the goal of becoming carbon neutral in a shorter period of time.
The project will also encompass significant educational activities, including
summer exchange programs for the graduate students, training on how to
effectively communicate science content to the general public, and the
development of training videos for the solar energy
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop new
understanding about mixing processes that result from the perturbations induced
by ground-elevated (e-type) surface roughness and thermal spanwise
heterogeneities. The scientific outcomes of this research will include
enhancement of the current knowledge related to mixing processes over complex
surfaces taking place when both turbulence and thermal forcings are
simultaneously present and development of new scaling relations that include the
effect of heated and non-heated photovoltaics-inspired ground-elevated surface
roughness elements. The objectives of this project will be fulfilled through a
synergistic effort including innovative high-resolution large-eddy simulations
(LES) and particle image velocimetry in scaled wind tunnel experiments. The wind
tunnel experiments will provide instantaneous velocity fields which will be used
to compute the budget of vorticity, thus quantifying the momentum exchanges. The
LES will also provide the instantaneous temperature fields which will also
contribute to the balance, accounting for thermal effects. This analysis will
facilitate understanding the factors contributing to the formation of secondary
circulations in elevated roughness elements. In addition to the new
understanding that will be developed in fluid mechanics, the proposed research
will also yield critical information to guide the design of future solar
photovoltaic farms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.