* 2235529
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Evolutionary mismatch and variation in physical activity and function
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Daniel Lieberman, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Bernstein
* 02/29/2024
* USD 33,467.00

Humans evolved to be moderately physically active, walking longer distances
daily than many are currently used to, often while carrying things, and engaging
in many other subsistence-related tasks that involve bodily movement. Regular
physical activity (PA) is such an important part of the human environment that
its prolonged absence increases the risk for numerous diseases and conditions
including lower back pain (LBP), the most common musculoskeletal condition in
the world. Although many factors contribute, the strongest predictor of LBP is
the endurance of trunk muscles. The endurance of trunk muscles and spine loading
depend largely on how much and what types of PA a person routinely engages in.
To better understand how PA affects the trunk and spine function, this Doctoral
Dissertation Research project studies people engaging in high levels of PA such
as walking long distances each day and consistently engaging in manual labor,
often while carrying water, food, and infants, compared to people with more
sedentary daily activity levels. The project provides research training and
collaboration opportunities for local community members and researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary hypothesis tested by this project is that
reduced PA generates low levels of trunk muscle activity and spinal loading
which are associated with low trunk muscle endurance. To test this hypothesis,
novel wearable sensors that measure bodily movement and back muscle activity are
combined with computer-based musculoskeletal modeling to compare spinal loading
and back muscle activation levels between rural (high-activity) and urban (low-
activity) populations to assess whether differences in spinal loading and back
muscle activation levels are associated with trunk muscle endurance. The project
also uses wearable sensors to test how trunk muscle endurance affects two spine
functions hypothesized to be associated with LBP: modulation of spine stiffness
during walking and the distribution of compression and shear forces generated in
the spine during walking. By making use of a research design where two
populations with different PA profiles live in geographic proximity, this
project addresses why and how engaging in PAs at different levels may help our
bodies, and specifically our backs and spines, function better and stay LBP-
free. Ultimately the results of this research can contribute to our
understanding of how our modern activity levels may be a mismatch for the levels
of activity experienced throughout human evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.