* 2235414
* FuSe-TG: Open, Multiscale, Application-Agnostic Platform for Heterogeneous System-in-Package Co-Design
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Ganesh Subbarayan, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 03/31/2025
* USD 550,000.00

Heterogeneous integration (HI) has shown tremendous potential to overcome the
cost and performance challenges of advanced monolithic integration technology
and effectively combat the slow-down of Moore’s law. However, HI constitutes a
grand challenge in engineering since it must simultaneously address the
electrical, optical, thermal, mechanical, and material challenges of integrating
separately manufactured/designed components into a higher-level System-in-
Package (SiP), for a diverse range of technologies. Currently, the design and
optimization of functional blocks and chips are implemented in different domains
without self-consistent links between different models, and without co-design or
co-optimization between them. This project, if successful, will translate to
sustained innovations in the microelectronics industry at-large and permit the
US to maintain global leadership in microelectronics, delivering systems that
achieve more-than-Moore scaling for years to come. This teaming project will
help meet the future workforce needs in microelectronics, utilizing the Nation’s
First Semiconductor Degrees Program (SDP) just launched at Purdue University.
The project will leverage partnerships with U of Central Florida, UC Santa
Barbara, and UC San Diego, all minority-serving institutions to attract
underrepresented students, and will also partner with Community Colleges to
develop training programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical objective of this
teaming effort is to break the barriers across applications, design domains, and
abstraction levels, in modeling, simulation, optimization, and design through an
open-source, multiscale, application-agnostic platform (Open-MAP) for
heterogeneous SiP co-design. Open-MAP encompasses three key components: (1) A
multiscale multiphysics modeling and analysis seamlessly integrated with either
first-principles accuracy or a user-desired level of accuracy, which is further
enriched by data, ML-assisted, and uncertainty quantification techniques; (2) A
suite of multiphysics-informed design and optimization tools to automate co-
design from intent to fabrication; (3) A series of co-design projects that will
be conducted to identify critical barriers to co-design, for informing and
guiding the development of Open-MAP, and eventually demonstrating the co-design
advantages using the Open-MAP capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.