* 2235224
* Collaborative Research: Towards Engaged, Personalized and Transferable Learning of Secure Programming by Leveraging Real-World Security Vulnerabilities
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Kostadin Damevski, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 01/31/2026
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by building personalized secure
programming projects motivated by real world security vulnerabilities. A number
of educators have introduced concepts in secure programming into a series of
introductory computer science courses. Students, however, still have difficulty
in applying knowledge to new programming tasks in real world scenarios. Students
may either have low intrinsic motivations or have few practical examples so that
there is limited transfer of skills and competencies across tasks. The proposed
project intends to provide additional opportunities for continued learning and
real-world applications of secure programming. The project has the potential to
prepare a capable workforce with strong secure programming skills. The project
would potentially contribute to a competent workforce to safeguard the nation's
information technology infrastructure. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team
plans to conduct three activities: 1) mapping between secure programming topics
in the curriculum and categories of real-world vulnerabilities, 2) building
easy-to-use learning projects from selected real-world vulnerabilities, and 3)
developing a personalized project delivery mechanism based on different task
contexts. The proposed work intends to establish a learner-centered competency-
based model for secure programming and to build a supporting community of
learners, educators, and researchers. The project results will be disseminated
on the project website, and through computing related conferences, open-source
repositories, and mailing lists. The NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through its Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.