* 2235295
* CAREER: Marshaling NEON Resources to Understand Wildlife Disease Transmission
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2028
* Luis Escobar, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 07/31/2028
* USD 149,647.00

Wild animals carry many different kinds of pathogens that can be transmitted to
other individuals of the same or different species. The virus that causes COVID
is a likely example. These transmission events are thought to be influenced by
environmental conditions, which affect wildlife abundance, distribution, and
health. This NSF CAREER project focuses on how changes in environmental
conditions contribute to pathogen transmission from wildlife to humans.
Researchers will study wild rodent populations in North and South America,
providing a comprehensive investigation of wildlife disease transmission across
different ecosystems. Results will help answer how changes in rainfall and
temperature influence pathogen infection rates in wildlife and hence the
likelihood that those pathogens will spread to humans. Such information will
inform strategies to prevent new epidemics. Students will participate in
international field expeditions in South America and laboratory work in
Virginia, an educational summer program at Virginia Tech, and a new course on
how to map wildlife diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will investigate
hantavirus circulation in wild rodents and model the risk of transmission to
humans. Data will be analyzed from the continental United States [National
Ecological Observatory Network (NEON)] and Chile to provide comprehensive
environmental gradients, diverse rodent species, and two hantavirus lineages.
Rodents will be sero-surveyed and demographic and epidemiological parameters
will be estimated from field data. These data will be integrated through
ecological niche modeling. Models will help elucidate the linkages between
environmental suitability of the rodent host and transmission patterns of
hantavirus. The project features a strong educational component, including an
exchange program between United States and Chilean
scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.