* 2235363
* Collaborative Research: CompCog: Modeling Search within the Mental Lexicon
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Michael Jones, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Simon Fischer-Baum
* 05/31/2026
* USD 110,848.00

Searching for the right word in our mental dictionary - sometimes called our
mental lexicon - is something that humans do frequently and mostly with great
ease. The current research is designed to better understand the mechanisms that
underlie memory search for words, which will help us better understand how words
are organized and retrieved in the mind. Furthermore, failures of this search
process, which show up as word-finding difficulties or having words on the tip
of your tongue, can be symptomatic of certain clinical disorders, and a stronger
theory of how this kind of memory search works can inform our understanding of
why it sometimes fails. The proposed research leverages recent advances in
machine learning, network science, and gamification. Word search is
conceptualized within a memory system that includes both information about a
word's meaning (e.g. that a dog is a type of animal) and information about a
word's sounds (e.g., that dog and dot start with the same sounds). This research
will ultimately inform the use and interpretation of clinical measures of memory
search as well as promote participation from underrepresented identities in STEM
generally and cognitive science specifically.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative proposal brings together researchers in psycholinguistics, network
science, and language modeling to develop a unified computational framework to
study lexical search and retrieval using a task that is widely used in both
basic science and clinical settings: the fluency task. In this task,
participants are asked to name as many words as they can in a certain amount of
time that all fit with a category (e.g. types of animals). The proposed work
will test the central hypothesis that memory search unfolds via complex
interactions between different sources of information as well as individual
variation based on our unique experiences in the world. Our approach involves
designing a gamified, web-based fluency experiment to generate a large
behavioral dataset of verbal fluency and using novel computational approaches
based on two fundamental search mechanisms (optimal foraging and random walks)
to account for which words are produced in what order. With this approach, we
will be able to evaluate the interaction of meaning and sound information, and
account for the variance observed in how different individuals perform on these
tasks. The proposed gamified web-based fluency task, combined with theory-
driven, bottom-up computational models of knowledge representation and memory
search have the potential to generate an unprecedented amount of fluency data,
uncover novel insights about memory search, and open up new lines of inquiry
that cut across fields of psychology and linguistics, thereby leading to a more
robust and unified cognitive theory of memory search. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly funded by the Perception, Action and Cognition program and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.