* 2235002
* Collaborative Research: CCRI: NEW: Building a Batteryless Computing Community through Access to Education, Testbeds, and Tools
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2026
* Jacob Sorber, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 02/28/2026
* USD 1,049,252.00

Batteries are a pressing challenge for the rapidly growing Internet of Things.
They wear out, require regular maintenance, and increase the cost of small
computing devices. Fueled by recent advances, a fledgling community of
researchers has begun developing batteryless computing devices that cost less,
do not need to be charged, are powered by harvested energy, and are more
sustainable than their traditional counterparts. In this community, research
opportunities are both abundant and challenging, and new researchers from
diverse backgrounds are needed if the community is to grow. Unfortunately, new
researchers face a steep learning curve, technical design challenges, and gaps
in educational materials. Worse, most of the community’s core hardware and
software tools and computing platforms are poorly documented, difficult to use,
and not commercially available. This project’s goal is to help the batteryless
computing community grow by removing these barriers. The project aims to
accomplish this by creating an online community research hub that brings
together essential digital artifacts and information from community members and
a collection of community hardware devices --development, testing, and
experimentation tools and platforms-- that will be manufactured and made
available to the&lt;br/&gt;community in the form of starter kits for new
researchers interested in joining the
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultimately, low-cost sensors and other computing
devices that can operate for decades without batteries and regular maintenance
will reduce the environmental cost of the Internet of Things and have a profound
impact on the national economy by opening up new opportunities in healthcare,
agriculture, transportation, space exploration, and other scientific fields that
require long-term data gathering. This project’s community hub and inventory
will expand public access to new hardware and software designs, artifacts, and
educational materials. Furthermore, the project directly involves undergraduate
and graduate students, expanding the supply of scientists educated in this
important, emerging research area. This project will help past and future
research results transition into public use, accelerate research progress, and
encourage new researchers from many traditionally-separate computing fields to
apply their expertise to critical scientific questions and challenges, like
improving the security of unreliably-powered computing devices, enabling
effective wireless communication in spite of intermittent failures, and bringing
modern machine learning techniques to unpredictable low-power computing
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.