* 2235062
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Semantics, Pragmatics, and Social Meaning of Additive Expressions
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2023,11/30/2024
* Kathryn Campbell-Kibler, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Mary Paster
* 11/30/2024
* USD 16,923.00

Discourse particles are words that facilitate the smooth flow of information in
conversation by clarifying how pieces of information relate to each other and to
shared discourse goals. This doctoral dissertation project investigates the
meaning of a particular class of discourse particles known as additives, which
include English 'too', 'either', 'also', and 'as well'. An additive signals that
the sentence it occurs in augments another piece of information. For example, a
speaker who utters, 'I like pizza. I like spaghetti too,' conveys that the
sentences 'I like pizza' and 'I like spaghetti' both contribute to the discourse
goal of determining what foods the speaker likes. This project uses data from
corpora of naturally-occurring English texts and large-scale web-based
experiments to understand how English additives link pieces of information in
discourse. By consulting with native speakers of four additional languages, the
project also aims to identify ways in which additives perform similar functions
across languages as well as ways in which they vary across languages. In
addition to facilitating the exchange of information to achieve shared discourse
goals, additives also convey social meaning — that is, information about a
speaker’s social identity. A particularly salient social effect arises when the
additive particle 'too' is used to express disagreement. For example, if a
parent says, 'You didn’t do your homework' to a child, the child might respond,
'I did too!' This use of 'too', which has been called the 'refutational use', is
only appropriate in informal contexts and tends to make the speaker sound
childish. This project seeks to characterize the social meanings that various
additives convey and understand how their social meanings might be related to
their semantics. Results of this project are shared with the public through an
outreach activity at the Center of Science and Industry (COSI), a local science
museum in Columbus, Ohio. This outreach introduces members of the public of all
ages to key concepts in semantics and sociolinguistics, contributing to science
education and raising the visibility of linguistics as a
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the tools of formal semantics and pragmatics,
this doctoral dissertation project analyzes the meaning of additive expressions
in terms of how they shape the structure of discourse. This involves precisely
specifying what relationship must hold between an additive’s host sentence and
the previously salient piece of information that it augments (called its
'antecedent'). In other words, in what way must two pieces of information be
related in order for a speaker to signal that one is offered 'in addition to'
the other? The analysis also explains how the meaning of some additive particles
could have been extended over time to give rise to the refutational use, whose
meaning has not been rigorously studied in previous research. To better
understand their meaning, a large-scale web-based experiment is conducted to
investigate the precise range of contexts for the refutational uses. To
determine the extent to which the analysis of English additives can be extended
to other languages and to identify dimensions along which additives vary between
languages, native speakers of four additional languages are consulted. One
product of this cross-linguistic investigation is a questionnaire that other
researchers can use with consultants in the field to study the additive
inventories of other languages beyond those studied in this project. To study
the social meaning of both the refutational and the additive uses of additive
expressions, two large-scale experiments are also conducted measuring the social
inferences that listeners draw from the use of such expressions in various
contexts. Using those data, the project investigates how differences between the
social meanings of the additive and refutational uses might be rooted in
semantic differences. This advances interdisciplinarity by bringing the formal
rigor of semantics together with insights from anthropology and sociology that
are foundational to sociolinguistics. In sum, this dissertation undertakes a
holistic investigation of the meaning of additive particles, encompassing
semantic, pragmatic, and social dimensions of meaning and employing both formal
and experimental methods. The results of this investigation sheds light on how
speakers regulate the flow of information in discourse and on the interplay
between semantics and social meaning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.