* 2235570
* I-Corps: Digital tool against post-traumatic stress disorder among COVID-19 survivors
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,01/31/2023
* Spyros Kitsiou, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2023
* USD 0.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a cost-effective, convenient, and time efficient solution to
address post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). The public health crisis
following the trauma of COVID-19 requires new solutions to increase healing and
improve outcomes. This technology seeks to connect patients with an anonymous
community forum, eye movement desensitization reprocessing, meditation, and
yoga. Core algorithms will be used to assess treatment options for post-
traumatic stress disorder.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on
the development of software to facilitate healing of post-traumatic stress
disorder (PTSD), while decreasing the cost of care and improving outcomes of
those suffering from PTSD. The COVID-19 pandemic has created trauma, disability,
and death in the U.S. The incidence of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
incidence related to COVID-19 is approximately 30% of the U.S. population. This
technology seeks to advance a core set of algorithms that diagnosis patients,
determining if they are positive for PTSD and improving their awareness of
treatment options. The approach involves an agile methodology that emphasizes
iteration and implementation of continuous feedback from the patient. The
proposed innovation involves software that may help those navigating post-
traumatic stress disorder through a set of core algorithms to minimize barriers
and improve access to resources. This technology may be able to decrease costs
associated with diagnosis and improve the ease with which healthcare is provided
at a location that the patient prefers, such as at
home.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.