* 2235138
* RAPID: Here we go again - The fate of Diadema antillarum and Caribbean reefs in the 21st century
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Jennifer Rehage, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 08/31/2024
* USD 199,676.00

Coral reef benthic community assemblage and functioning are controlled in part
by herbivores that graze on algae, which compete for space with various taxa,
including coral and sponge species. In the Caribbean, it is hypothesized that
the black sea urchin, Diadema antillarum, is a keystone grazer that controls
macroalgae species composition and biomass at low levels and facilitates the
recruitment and survival of reef-building corals, leading to a coral-dominated
state of reefs. The recent D. antillarum die-off provides the conditions of a
natural removal experiment useful to understand the top-down control exertion of
this herbivore, especially by quantifying the spatial arrangement progression of
benthic functional groups across urchin abundances. This study is assessing the
impact of the loss of this keystone species on reef community structure and
function using innovative imaging tools to quantify the fine-scale changes in
the community structure, the size distribution, and spatial dispersion of D.
antillarum, the dominant coral species (Porites), and turf-algae and macroalgae
on the reefs of Culebra, Puerto Rico, during the initial phase of the Diadema
die-off in the Caribbean. The Caribbean-wide D. antillarum die-off highlights
the importance of understanding how and when herbivores play a role in shaping
reef communities. This RAPID award is creating a rich digital dataset that will
be leveraged to assess multiple ecological questions and provide numerous
opportunities for undergraduate and graduate research
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The loss of this keystone species is expected to
impact overall reef community structure and function and the abundance and
distribution of coral turf-algae and macroalgae. The project uses innovative
spatially explicit tools to quantify the fine-scale spatiotemporal changes in
the community structure, size distribution, and spatial dispersion of D.
antillarum, Porites astreoides (dominant coral species), and turf-algae and
macroalgae (Dictyota spp.) on the reefs of Culebra, Puerto Rico, during the
initial phase of the Diadema die-off in the Caribbean. Based on top-down
control, competition, and percolation theory, the investigators hypothesize (H1)
a strong relationship between D. antillarum and the community structure of
reefs, (H2) an increase in macroalgae/turf algae cover starting with a non-
uniform dispersion of algae clumps, followed by the coalescing of algae clumps
percolated across the reefs and around P. asteroides colonies, which will result
in (H3) a decrease of P. asteroides demographic parameters (e.g., growth, size-
structure, recruitment) due to smothering, shading, and interactive effects with
algae. They hypothesize (H4) that the trophic dynamics of reefs will shift,
especially by the diversification of basal resources and expansion of trophic
niches of consumers. The investigators are using Structure-from-Motion software
to create large-area images that reproduce a digital reconstruction of reef
plots. They leverage data from an existing project in Culebra (Puerto Rico) that
has collected over 90 high resolution (cm-scale), large-area images (LAIs, 100
m2) since 2020. They are generating bi-monthly LAIs (8 time points) to assess
the fine-scale and fast responses as a function of the die-off. Samples across
different basal resources and trophic guilds/levels are being collected to
perform stable isotope analysis and Bayesian mixing models to quantify shifts in
trophic dynamics due to the response of the reef community to the urchin die-
off. These research activities follow an analytical framework based on a before-
and-after experimental approach and high-resolution temporal trends. Different
statistical modeling techniques are being incorporated in this framework to
address the projects' hypotheses and synergistic
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.