* 2235377
* FuSe-TG: Materials and Devices Co-Design for Next-Generation Communication Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2025
* Hong Tang, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 03/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

In this planning grant a team of experts will work together to address some of
the critical challenges for next-generation communication systems.
Semiconductors, such as silicon, gallium nitride, gallium arsenide and indium
phosphide, form the backbone of today’s communication systems. For next-
generation communication systems, however, multi-functional semiconductors are
essentially required. Recently, ferroelectric ultrawide bandgap semiconductors
have shown significantly enhanced electrical, piezoelectric, and linear and
nonlinear optical properties compared to conventional semiconductors, which have
made them one of the most promising materials for future communication devices.
This project will facilitate forming a team of experts and establish research
connections and industrial partnerships to enable the co-design of next-
generation and beyond communication technologies. The planning phase focuses on
seeding synergy and adding new researchers and external partners to the team to
work toward three integrated thrusts, including co-design of materials and
devices for ultrahigh speed communication technologies, epitaxy and
heterogeneous integration, and co-design and demonstration of multifunctional
energy-efficient devices. Success of this program will result in a
multifunctional platform for the co-design of high-speed communication and
quantum devices for future ultra-fast wireless and optical communication
systems. The broader impacts also include the highly interdisciplinary nature of
this project and outreach to undergraduates, underrepresented minorities, and K-
12 through the appealing potential social impacts of the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers in this team will explore high-
speed semiconductor devices by addressing the energy efficiency and connectivity
challenges from ultrahigh-speed operation to a far-future goal of light-wave
electronics and quantum information technology. Their co-design starts from wide
and ultra-wide bandgap semiconductors, including the newly discovered
ferroelectric nitrides and grafting-based heterogeneous integration, to spur
advances in multifunctional electronic, acoustic, photonic, light-wave
electronics, and quantum devices for future high-speed communication systems.
The outcomes will ultimately include significantly improved RF power density,
bandwidth, reduced power consumption of operation, enhanced&lt;br/&gt;security,
and possibilities to tap into quantum information with semiconductor technology.
Team members from seven universities and four industrial partners, bring
together expertise ranging from materials discovery, predictive theory for
design, and state-of-the-art epitaxy/characterization to a broad range of
emerging technologies. The team will ultimately focus on creating communication
devices that reach 10-times higher speeds in a decade and potentially connect
with emerging quantum and light-wave electronic components to revolutionize
sensitivity and speed, respectively. Through this planning grant, they will
identify the co-design challenges and opportunities for next-generation
communication technologies, create a community outreach program, engage industry
partners, and find new collaborators to complement the co-design
team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.