* 2235657
* Collaborative Research: Developmental links between teeth and faces
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Tim Smith, Slippery Rock University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Robin Bernstein
* 03/31/2026
* USD 133,151.00

Faces transform from birth to adulthood. Growing and erupting teeth are among
the most transformative drivers of changes in facial appearance, promoting bone
formation and influencing overall jaw growth. Prior research has focused on the
eruption of ‘baby teeth’, or deciduous teeth, and subsequent permanent teeth.
However, the period near or at birth, when many teeth are not yet fully
developed, has rarely been studied. This study investigates the role(s) of teeth
in facial development during early critical periods, and results inform a better
understanding regarding how different parts of anatomy can influence the
appearance of others, as well as the whole organism. The project generates 3D
models, a website and other resources for K-12 students and provides training
and professional development to one postdoctoral scholar and multiple graduate
and undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study investigates the
underpinnings of functional matrix theory, which posits that bones that border
soft tissue structures and other organs such as teeth, directly cause
transformations of bone morphology. The principal investigators use the two
sides of lower jaw to study cellular and tissue-level event in tooth and jaw
formation, which are then mirrored on three-dimensional reconstructions of the
opposite side of the jaw. The three-dimensional reconstructions are accomplished
using micro computed tomographic (µCT) scanning to detect bone, following by a
second scan after soaking half of the jaw in iodine, after which unmineralized
tooth germs are easily detectable using µCT. Amira software are used to generate
three-dimensional views that denote critical cellular and tissue-level
mechanisms (i.e., cell signals for bone deposition and resorption, and bone cell
maturation). µCT will also be used for morphometric analyses. Ultimately, by
investigating how developing teeth compete for space within a growing face,
results are relevant for interpreting variation in modern and past
anatomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.