* 2235443
* FuSe-TG: STAMPEDE: Scalable Technology And Manufacturing of Photonics for Extreme information-Density
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2025
* Bruno Azeredo, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 03/31/2025
* USD 480,000.00

The integration of both classical and quantum photonic integrated circuits
(PICs) is poised to revolutionize information communications technology,
computing, and sensing systems. These advances are made possible through novel
manufacturing processes that integrate heterogeneous materials onto integrated
circuits to introduce light generation, information encoding, and signal
transmission and transduction. These functions are necessary to achieve large
information capacity that deliver unprecedented data transfer speeds within data
centers and packaged semiconductor integrated circuits. STAMPEDE has assembled a
team of experts in materials, photonics, manufacturing, and education to rapidly
advance research and skilled STEM workforce training pertaining to this emerging
generation of integrated photonic systems. It will provide low-cost scalable
nanomanufacturing solutions, photonic chip designs for high-density information
with anti-counterfeiting features and embedded hardware security against cyber
physical attacks. Concomitantly, this project will enhance education and access
to state-of-the-art photonics science and technology for broad audiences
including community colleges, undergraduate and graduate students with a strong
emphasis in material processing, semiconductor manufacturing and sustainable
technologies. These advances are expected to benefit consumers of electronic
products with an efficient photonic integrated platform that will provide fast,
reliable and energy-efficient computing and communications, and, at the same
time, provide an educational and workforce pipeline for the US-industry to lead
the forefront of the global semiconductor industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;STAMPEDE will demonstrate (i) III-V semiconductor
heterogeneous integration onto silicon via selective-area growth method of III-V
nanowire array light-emitting diodes and its micro-transfer printing onto
silicon substrates, (ii) scalable 3D nanopatterning of infrared optical
microscale elements via electrochemical nanoimprinting that improve light
coupling efficiency, (iii) hardware systems for handling information dense tasks
secured with physical unclonable functions (PUFs) that can prevent cyberattacks,
and (iv) machine learning models to enable inverse design of PUFs in waveguide
structures, while allowing scalable process integration with standard foundry
manufacturing. STAMPEDEâ€™s educational and workforce development plan include:
(1) strengthening undergraduate and graduate education through new photonics
program offerings, bootcamps, course innovations, and cross-institutional
learning, (2) workforce advancement through the development of massive open
online courses and virtual learning opportunities, and (3) growth of face-to-
face photonics bootcamps and establishment of an annual STAMPEDE workshop
organized in conjunction with the Electronic Materials Conference. In close
collaboration with partner minority serving institution (i.e., Bridgewater State
University) and community colleges (i.e., Cape Cod Community College, Massasoit
Community College, Monroe Community College), STAMPEDE seeks to advance
opportunities for underrepresented groups in pursuing graduate education,
enhance STEM career training, and increase exposure to semiconductor
manufacturing concepts at the undergraduate level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.