* 2235043
* Collaborative Research: CCRI: Grand: Quori 2.0: Uniting, Broadening, and Sustaining a Research Community Around a Modular Social Robot Platform
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Naomi Fitter, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Cindy Bethel
* 03/31/2028
* USD 1,182,129.00

Quori 2.0: Uniting, Broadening, and Sustaining a Research Community Around a
Modular Social Robot Platform&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One significant
challenge for robotics research is the lack of a common robot with which to
work. It is often difficult to compare results if researchers are using
different types of robots that often have different shapes, sizes, sensors, and
capabilities. To address this challenge, fifty humanoid robots (called "Quori")
will be built. The Quori robots developed will be distributed to research teams
across the United States. These robots will serve as a standardized robot
platform to create a robotics community infrastructure to advance scientific
robotics research. This effort builds on the success of a previous project that
designed, built, and tested ten prototype Quori robots, and awarded them to a
small selection of U.S. research teams. The current project incorporates the
lessons learned from the prototype Quori development to improve the design of
the robot, adapt it to make it easier to manufacture at scale, and distribute it
to a broader set of research teams. The project connects students and
researchers who use the Quori robots through online collaboration tools, regular
events, and opportunities to work together. This will build a community of
roboticists across the country that can learn from each others' work, share
ideas, and allow for rapid advancement of research in robotics. A focus of this
project is to include new teams of diverse robotics researchers and pair them
with more experienced robotics community members. This will increase the
diversity of researchers involved in robotics and STEM (Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics) research in the United States. This project will
accelerate the pace of research progress, especially in the field of Human-Robot
Interaction (HRI). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award builds on a successful
previous project that designed, implemented, and deployed a limited number of
prototype Quori humanoid robots to HRI research teams across the country. The
project will use feedback from this initial prototype deployment to redesign the
robots to make them better suited for large-scale manufacturing. The central
goal of the project is to establish a common hardware and software platform for
HRI research and to build a community of researchers around this robot platform.
The efforts are strongly influenced by the PR2 Beta Program at Willow Garage,
which built a connected community of researchers around the world using the PR2
robot and the now very popular Robot Operating System (ROS). The development of
a common hardware and software platform infrastructure, allows students and
researchers to rapidly and easily share results and perform replication studies
to advance robotics technology in the country. The robots will be distributed
based on an inclusive selection criteria that considers the diversity of
university types, locations, career stage of researchers, and other factors. The
project will build an inclusive community of students and researchers using
Quori 2.0 robots, intentionally focusing on mechanisms to bring in new community
members, broadening the diversity of the robotics research community, and
ensuring they are supported as use the Quori 2.0
platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.