* 2235645
* Developing Modernized Data Science Instruction in Psychology Curricula
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Aileen Bailey, St Mary's College of Maryland
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 06/30/2026
* USD 297,988.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing, assessing, and
sharing psychology-based data science course materials for undergraduate
education. Data science is an emerging and rapidly growing interdisciplinary
field that uses computational methods to understand information in large
datasets. There is an urgent need for evidence-based educational materials that
support data science training for undergraduate students pursuing a vast array
of academic programs. Psychology is an excellent program for data science
integration because it is among the most popular undergraduate academic majors
and it is especially attractive to women and underrepresented students. This
Engaged Student Learning (Level 1) project will contribute to the development of
exemplary STEM education and data science preparation for undergraduate students
within psychology. It will reveal effective strategies for teaching modern data
science skills and provide scientific guidance regarding best practices in such
instruction. Finally, by freely distributing data science-infused psychology
course materials that are available to teachers of any discipline, this project
will empower educators and learners to adapt evidence-based data science content
that has the potential to dramatically increase undergraduate students’
readiness for academic and professional success in a dynamic, information-rich
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will lead to the development of
psychology laboratory research courses that intentionally embed and scaffold
data science skills throughout a 15-week semester. These data science-enhanced
courses will strengthen students’ computational skills while providing them with
multiple opportunities for future professional and academic growth. The courses
will empower students to apply a broad array of valuable, modern data science
skills, rooted in computer programming, establish effective data acquisition,
coding and analysis, explore large datasets, visualize complex behavioral and
physiological data, and transparently communicate algorithmic processes to
guarantee analysis replicability. The project includes a three-year, rigorous,
pre/post research study to systematically assess the newly developed data
science course experiences and determine how they influence students’
capabilities in critical thinking, quantitative literacy, and confidence in
scientific and data science skills. The dataset will include a data science in
psychology treatment group and a non-data science control group to compare gains
in data science skills and data literacy confidence. Finally, the developed
course materials will be released as publicly accessible Open Educational
Resources (OER) so that the products of this project will contribute to the
nascent pedagogy of data science. The NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports research
and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through its Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.