* 2235826
* CAREER: Elucidating Isodiazene Reactivity with Anomeric Amide Reagents
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Mark Levin, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 04/30/2028
* USD 449,463.00

With support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Mark Levin of the University of Chicago is studying a process that allows for
the excision of single nitrogen-atoms from complex molecules while leaving the
rest of the structure intact. This so-called 'molecular editing' technique
provides scientists with the capacity to effect profound changes to existing
compounds and it may facilitate the design and evaluation of new candidate
pharmaceutical agents, advanced materials, and agrochemicals of potential
benefit to society. In addition to developing more efficient and effective
variants of the nitrogen-deleting transformation of interest, an understanding
of its microscopic mechanism will be sought to inform on future variants of the
process and to expand upon its range of applicability. The broader impacts of
the funded project extend to the training and career development of the diverse
team of graduate and undergraduate students conducting the research, many of
whom will go on to become a part of the science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) workforce. Also under the auspices of the award, Professor
Levin and a colleague at the University of Chicago continue their commitment to
organizing the recently inaugurated Future Faculty Conference (FFC), a meeting
designed to empower postdoctoral fellows belonging to groups traditionally
underrepresented in the chemical sciences with the tools and knowledge necessary
to successfully navigate the academic job market. It is envisioned that the
annual FFC will help to improve the future diversity of the academy with the
expected ancillary benefit of promoting inclusivity in higher
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funded project focuses on the in situ
generation of isodiazenes from amine substrates and anomeric amide reagents and
detailed study of the subsequent transformations of these reactive
intermediates, which typically involve extrusion of molecular nitrogen. The
investigational plan of the project is divided into two themes. In the first,
the development of improved anomeric amide reagents that subvert known
decomposition modes of current best-in-class reagents, will be pursued to enable
more challenging, weakly nucleophilic amine substrates to be successfully
engaged. The challenges of this aim will be addressed through a systematic,
computation-aided experimental structure-activity relationship survey of the
reagent. The second research theme concerns an examination of the subtle
mechanistic differences between how separate substrate classes react and
leveraging the findings to develop additional synthetically useful
transformations. A better understanding of the rules governing the partitioning
of the isodiazene as a function of substrate structure will enable more
effective nitrogen deletion reactions to be developed as well as nitrogen
insertion, pericyclic rearrangements, and deaminative functionalizations. Each
type of process has valuable applications and it is anticipated that the new
knowledge emanating from this research will lead to important advances to the
theory and practice of molecular editing and to the wider field of synthetic
organic chemistry in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.