* 2235588
* Improving Productive Mathematical Dispositions of Pre-Service Elementary Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Gulden Karakok, University of Northern Colorado
* Standard Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 04/30/2026
* USD 299,947.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving elementary
teachers' dispositions toward mathematics. Such improvement is expected to occur
through implementing four evidence-based interventions in Math for Teachers
courses. These courses are taken by elementary education majors, a group who may
have feelings of mathematics anxiety or avoidance. The effects of the
interventions will be studied through self-assessments and an innovative use of
eye-tracking technology. By addressing dispositions such as math confidence,
math anxiety, sense of control over mathematical learning, and math avoidance,
this project seeks to significantly enhance future elementary teachersâ€™
mathematical attitudes and behaviors. In turn, this could affect their future
teaching of mathematics and promote productive mathematical dispositions for
their future students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will measure
mathematical dispositions using existing surveys and content knowledge
assessment. Additionally, the relationship between eye-tracked behaviors and
mathematical dispositions will be analyzed; this will add to the literature
around eye-tracking and mathematics by application in the novel context of
teacher preparation. Assessment will occur before and after four interventions:
expressive writing, focused breathing, cognitive reappraisal, and mindset/self-
efficacy. Students will experience each intervention six times in a 12-week
course. Both baseline and experimental data will be collected and subsequently
analyzed using appropriate statistical methods. The goals of this project
include providing evidence of the effectiveness of research-based interventions
on overall mathematical dispositions and to suggest the utility of measuring
mathematical dispositions via both traditional and novel approaches. The NSF
IUSE: EDU Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through its Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools. The Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship (Noyce) Program is providing co-funding for this IUSE: EDU project
to support the project's pre-service teacher preparation goals, which are well-
aligned with Noyce Program goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.