* 2235474
* FuSe-TG: Co-designing Novel Memristor Heterostructures for Brain Inspired Computers
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Nobuhiko Kobayashi, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 07/31/2025
* USD 299,086.00

Brain-inspired-computers (BICs) are of great interest, because BICs potentially
can perform distinctive tasks that cannot be easily executed by conventional
digital computers. Thus, BICs have the potential to transform how information is
processed and stored. The key electronic component for BICs is a memristor- a
device that can mimic the brainâ€™s operation mode. This project aims to develop a
new type of memristor by combining two-dimensional (2D) semiconductors and
traditional memristor materials. Such a device is more energy efficient and
reliable than current state-of-the-art memristors and is scalable. This goal
requires a co-design process that involves a team of researchers with diverse
expertise such as scalable material synthesis, atomistic simulations, atomic-
scale structural and property characterization, device studies and circuitry
modeling. This project enables such a co-design process by establishing a strong
connection among this team of researchers and by constant knowledge sharing and
implementation of feedback loops that can lead to timely adjustment of planning
and methodology in the process. Developing such highly efficient and reliable
key hardware components for BICs by utilizing various techniques in physics,
materials sciences and electrical engineering can potentially revolutionize the
field of BICs and the broad field of computing. The team building effort
includes establishing an annual workshop that allows the faculty team members
and their students to meet and discuss preliminary data and recent developments
in the field, and work-force training not only for students directly involved in
the project but also for those involved in various outreach programs in the
local community the faculty team members actively engage in. The
interdisciplinary teaming activities involved in this project will help develop
a diverse workforce that focuses on future semiconducting industries and promote
student members from underrepresented groups both in the local community and
broad interdisciplinary academic communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Memristors
are key components for BICs as a memristor unifies information processing and
storage, emulating the brain. The traditional transition metal oxide based
memristor faces problems such as poor reliability, non-uniform device-to-device
performance, low integration density, and high-power consumption. To overcome
these problems, novel memristors based on heterostructures composed of
atomically thin 2D materials and traditional memristor materials will be
developed through a collective effort by members in this team. These memristor
heterostructures operating under new mechanisms will take advantage of both 2D
materials and traditional memristor materials to enable highly efficient and
reliable resistive devices. This proposal aims to establish a team composed of
materials scientists, physicists, and electrical engineers to co-design novel
memristors for BICs. The co-design process involves four thrusts: 1) Atomic-
level understanding of the operation mechanism of resistive switching of the 2D
memristor and identifying suitable candidates for memristor components,
including the electrodes, active resistive layer and the selector; 2)
Experimental synthesis of all components in a scalable way and integration of
these components into a working memristor; 3) Device design to optimize the
functionalities of each component and yield the most energy-efficient and robust
individual memristor that also performs well in a memristor array; 4) Neuronal
circuit design to guide higher-scale integration of memristors to realize a
small-scale BIC, with the view towards scalable BICs. This project will enable
the team to develop a tight connection among the team members to efficiently co-
design next generation memristors based on heterostructures composed of 2D
materials and traditional memristor materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.