* 2235902
* CAREER: Intradermal Biocompatibility of Nanoparticles as Minimally Invasive Implants for Human Health
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Carson Bruns, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 08/31/2028
* USD 605,170.00

This research is motivated by the principal investigatorâ€™s mission to develop
nanoscale biomedical devices that integrate seamlessly and permanently with the
body, via the skin, using minimally invasive implantation procedures akin to
cosmetic tattooing. Ordinary tattoo pigments, which have been implanted in human
skin for millennia using the simplest of tools, are nanoparticles. However, the
modern tools of nanotechnology have scarcely been brought to bear on tattoo
pigment nanoparticles, despite the widespread popularity of tattoos among the
United States population, over a quarter of which is tattooed. Many different
nanoscale sensors and devices are now available. The skin, as the most external
organ, offers an optimal site for implanting them, especially when they might
confer new biomedical benefits such as the ability to sense and monitor vital
health factors. The opportunity to replace tattoo pigments with functional nano-
biosensors, as well as the general lack of fundamental knowledge on the safety
of ordinary tattoo pigments, motivates the need for more research on the
biocompatibility of nanoparticles implanted in the skin. This project will
combine the tools of nanotechnology with a model to understand how to design and
create skin nano-implants that are as safe, hypo-allergenic, and biocompatible
as possible. Education and outreach efforts will integrate this research into a
unique art-meets-science workshop and other public outreach activities designed
to broaden participation and enhance diversity in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This hypothesis-driven investigation will
establish fundamental knowledge on how nanoparticle size, composition, surface
chemistry, density, and stiffness affect biocompatibility. In order to
characterize the structure-property-biocompatibility relationships in
intradermal nanoparticles, the research team will (i) create a library of
nanoparticles with systematic variations in size, composition, density, and
stiffness, (ii) implant these nanoparticles in murine dermal tissue, and (iii)
characterize biocompatibility in vivo with respect to acute and chronic
immunogenicity, toxicity, and biodistribution. It is hypothesized that larger,
denser nanoparticles will minimize migration, while softer nanoparticles will be
less pro-inflammatory by mimicking the mechanics of native tissue. It is also
hypothesized that inert polymer coatings may provide a general way to improve
biocompatibility by passivating immunogenic surfaces. These hypotheses will be
tested by comparing assays for inflammation, geno- and phototoxicity, and
biodistribution in vivo among hairless mice (as a human skin surrogate)
implanted with different nanoparticles in the library. These studies will
produce critical insights needed to establish general guidelines that ensure the
safety of both ordinary tattoo pigments and the next generation of intradermal
biomedical nano-implants. Outcomes of the art-meets-science workshop will
include exploring connections between body art and biomedical engineering. These
outcomes will be assessed using survey instruments to understand how the
outreach activities influence participant attitudes about science, technology,
and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.