* 2235345
* IUSE/PFE:RED A&amp;I Curriculum integration through collaborative teaching and mentoring: adapting an integrated system for engineering formation
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Antoinette Maniatty, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Dana L. Denick
* 07/31/2027
* USD 998,850.00

Engineering education faces significant challenges due to rapid technological
advances, the continuous evolution of base knowledge, and rapid changes in the
way students perceive and process information. This environment motivates the
continuous development of the engineering curriculum and teaching methods. One
difficulty arising from the traditional instruction methods is that courses are
taught independently by different instructors, with little effort to underline
the relationships and commonalities between disciplines. Another concern is
related to the limited access to hands-on activities and project-based learning
in most colleges. This project will introduce several curricular changes
supported by a radical change of teaching methods and culture from an
individualistic approach to a more comprehensive, collaborative teaching method,
with connections between disciplines being continuously established and project-
based learning becoming the norm. This is expected to lead to a significant
enhancement of the student experience, increased student-teacher interaction,
increased student retention and development of student skills needed to expand
our nation’s technical lead and innovation
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to change the culture in
the Mechanical, Aerospace and Nuclear Engineering (MANE) Department at
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute (RPI) from a traditional engineering siloed
approach to an integrated and collaborative approach. The central research
questions addressed in this project are: 1) how student learning outcomes and
learning experience are impacted by the transformation of the department culture
in relationship to pedagogy; and 2) how successful is the replication of a
pedagogical model developed in a single-program department of a large public
university when applied to a multi-program department of a smaller private
college. These research questions will be addressed by replicating the
successful implementation of Colorado State University (CSU) NSF-supported
project “Revolutionizing Roles to Reimagine Integrated Systems of Engineering
Formation”. This program transformed engineering education by enabling students
to better understand how different disciplines are coming together and course
topics are applied in practical engineering problems. Important components of
this program include nanocourses (or “just in time” knowledge delivery),
knowledge integration activities between disciplines within the curriculum, and
vertically integrated and open-ended projects. We will follow a multi-method
research approach to understand the implementation of the CSU program in our
department. We will use a natural quasi-experimental design with mixed-methods
(observation, focus groups, interviews, surveys, secondary data analysis) over a
period of four years, across all levels of education, for assessing the impact
of the implementation. Our primary expected outcomes over the short term are a
changed pedagogical culture among faculty, an increase in student engagement and
learning, and a better student understanding of seemingly disparate disciplines.
Over the long term, we anticipate an increase in retention of engineering
students, especially underrepresented minority students. Should the RPI
experiment be as successful as the CSU one, it will be a demonstration that the
model is viable to be implemented more broadly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.