* 2235373
* FuSe-TG: Co-design based Wide bandgap Semiconductor Research Center
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Steven Ringel, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 05/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

The objective of this proposal is to build an interdisciplinary team that will
identify the most important co-design challenges and opportunities for wide
bandgap (WBG) semiconductors in microelectronic systems, explore convergent co-
design techniques across materials, devices, circuits and integration
technologies to address different verticals relevant to future semiconductor
technology, and attract and train a diverse workforce with skills relevant to
the semiconductor industry. Wide bandgap semiconductors enable new limits for
high performance in terms of power, voltage, efficiency, and frequency, and
could greatly expand the performance and functionality beyond Si
microelectronics. The workforce training plans outlined in the previous section
will enable students from diverse backgrounds to get training relevant to
semiconductor. The positive impact on semiconductor industry from both workforce
training and research will have positive economic outcomes both regionally and
nationally. Wide bandgap semiconductors can create technologies that have real
societal impact, such an energy-efficient computing, high-bandwidth
communications, and future space and nuclear technologies. The research proposed
here will help to accelerate and enable many of these outcomes. The development
of a skilled workforce versed in the organizational and technical aspects of co-
design from associate to doctoral-level is critical for advancing semiconductor
technologies and needs to train the future workforce and upskill / reskill the
existing workforce. The proposed work will expand three interdisciplinary,
experiential semiconductor workforce experiences for students, including 1)
Graduate Research Associateships (GRA), 2) Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU), and 3) Manufacturing Internship Opportunities
(MIO).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will enable the formation of a
center to enable co-design based research across four verticals â€“ analog/mixed-
signal/RF, power, extreme-environment, and photonics, and three cross-cutting
enabling capabilities: materials/processing, circuit design, and heterogeneous
integration, and workforce training in engagement with a diverse base of state,
educational, and industry partners. The center envisioned here will be a broad
university-industry partnership to focus on co-design techniques to enable
vertically integrated materials/device/circuit engineering. This will enable
higher complexity/functionality WBG systems, and help to accelerate the
integration of WBG with Si microelectronics. The proposed work will be done in
three well-defined phases, starting with a series of industry
discussions/interviews, and challenge/ideation workshops in Phase 1, smaller
task forces focused on individual exploratory research in Phase 2, and vertical-
focused workshops in Phase 3. The final goal will be to create a template to
establish the a broad interdisciplinary center for wide-bandgap semiconductor
devices, circuits, and systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.