* 2235146
* I-Corps:  Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) Scanner Using Frequency-modulated Rabi Encoded Echoes (FREE) to Image Human Body
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Michael Garwood, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/29/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a silent, portable, and affordable Magnetic Resonance Imaging
(MRI) system. MRI is a noninvasive medical imaging test that produces detailed
images of most internal structures in the human body, including the organs,
bone, muscles, and blood vessels. Clinicians receive crucial medical information
regarding stroke, tumors, and many other medical conditions from MRI and often
regard MRI as the gold standard for imaging. Current MRI instrument,
infrastructure, and maintenence costs limit accessibility for approximately 70%
of the world's population. The proposed technology seeks to provide a low-cost,
portable, and affordable MRI system. An affordable system brings the clinical
value of MRI to communities in need and empowers clinicians with crucial life-
saving information. The proposed technology may expand the reach and impact of
clinical MRI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of a Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) system using Frequency-
modulated Rabi Encoded Echoes (FREE). Currently, MRI systems contains a main
magnet (~40% of the cost), B0 gradient coils (~30% of the cost), and B1
radiofrequency coils (10% of the cost). In this MRI system, B0 gradient coils
permit encoding and imaging of the body, while B1 radiofrequency coils permit
signal creation. FREE is a published B1 encoding approach that allows the
removal of B0 gradient coils from a system, cutting the cost of a system by
~30%. In addition, FREE allows the use of imperfect magnets. Imperfect magnets
lower the cost for MRI creating additional cost-savings. Also, the proposed
technology removes the noisy B0 gradient coils, creating a silent MRI system,
reducing the number of hardware components and consequently reducing
infrastructure costs. The feasibility of this approach was demonstrated in brain
image performed on a conventional system by shutting off B0 gradient coils and
encoding with purely B1 radiofrequency coils in one direction. Ongoing research
focuses on the complete redesign of a B0 gradientless MRI system to image the
body.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.