* 2235277
* CAREER: Massive Black Holes in Dwarf Galaxies
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Amy Reines, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2028
* USD 434,633.00

Essentially every giant galaxy, including our own Milky Way, harbors a
supermassive black hole at its center. These black holes have masses of millions
or even billions of times the mass of our Sun. Sometimes black holes feed on
surrounding gas or consume stars, ripping them apart along the way. These
processes can release enormous amounts of energy, which can have a significant
effect on the host galaxy. Despite the importance of supermassive black holes,
their origin is far from understood. We do not know how the initial “seed” black
holes formed in the early Universe, how massive they were originally, or in what
types of galaxies they formed. We do know, however, that larger galaxies host
more massive black holes, suggesting galaxies and black holes grow together.
Therefore, finding and studying the smallest “dwarf” galaxies hosting
supermassive black holes can provide clues to the origin of supermassive black
holes. The investigator will study the properties of supermassive black holes in
dwarf galaxies, leading to a better understanding of black hole formation and
galaxy evolution. The research activities will directly relate to the
investigator’s educational efforts to inspire Montana youth to engage in STEM
and empower K-12 teachers to offer space-related activities in their classrooms.
The investigator is a leader in the Montana Space Public Outreach Team (SPOT),
which reaches 10,000 students each year in Montana. SPOT is a science
ambassador’s program in which undergraduates are trained to help teachers
present science topics in high schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator
will (1) systematically search for supermassive black holes in dwarf galaxies
using untapped multi-wavelength observations and a variety of techniques, (2)
characterize the least-massive galaxies that can form a massive black hole, (3)
estimate masses of the smallest black holes to constrain seed masses, (4)
determine the accretion and radiative properties of low-mass black holes in
dwarf galaxies, and (5) probe black hole feedback in dwarf galaxies to inform
galaxy formation models at low masses. Finding and characterizing these systems
is important for a holistic understanding of dwarf galaxy evolution and
feedback, as well as advancing our understanding of the birth and growth of the
first black holes in the earlier Universe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the Astronomy and Astrophysics Grant Program and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.