* 2235954
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Inequity, postpartum neglect, and social support impacts on stress and mental health in parents with infants in intensive care
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2023,04/30/2024
* Katey Mari, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Robin Bernstein
* 04/30/2024
* USD 14,041.00

Postpartum neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) parents are a widely understudied
population known to be more vulnerable to adverse physical and mental health
outcomes than parents of healthy infants. This Doctoral Dissertation Research
project explores the biocultural pathways through which social, economic, and
structural inequities are associated with stress and depression among parents
with infants in an urban children’s hospital NICU. These pathways, through which
the effects of biology and culture impact each other, provide key context for
understanding how intersectional inequities, social support resources, and
access to adequate healthcare mediate differences in wellbeing among NICU
parents in the United States, who are already at high risk of poor outcomes. The
results of this work are shared directly with hospital leaders, nursing staff,
and social workers at the study’s hospital research site to contribute to
discussions of how to reduce parental NICU-related stress and improve postpartum
mental health outcomes. This project also supports undergraduate mentorship,
interdisciplinary collaboration, and science engagement activities with the
public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Having an infant in intensive care is linked to
higher rates of postpartum depression, post-traumatic stress disorder, and
pregnancy-related morbidities due to the increased stress associated with
adverse birth outcomes and stressful postpartum environments. This project uses
a comparative mixed-methods approach including parental surveys, ethnographic
observations and interviews, and infant medical record data to provide a more
comprehensive view of the lived experiences of postpartum NICU parents. It
explores how embodied NICU-related stress and mental health vulnerabilities are
mediated through social and economic inequities that can affect adequate access
to maternal postpartum healthcare and social support resources. To assess
postpartum NICU-related stress, the project employs a self-reported NICU-
specific stress scale that allows investigators to understand how key stressors
associated with the physical and social NICU environment contribute to parental
postpartum stress. Assessing the relationship between the sociocultural and
economic environment, contextual-specific stressors, and mental implications for
postpartum NICU parents is critical not only for the health of the parent but
also for their infants during early development and the health of future
pregnancies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.