* 2235649
* Structuring Equitable Participation in Undergraduate Mathematics Proof Classes
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Cody Patterson, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Standard Grant
* John Haddock
* 12/31/2025
* USD 600,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving students’
experiences in proof-based mathematics classes. These courses are taken by
future high school mathematics teachers and mathematics majors. The unique
content and features of proof-based courses have the potential to strengthen
conceptual connections for mathematics majors, including connections to K-12
mathematics for prospective secondary teachers. However, these benefits do not
always fall equitably to students, and proof-based courses can sometimes serve
as a barrier to students’ future STEM careers. This Level II IUSE:EDU Engaged
Student Learning track project will facilitate professional development and
collaboration with instructors of these courses to design and implement group-
work tasks that may support more equitable learning experiences. The innovation
of this professional development will lie in adapting and implementing group-
work principles from complex instruction, developed at K-12 levels, to the
advanced undergraduate level. The project will also investigate how implementing
such group work can alleviate inequities in group-work participation. Thus, the
significance of this work will include the development of knowledge and concrete
instructional strategies that may support transformation of advanced mathematics
classes into more inclusive spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on
a substantial foundation of research illustrating that complex instruction
principles and the incorporation of group-worthy tasks can lead to more
equitable participation in mathematics classrooms. Using this research
foundation as a catalyst, the project will pursue several goals. The first goal
is to design, implement, and study workshops to support instructors of proof-
based courses in implementing group-worthy tasks in their courses. A second goal
is to build understanding of how design features of group work impact student
interactions and can lead to more equitable participation in mathematics
classrooms. An additional goal is to disseminate project outcomes and group-work
resources at local, regional, and national levels to mathematical sciences
departments and other STEM departments working to enhance student learning,
success, and equitable classroom participation. Status hierarchies that exist in
social settings often shape student collaborative work. That is, the decision to
speak up, ask a question, or offer an idea is not necessarily a direct
consequence of what the student knows, but often is an interplay with how they
perceive their status in the class as well as how they think their instructor
and their peers perceive them. The project will focus on tasks that
intentionally make use of students’ diverse strengths. By properly developing
and implementing these tasks, instructors can help override negative status
effects and cultivate positive interdependence among students. While these
principles have been well established at K-12 levels, little is known about
their potential at the advanced undergraduate level. Through project research
and evaluation, the project aims to generate new knowledge to enhance literature
and classroom practice related to proof-based courses and equitable group work.
Qualitative and quantitative data will be collected from the workshops and
subsequent classes, and mixed methods analyses will be conducted to result in a
better understanding of how to develop and implement equitable group-worthy
tasks and of the overall relationships between tasks, instruction, and group
work. In turn, the outcomes will enable the investigators to build theories on
how such group work plays out in the advanced mathematics context. By
contributing tasks and models for more equitable group work in proof-based
classes, the project will serve as a resource for curriculum developers,
instructors, and professional communities of practice. Dissemination will be
through local, regional, and national outlets and will include workshops,
conference presentations, and peer-reviewed publications. The NSF IUSE: EDU
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through its Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.