* 2235871
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track I:  Accelerating Use of Geologically-driven Engineering and Reclamation (AUGER), A Predictive Approach to a Sustainable Critical Minerals Industry
* TIP,ITE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Charles Bachmann, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 11/30/2023
* USD 738,922.00

In order to meet the metal and mineral resource requirements for a low-carbon
and renewables-led future, fulfill infrastructure needs, and lift communities
out of poverty, a true paradigm shift in the US mineral resources sector is
needed. This project provides an opportunity to merge fundamental materials
sciences to better inform engineering and practices for a more sustainable US
mineral industry. It brings together an interdisciplinary and diverse team of
scientists and engineers working on unconventional mineral resources such as
mine waste and tailings, at scales ranging from the micron to kilometer scale,
in order to address the national need for critical minerals. The project uses
the information from the nature of the materials themselves, the compositions of
ore deposits as well as mine waste materials, to predict how extraction of
critical minerals can be made more effective for a better domestic supply. It
combines measurement methods and engineering approaches into a sustainable
mining toolkit and delivers community-based workshops to inform society of the
potential for a sustainable mineral resources industry. The goal is to
fundamentally change the way mineral extraction is informed and designed by
becoming more adaptive to the nature of the materials themselves, and to uncover
new critical mineral resources while cleaning up sites and reducing risks. The
project will also contribute to a more diverse, interdisciplinary and creative
workforce for the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings
together experts in geology, mining, and materials characterization from the
microscale to the macroscale, with industrial partners in mineral extraction and
tailings reuse, next-generation building materials, and entrepreneurship. This
diverse team recognizes that most of the data generated in a minerals project is
underutilized, and so the team aims to advance project knowledge by linking
early-stage characterization to the prediction of impacts, critical minerals
discovery, the mineral extraction value chain, and the sustainable end-use of
byproducts. The AUGER project has three objectives: 1) Improve fundamental
materials science characterization capabilities by developing a new multi-modal
mineral mapping tool, 2) inform new and adaptive engineering strategies in ore
and waste management by integrating microscale and remote sensing datasets into
geometallurgical models that drive predictive insights, and 3) catalyze a
paradigm shift for stakeholders in industry, communities, and the general public
through workshops, a resource toolkit, and outreach to diverse groups for a
diverse, interdisciplinary, innovative and transformative minerals industry of
the future. Objective 1 develops a novel approach to microscale-resolution,
large-area mineral characterization with minimal sample preparation by
integrating x-ray fluorescence and hyperspectral reflectance probes, while
objective 2 incorporates new microscale data along with hyperspectral remote
imaging by drone and satellite and integrates these data for an industry-
community tool. These objectives will enable prediction of potential negative
impacts and also of potential new critical mineral resource value through early,
basic understanding of the materials. The AUGER project also will advance
collaboration and education by engaging industry partners, the public, and local
site stakeholders in advance of mineral resource site development. Increased
knowledge of materials characteristics enhances the opportunities for society to
optimize the potential value inherent in ores. Shifting the plan for waste
management to the very beginning of site exploration enables earlier
identification of potentially overlooked key critical mineral sources in waste,
promotes sustainable re-mining of waste, and engages end-users for bulk
byproducts in sustainable industries such as next-generation building materials
or agricultural soil amendments and CO2 sequestration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.