* 2235587
* Student Support: 2023 Powder Metallurgy &amp; Particulate Materials Conference and Additive Manufacturing with Powder Metallurgy Conference; Las Vegas, Nevada; 18-21 June 2023
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Diran Apelian, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 12/31/2023
* USD 48,655.00

Powder metallurgy is a topic with applications in literally every portion of the
manufacturing sector in the US economy, and therefore, directly impacts economic
welfare and national security. This award supports student participations for
the International Conference on Powder Metallurgy and Particulate Materials
(PowderMet2023) and co-located Additive Manufacturing with Powder Metallurgy
(AMPM2023) conference, to be held 18-21 June 2023, in Las Vegas, Nevada. The
support provides a new generation of student researchers with an opportunity to
attend the advanced manufacturing conferences, present their work, learn from
leading experts in the field, and interact with students from other
institutions, fostering a sense of worldwide community of scientific enquiry.
The supported students will present their posters and participate in the
conference poster award competition, among other activities. The relationships
with conference participants will help the students in determining their
specific areas of interest in this broad field and create colleagues for future
interactions and potential collaboration. This will not only stimulate learning
and training for the students, but also allow them to be exposed to new research
concepts in powder metallurgy and additive manufacturing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the student participation in
PowderMet2023 and AMPM2023 are to (1) expand career-enhancing learning
opportunities for a broader knowledge of powder metallurgy and metal additive
manufacturing, (2) promote technology transfer and provide a forum to introduce
new research and development activities, (3) promote collaborative partnerships
between organizations in advanced manufacturing and in emerging technologies to
increase workforce development, and (4) develop a workforce aligned with
regional economies based on emerging technologies across the Nation. The
conference organizers will support up to 40 successful student applicants, who
study at U.S. institutions. An emphasis will be placed on students whose
institutions are under-resourced and would otherwise not be able to send them to
the conference, and students presenting their research results at the
conference. The organizers will invite applications through conference
announcements and other means. The awards will provide support toward
registration and accommodation. The availability of this support will encourage
the participation of members of groups underrepresented in powder metallurgy
research, and graduate and undergraduate students who are otherwise unable to
afford attending these highly specialized advanced manufacturing
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.