* 2235774
* Project-ACE: Active-learning (A) based Engineering Curriculum-transformation (C) for Excellence in Equity (E)
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Milica Markovic, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 07/31/2026
* USD 595,227.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by significantly enhancing
students’ engineering identity, self-efficacy and sense of belonging in
engineering through implementation of active-learning pedagogy in Electrical,
Electronic and Computer Engineering programs. Engineering curricula have long,
highly regimented chains of pre-requisite courses called “critical paths” that
often represent bottlenecks to student’s timely graduation. The novel approach
taken in this project is to target selected required courses along these
critical paths for conversion to active learning pedagogy in which students are
engaged in authentic, active learning experiences, and solving open-ended, real-
world problems that employ professional research practices used in the field.
Project implementation in an institution designated as both an Hispanic Serving
Institution and an Asian American, Native American, Pacific Island Serving
Institution will ensure direct impact on large numbers of students from
backgrounds underrepresented in STEM fields of study. Specifically, it will help
historically minoritized students at a primarily undergraduate institution
bridge the gap between theory and industrial application, thereby improving
their content knowledge, self-efficacy, graduation rates and career
readiness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project plans to redesign six engineering
courses along critical paths to engage students in authentic, active learning
experiences, including course-based undergraduate research experiences and
project-based learning. By shifting the focus from a single course redesign to
strategic redesign along the critical path of engineering courses, the project
will fill an important knowledge gap in the engineering education literature.
The active learning-based course redesign will be carried out by trained faculty
and will have the theme of "design and optimization of electronic circuits in
modern smart-devices." Three research questions, posited to guide the
investigations, will measure the change in i) sense of belonging, (ii) failure
rates, and (iii) intention to persist. Survey as well as institutional data on
failure rates will be collected and analyzed. Undergraduate and graduate
students will be recruited to provide mentoring and other support. The learning
experiences developed for this project will be disseminated through publications
and a public website. The insights gleaned from this project will have broad
relevance for improving STEM education, reducing equity gaps, and helping to
strengthen and diversify the nation’s STEM workforce. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through its Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.