* 2235494
* CAREER: Mechanical Metamaterial Electronics: Theory, Design and Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Amir Alavi, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 04/30/2028
* USD 535,120.00

Mechanical metamaterials are a class of artificially engineered materials that
can offer new and/or customized behaviors through the interplay between material
properties and geometry. This research into mechanical metamaterials will
explore fundamental properties of active metamaterials never realized before by
traditional research methods, potentially leading to the invention of novel
electronic material systems that operate autonomously and serve various roles in
engineering and medical applications. Specifically, this Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) project will establish a new field of mechanical
metamaterial electronics (meta-mechanotronics). This field couples the
engineering domains of mechanical metamaterials, digital electronics, and nano
energy harvesting. The generated knowledge will provide new road maps for design
and discovery of self-powered autonomous engineered materials and future
mechanical metamaterial computers. This CAREER award will accelerate the
education of undergraduate and graduate researchers at the intersection of
electronic materials, structural mechanics, green energy harvesting, and machine
learning. An innovative outreach program is planned for K-12 students that will
inspire them to pursue careers in STEM. Under the “train-the-trainer” model,
members of multiple ASCE Student Chapters will be trained and deployed with
educational/development kits to educate thousands of middle and high school
students nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project
is to broaden our understanding of the science of designing active electronic
mechanical metamaterials with sensing, triboelectric energy harvesting,
actuation, and information processing functionalities. These material systems
will be composed of rationally designed micro/nano structures with built-in
contact-electrification mechanisms to realize such advanced functionalities. A
computational data-centric framework based on topology optimization and machine
learning will be created to explore new design possibilities for multi-layered
and multi-material electronic mechanical metamaterials. Numerical and
theoretical models will be developed to characterize the mechanical and
electrical behavior of the explored mechanical metamaterials. Various rational
designs for the triboelectric layers, material and surface optimization methods,
and additive manufacturing processes will be investigated to increase the power
output of the electronic mechanical metamaterials to levels on the order of
100-500 µW. With these power output levels, electronic mechanical metamaterials
can potentially be used for green energy harvesting to power low-power
electronic devices. The electrical signals generated by these materials systems
under external stimuli will be used to create self-powered mechanoelectrical-
logic gates for digital computation. Digital information storage will be
demonstrated by incorporating the data into the self-recovering unit cell
patterns. Meta-mechanotronics-inspired digital circuits will be designed to
perform basic computations (addition, subtraction, multiplication, and
division). The real‐life applications of meta-mechanotronics will be
demonstrated by creating metamaterial orthopedic implants with diagnostic
functionality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.