* 2235041
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Social-Emotional Analysis of the Language Environment (SEAL): Key Word &amp; Phrase Spotting in Early Childhood Care Settings
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Tony Albano, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 05/31/2024
* USD 174,362.00

o This project is jointly funded by the Developmental Science Program and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Children’s success in school and in life depends
on whether they have learned certain social and emotional skills in their early
years. To build teachers’ capacity to promote social emotional learning, there
is a need for tools that provide data-based feedback to teachers on talk that
focuses on social-emotional learning. This project creates such a tool, the
Social Emotional Analysis of the Language Environment (SEAL). SEAL uses advanced
speech processing algorithms to automatically capture a key element of teacher
practice in early childhood education classrooms known to support social
emotional learning: their use of language, and specifically, words and phrases
within everyday interactions that tap into social emotional learning. This
automatic measurement of teachers’ social-emotional talk from audio recordings
in toddler classrooms could represent a transformative approach to help teachers
better support children’s social-emotional development (e.g., understanding,
managing, and expressing emotions). In turn, such a tool could better ensure
young children gain the skills that ensure they are ready for school,
relationships, and life. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project activities to demonstrate
proof-of-concept for SEAL include: (1) developing a social and emotional word
and phrase bank, informed by a national survey and focus groups with early
childhood professionals and input from an expert advisory panel; (2) exploring
teacher audio data to refine existing speech processing algorithms to detect
classroom adult social emotional key words and phrases; and (3) examining
initial validity of the word and phrase bank by comparing human transcription to
a baseline algorithm to automatically detected speech data. This probe study
serves to create evidence that a future fully formulated SEAL solution could
yield data that will be easy to access and interpret and can be used by
individual teachers, coaches, and early childhood programs to improve practices
aimed at promoting child social emotional outcomes. Eventually, like an
automated monitor for counting steps, we envision SEAL could be used by teachers
themselves to monitor classroom social emotional talk and build capacity to
improve social emotional competence in young children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.