* 2235356
* CAREER: Near-Critical Heat Transfer
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2022,05/31/2025
* Brian Fronk, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 05/31/2025
* USD 329,032.00

At high temperatures and pressures, fluids can exist above a critical point
where they can transition between “liquid-like” and “gas-like” properties
without undergoing a phase change (such as the formation of bubbles or
droplets). Recently, supercritical fluids have gained significant interest as
working fluids in highly efficient engines, advanced aerospace applications, and
electronics cooling. Supercritical fluids near the critical point have unique
thermophysical properties that often provide enhanced heat transfer, but these
properties can also lead to damaging flow instabilities and degraded heat
transfer during certain operating conditions. The cause and control of these
damaging near-critical degradations and oscillations are not well understood.
This project will use a novel experimental approach to understand the physical
phenomena that govern the heat transfer properties of near-critical fluids in
order to predict and control their potentially damaging effects. In addition to
the research objectives, this work will be linked with the development of a
unique educational program dedicated to developing globally competent engineers
prepared to bring supercritical technology to the
market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this research will use fiber optic
sensors to measure transient convective heat transfer of supercritical fluids,
and use the data to develop transient models of conjugate heat transfer in
tailored, non-homogenous, heat exchanger substrates. This proposed work will
provide fundamental insights on the relationship between buoyancy, flow
acceleration, and varying thermophysical properties on the unsteady convective
heat transfer coefficient of supercritical fluids, and new information on the
evolution of high- and low-frequency flow oscillations during transients of
supercritical fluids. Established theory and models developed for steady state
conditions will be evaluated using experiments more representative of actual
supercritical system operation. Data will be used to guide the modeling of
conjugate effects in non-homogeneous substrates, laying the groundwork for
components fabricated through new manufacturing techniques. Finally, the
demonstration of the fiber optic instruments for distributed high accuracy heat
transfer experiments is of value to the broader thermal transport
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.