* 2235863
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track H: Advancement of Driving Technology for Vocational Enablement
* TIP,ITE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Kris Geroux, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 11/30/2023
* USD 750,000.00

The Advancement of Driving Technology for Vocational Enablement project is a
multi-organizational and multi-disciplinary effort to improve the quality of
life of Persons with Disabilities (PWDs) through independent driving, resulting
in meaningful employment and inclusivity. Access to transportation is essential
for obtaining employment, education, healthcare, and social interaction, yet
remains a significant barrier for PWDs, particularly in rural America. This
barrier is further exacerbated for some underrepresented groups, such as African
Americans who experience higher strain to obtain the same standard of living as
a similar household member without a disability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ability to obtain, maintain, and have expanded competitive integrated employment
options are limited for PWDs who are unable to independently drive, resulting in
reduced quality of life, limited community engagement, and lack of meaningful
employment. This project will develop advanced driving technology that will
serve to cultivate the skillset and ability to independently drive. A consortium
of researchers, industry leaders, educators, PWDs, and various stakeholders will
produce a proof of concept in this Convergence Accelerator Phase I project, to
further advance science, prosperity, and welfare of PWDs, who represent the
largest minority group in the United States. This project remains deeply rooted
in universal design, culturally responsive intervention, and embraces a diverse
community in discipline and in representation to bring forward an innovative
solution for acquiring the skills necessary to become an independent driver. The
innovative outcomes of this project are likely to transcend PWDs by offering
advanced technological and educational opportunities for all individuals to
become skilled, independent drivers. Additionally, this project will create a
diverse and skilled workforce that includes PWDsâ€”advancing the economic
prosperity and social welfare of the United States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Convergence Accelerator program addresses national-scale societal challenges
through use-inspired convergence research. In Phase I, this project will focus
on one of the most important skills necessary to obtain and maintain competitive
integrated employment for PWDs: independent driving. Within this planning phase,
the diverse team will participate in the innovative convergence accelerator
curriculum and will plan and apply this model to the development of technology
to support independent driving for PWDs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed team
in Phase I consists of experts in behavioral psychology, rehabilitation
counseling, engineering with a focus in human-center computing, virtual reality,
machine learning, autonomous vehicles, and partnerships with centers and
industries surrounding disabilities, technology, robotics, and artificial
intelligence. This diverse group of expertise offers a unique intersection of
skills and resources to meet the demands of the project. During Phase I, the
team hopes to accomplish a handful of deliverables lending themselves directly
to the development of scalable technology to meet the independent driving needs
of PWDs. This project outlined five primary deliverables to meet the demands of
the Phase I Convergence Accelerator. First, the team will work to explicitly
identify the gaps in the existing research and technology for independent
driving. A large part of the Phase I year will be spend on formalizing
agreements with additional partnerships and stakeholders needed to support
universal design and culturally responsive intervention. In this vein, partners
and stakeholders in the disability community will be vital for ensuring
diversity, equity, and inclusion as part of the planning, the science, and all
other programmatic aspects of the project. While the initial steps will be
ongoing across the life of the project, it is the data and information collected
from these steps that will support the team in determining the best innovative
and culturally responsive solution to meet PWDs independent driving needs. This
will culminate in a final proof of concept and pitch of an idea that will
actionably address PWDs becoming independent drivers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.