* 2235135
* CyberCorps Scholarship for Service: Graduating Workforce-Ready Cybersecurity Professionals
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Sergio Salinas Monroy, Wichita State University
* Continuing Grant
* Li Yang
* 12/31/2027
* USD 898,245.00

The US economic competitiveness and security depend on the nation's ability to
produce enough cybersecurity professionals who can secure its
cyberinfrastructure. This project will award scholarships to undergraduate and
graduate students enrolled in cybersecurity programs at Wichita State University
(WSU). Significant efforts will be made to recruit and retain outstanding
students, including those from underrepresented groups. As a result, the project
will provide a steady stream of diverse workforce-ready cybersecurity
professionals for government service. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;WSU is the only
urban-serving research institution in Kansas and is designated as a National
Security Agency and Department of Homeland Security Center of Academic
Excellence in Cyber Defense Education. WSU offers strong cybersecurity graduate
and undergraduate programs that accommodate students with diverse academic
backgrounds. Scholarship recipients will receive individualized career advising
focused towards transitioning to a government job and participate in mentored
research while completing a cybersecurity degree. Students will have an
opportunity to conduct research in areas such as biometrics, cyberphysical
system security, mobile security, and wireless network security. The project
team will leverage its existing close ties with minority-oriented and security-
oriented student organizations on campus, as well as with community colleges and
local high schools, to recruit students. The project also includes retention
specialists who will develop support structures, including parent mentoring, to
tackle challenges faced by students from underrepresented groups. To further
improve the inclusivity of our programs, the project will train participating
faculty on the academic challenges faced by students from underrepresented
groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the CyberCorps®
Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which funds proposals establishing or
continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity and aligns with the U.S.
National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity workforce. Following
graduation, scholarship recipients are required to work in cybersecurity for a
federal, state, local, or tribal Government organization for the same duration
as their scholarship support. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.