* 2235028
* CAREER: Searching for New Physics Phenomena and New Audiences
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Lawrence Lee, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Kaushik De
* 05/31/2028
* USD 200,000.00

The Standard Model of Particle Physics is an unprecedentedly successful theory
of the universe at the smallest scales. However, there exist numerous reasons
the theory is unsatisfactory and incomplete. In order to gain insight into these
issues, the group led by PI Prof. Lawrence Lee at the University of Tennessee
studies the particle collisions at the Large Hadron Collider (LHC) at CERN
outside of Geneva, Switzerland. As the facility able to probe the largest energy
densities in the world, the LHC is able to probe the smallest length scales in
controlled experiments. In careful analysis of the data from the collisions at
the LHC, the group searches for deviations from Standard Model predictions,
particularly in the form of new unknown particles. Finding such a new particle
would help explain the shortcomings of our current understanding and guide us to
a more complete theory of the universe. Given that no significant deviation from
the Standard Model has been observed at the LHC yet, finding any new physics
phenomena will require new techniques and new data. This project comprises data
analyses searching for new particles Beyond the Standard Model in new and
innovative ways, upgrading the CMS experiment at the LHC to continue to collect
data for decades to come, and communicating this work to the public through fun
and educational outreach programs. This educational component includes reaching
the public with physics-inspired electronic music through Lee's ColliderScope
project and the development of a particle physics educational exhibition in
collaboration with a local college of design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI Lee's
group works primarily as members of the Compact Muon Solenoid (CMS) Experiment
at the LHC. This project has four main objectives. In the search for new physics
phenomena, the group will search for new long-lived particles at high masses
that travel macroscopic distances into the CMS detector before decaying.
Directly looking for the interactions of these particles with the detector, they
can be discovered via anomalously large ionization signatures. This work will
focus on currently existing data and new data as it's collected. To continue to
take increased data in the environment of the High-Luminosity LHC, the group
will also work on upgrading the CMS detector itself in the context of the
silicon tracker upgrade that provides new track-based triggering abilities to
CMS. In particular, the group is involved in the construction, readout, and
control software for this upgrade. To communicate the goals of the LHC with the
general public, the educational components to this project involve engineering
"lissajous" music in which particle physics imagery is encoded in audio
waveforms that can be visualized on oscilloscopes, and an educational exhibition
explaining cosmic ray physics to K-12 students as well as training students of
design in the technical skills common to particle
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.