* 2235576
* Collaborative Research: Integrating Sociotechnical Issues into Electrical Engineering Starting with Circuits
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Susan Lord, University of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 04/30/2026
* USD 224,971.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by enhancing the preparation of
engineering students through helping them address sociotechnical issues in
electrical engineering (EE). Typically, the undergraduate engineering curriculum
emphasizes purely technical topics, but real engineering problems involve
complex social issues and require both technical and social expertise. Most
engineering instructors have been educated with a deep technical focus, they
have little experience outside of engineering, and they feel ill-equipped to
integrate non-technical topics. This project aims to help engineering
instructors integrate sociotechnical issues into their courses by developing
four modules for an introductory circuits course. Each module is linked to
technical circuits topics, and each emphasizes a different sociotechnical issue
such as the conflict minerals (minerals sourced from an area with armed conflict
that impacts the trade of those minerals) needed for electric circuits
components and repurposing of electric vehicle batteries. Circuits is typically
the first course in the EE curriculum, and it enrolls students from many
disciplines. Thus, inspiring engineering instructors to implement these
sociotechnical modules in introductory circuits courses has the potential for
far-reaching influence on the field. The modules are intended to be implemented
in the middle years of the college experience, when students are forming their
engineering identities, and they should help students achieve key accreditation
outcomes related to social and global perspectives. This project hopes to impact
the professional formation of over 900 students in 14 courses across six
institutions. Including sociotechnical issues in a fundamental course such as
circuits sends a powerful message to students about what is valued by the field,
and that message can have a significant impact on students, particularly those
who have been historically marginalized in EE including women and students of
color.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A sociotechnical module on conflict minerals has
already been developed by one of the Principal Investigators (PIs) and tested in
a circuits course taught by that PI. A cohort of EE graduate students will be
recruited to assist in developing other modules using principles of backwards
course design to create learning objectives, instructional activities, and post-
class assessments with homework and exam questions for each module. These
graduate students will be better prepared to teach EE courses that promote a
sense of social responsibility. After pre-piloting each module at a small
private institution (University of San Diego) and piloting it at a large public
research institution (University of Michigan; UM), the use of these modules will
be scaled up to other large circuits courses at UM and at four other
institutions. Student feedback will be used to refine the modules and explore
the experiences of the engineering instructors and students who engage with
them. Assessment will focus on the effectiveness of the modules at reinforcing
technical content, promoting students’ sense of social responsibility, and
disrupting students’ adherence to normative cultural beliefs. Successfully
implementing these sociotechnical modules in a range of different contexts
should enhance the likelihood of widespread adoption and will provide a model
for development of sociotechnical modules in traditional engineering classes
which can be adapted by other instructors. The NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through its Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.