* 2235061
* Conference: An International Workshop on the Future of Geodetic-geophysical Observational Networks in Antarctica
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Richard Aster, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Kelly Brunt
* 08/31/2023
* USD 32,557.00

This project will support a planning conference for Antarctic geodetic and
geophysical observational networks and the associated research. The conference
will be held in Fort Collins, Colorado, in late September 2022. The conference
is expected to draw researchers from both the US and international research
communities; this project will provide support to the participating US
scientists. To broaden participation in the field, this project will focus on
supporting early-career researchers and researchers who have not participated in
fieldwork in Antarctica as of yet. A white paper will be produced following the
conference, which summarizes the proceedings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
conference, entitled “An international workshop on the future of geodetic-
geophysical observational networks in Antarctica”, has five principal goals: 1)
to review the current status of, and recent results from, the existing
observational networks; 2) to identify the spatial and temporal shortcomings of
the existing networks; 3) to construct ideas for leveraging logistics for future
national and international projects; 4) to envision new directions to improve
the reliability and duration of the networks; and 5) to form strategies to
attract and promote a future generation of polar geoscientists with a focus on
diversity. The conference is organized by members of a subcommittee of the
Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research. This linkage ensures that the
conference meets international objectives, including improving the cooperation
between observers and modelers and improving the cooperation between scientists
making in-situ geodetic and geophysical measurements in Antarctica. The
conference is coordinated with the West Antarctic Ice Sheet Workshop, to be held
in Estes Park, Colorado, 26 – 29 September 2022, minimizing travel for some
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.