* 2235208
* FuSe-TG: Co-Design of Germanium Oxide-based Semiconductors from Deposition to Devices
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Ramana Chintalapalle, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 03/31/2025
* USD 460,000.00

Non-Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Future of Semiconductors (FuSe)
project focuses on developing research capabilities and collaborations centered
around germanium oxide-based semiconductors that are of interest for
applications such as power electronics and infrared detection. The grant enables
the formation of a team, which consists of 12 investigators from five different
universities representing five disciplines within physical science and
engineering, to address fundamental scientific and engineering challenges
associated with material design, manufacturing, property control and device
integration, activities required to move germanium oxide semiconductors from
academic laboratories into society-benefiting technologies including electric
vehicles to autonomous systems. In parallel, the team coordinates activities to
make progress on the development of new materials and devices through co-design
principles. Concurrent with these activities, the project pilots workforce
development initiatives to help bolster the United States technical workforce in
the semiconductor sector. These include providing students from traditionally
under-represented groups with summer research experiences focused on oxide
semiconductors and creating educational and training opportunities for students
at technical-focused colleges in geographic proximity to the teaming
institutions. Additionally, the team builds inter-institutional and industrial
partnerships to ensure the research and workforce development activities are
aligned with national technological needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project applies a convergent and team-based
approach to plan the realization of wide and narrow band gap germanium oxide-
based semiconductors that can be doped, form alloys for band gap engineering,
are not comprised of toxic elements, and can be processed into high performing
devices. The team is building research collaborations aimed at advancing
fundamental knowledge in areas related to thin film deposition, crystal growth,
thermodynamic and electronic structure modeling, defect characterization, and
device testing. The team works to understand and implement the materials
synthesis conditions required to stabilize targeted germanium oxides in
heterostructure form, while enabling both doping and alloying for property
engineering. Computational and experimental activities provide strategies for
understanding and controlling defects, either those desired (dopants) or
undesired (dislocations, point defects), within these semiconductors. The team
develops an understanding of the ultimate limits to the fabrication and
performance of junctions, contacts, and devices for high power electronics and
sensing based on germanium oxide semiconductors. Co-design is infused throughout
the scientific objectives such that issues related to manufacturing scalability,
substrate development, and environmental impacts are evaluated and researched
alongside heterostructure design and device demonstrations. The project pilots a
two-pronged strategy for enabling new educational opportunities related to
semiconductors. The first of these leverages the existing NSF-PREM programs to
create a summer research opportunity for a student from an under-represented
group in one of the participating labs each year; the second establishes
educational opportunities for students at community or technical
colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.