* 2235462
* FuSe-TG: Co-design of Attojoule Multifunction Semiconductor Electronics with Atomic Precision
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2025
* Priya Vashishta, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 02/28/2025
* USD 380,000.00

Future semiconducting systems will face formidable challenges due to massive
expansion of data processing that is driven by the broad adoption of artificial
intelligence (AI), machine learning (ML), and distributed Edge applications that
integrate data and computing. It is imperative to increase the energy efficiency
of computing million-fold, according to the 2021 Semiconductor Research
Corporation decadal plan. A compelling solution is to make semiconductor devices
more capable, i.e., multifunctional. A material with a bandgap does not
necessarily make it a semiconductor until there are impurity ions, namely
dopants, to tune its electrical conductance and other properties. Mobilizing the
dopant ions in semiconductors opens a window with nearly infinite opportunities.
It is likely that future semiconductors will be dynamically reconfigurable on
the fly with atomic precision at record-low attoJoule (10-18 Joule) energy
level, which resembles but outperforms biological synaptic systems. This grant
is to forge a team for developing a simulation and AI guided co-design framework
for attoJoule semiconductor materials with atomic precision, multifunctional
devices, and smart systems for future ultralow-power computing and memory,
thereby realizing a sustainable society with ubiquitous AI. The educational goal
is to establish a cross-disciplinary coalition that trains a future generation
of semiconductor cyberworkforce, who will solve challenging material-device-
system co-design problems through innovative use of advanced cyberinfrastructure
at the nexus of high-end computing, quantum computing and
AI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The grant aims to establish a disruptive paradigm for
reconfigurable multifunctional synaptic switching with aJ energy consumption and
atomic precision, thereby creating a new industrial approach for energy-
efficient Edge computing. Key innovations include: (1) Protonic electrochemical
ionic synapse that is deterministic and achieves high-speed switching with
attoJoule energy consumption; (2) In-sensor computing systems to process images
without external power supply at Edge; (3) Synaptic material-device-system co-
design guided by first principles-based multiscale simulation and AI, thus
providing a generalizable rational co-design framework for the future of
semiconductors (FuSe). The underlying software suite is developed into a
CyberFuse training module that is accessible through a CyberFuSe portal. The
training modules are piloted in classrooms to support a dual-degree program
(Ph.D. in physics, materials science or electrical engineering with MS in
computer science or AI) and taught in CyberFuse training workshops with a strong
focus on underrepresented groups. In addition, the grant provides career
pathways to community college students, who constitute more than one third of
the nation’s undergraduate students. The grant also broadens participation
through (1) USC’s Women in Science and Engineering (WiSE) program and (2)
undergraduate research by underrepresented groups jointly supervised by faculty
from USC, MIT, Stanford, CMU, TAMU and Howard - one of the oldest and largest
historically black colleges and universities. The FuSe team includes industrial
partners from SLK America, Applied Materials and IBM for accelerated technology
transfer and feedback on research and future workforce
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Future of
Semiconductors (FuSe) program and by the Historically Black Colleges and
Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.