* 2235466
* FuSe-TG: Electronic-Photonic Systems-on-Chip for Computation, Communication and Sensing
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Vladimir Stojanovic, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 05/31/2024
* USD 400,000.00

The research vision is to create a breakthrough in the capability of future
semiconductor technologies - to develop devices, circuits, systems, process,
design flow and tools, and train students, in a novel platform for electronic-
photonic systems-on-chip (EPSoCs) in advanced CMOS foundry processes, addressing
a range of key applications in computing, communication and sensing.
Semiconductor technology is entering a new age as the transistor scaling that
has provided the past 50 years of progress slows down. Electronic-photonic (EP)
integration offers a path to revolutionizing these capabilities via powerful new
systems-on-chip (SoCs) for applications from optical input/output (I/O) today,
through future radio frequency/mm-wave signal processing for 5G/6G wireless,
light detection and ranging (lidar) imaging, and new paradigms for computing
like artificial intelligence (AI) scale-out fabrics, photonics-interfaced
superconducting electronics, and quantum computing. This path of innovation
requires a convergent, interdisciplinary co-design approach intertwining the
skills of photonics designers, electronic circuit/system designers, process
engineers, and system/application experts. Researchers plan to utilize initial
proof-of-concept developments to team with the domain and application experts
and establish a base research and educational portfolio and a research team to
shape the Center-scale Co-Design research
effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Monolithic electronics-photonics integration has
been demonstrated by the members of the team - its use and advantage in
classical optical interconnects, as well as the design of the first photon-pair
source with integrated electronic sensing and control, molecular and ultrasound
eletronic-photonic sensor systems-on-chip, a design of the mm-wave analog
photonic link and a demonstration of the first cryo-photonic link. The goal in
this work is to establish an effective co-design team with application domain
experts to further develop the architectures and system-to-device modeling
methodologies and co-design efforts along the three key research vectors in
computation, communication and sensing, to establish a research and educational
foundation for future Center-scale Co-Design research effort. Furthermore, these
EPSoC concepts will be developed in a new, photonics-optimized high-volume
electronic-photonic process (45nm SPCLO SOI CMOS) enabled by the teamâ€™s previous
work. In the long-term, this work will create an EPSoCs platform that leverages
state-of-the-art CMOS foundry technology. It will develop a framework (block
libraries, tools, models and design methodologies) for low cost, rapid
innovation and design of sophisticated EPSoCs. It will also democratize EPSoC
technology making it accessible to a broader research, industrial and even
educational community (e.g. making possible EPSoC chip design through open-
source design tools and generator libraries).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.