* 2235072
* AGS-FIRP Track 3: Solar Eclipse Observations with the Airborne Coronal Emission Surveyor (ACES)
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2025
* Jenna Samra, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 12/31/2025
* USD 219,980.00

This project is a Track-3 deployment to commission a new imaging Fourier
transform spectrometer with an observation of the solar corona from the NSF/NCAR
Gulfstream V (GV) during the 2024 total solar eclipse across North America. The
Airborne Coronal Emission Surveyor (ACES), currently under construction on NSF
award AGS-MRI #2117582, will survey the 1–4 μm wavelength region to look for
lines that may be viable candidates for measuring the coronal magnetic field and
plasma diagnostics at large solar radii. ACES is a new focal plane instrument
enabled by the Airborne Stabilized Platform for InfraRed Experiments (ASPIRE,
AGS-MRI #1919809), commissioned in 2021 with observations from the GV. It builds
on the success of ASPIRE and the Airborne InfraRed Spectrometer (AIR-Spec, AGS-
MRI #1531549 &amp; AGS #1822314) to expand the infrared window for thermal and
magnetic studies of the Sun’s outer atmosphere. The eclipse campaign and data
reduction effort are modeled on the very successful AIR-Spec missions to observe
the 2017 and 2019 total solar eclipses. Following deployment, the instrument
will be delivered to NCAR as a resource for the solar physics community. Two REU
students and one graduate student will be trained. The team is a diverse group
of early to mid-career scientists and engineers and is led by a female
PI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During its six-minute commissioning observation from
the GV, ACES will observe from an altitude of 14 km with a spectral resolution
of 0.5 cm−1 and a spatial plate scale of 20" across a field of view of
2000"×100". The instrument will search for more than twenty forbidden lines of
ionized magnesium, aluminum, silicon, sulfur, argon, calcium, iron, and nickel,
at least half of which have never before been observed. The novel research goals
include: identifying the brightest spectral lines; documenting their widths and
higher order properties of the line profiles; measuring contributions from
collisional versus radiative excitation; documenting the variations of all of
the above as a function of the features observed and projected radius. The
science questions probe the diagnostic potential of emission lines in the 1–4 μm
range, the variation of plasma density and temperature with radial distance, the
ratio of radiative to collisional excitation as a function of radius, and the
variation of elemental abundances across the corona. The solar feed for ACES
will be provided by ASPIRE, which was constructed with NSF award AGS-MRI
#1919809 and commissioned in December 2021. ASPIRE enables the large aperture,
high altitude, and image stability (6 arcsec RMS in a 1-s exposure) necessary to
measure the infrared corona with high sensitivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.