* 2235808
* Maximizing the Impacts of Inclusive Course-based Undergraduate Research Experiences: from Hypothesis to Undergraduate Conference Participation
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Janice Krumm, Widener University
* Standard Grant
* Julio Soto
* 04/30/2028
* USD 143,609.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by training a highly skilled
STEM workforce through undergraduate research experiences. However, such
experiences are unevenly distributed and may not be available at institutions
with fewer resources. Additionally, many students find accessing these
opportunities difficult due to time and financial challenges. To address this
challenge this project aims to assess the impacts of Course-based Undergraduate
Research Experiences (CUREs) using digitized Natural History Collections (dNHC)
data. These CUREs can be taught at all institution types, in online, in-person,
and hybrid formats; and they have the potential to increase access to research
experiences for all students. Faculty from four institutions (George Washington
University, Widener University, Texas Tech University, and Westfield State
University) will collaborate to measure the impacts of these CUREs on student
learning and student science identity. Students who successfully complete the
CUREs may apply to participate in a mentored and financially supported cohort-
based scientific conference experience. How the conference experiences may
further impact student learning gains will also be assessed. This study will
produce a rich dataset from multiple institutions including minority serving
institutions and community colleges. This will document the impacts of dNHC
CUREs and connected conference experiences. This will help to encourage broader
use of dNHC CUREs and supported conference experiences and help lead to a
diverse and skilled STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gaining broad
institutional support for dNHC CURE implementation and student conference
presentations requires clear evidence of student gains and the transformational
impacts of these experiences on student science identity which contributes to
persistence in STEM. This project will formally determine the impacts of dNHC
CUREs and conference experiences on student learning in data science and
geospatial skills, and student perceptions of science identity and self-efficacy
across institution types and student populations. This will lead to better
understanding of the differential effects of these experiences across
demographic student populations and diverse institutional types. To refine best
practices for mentoring undergraduates through national conference experiences,
training materials for faculty and students will be created, and the impacts of
undergraduate conference experiences where students present their CURE research
will be assessed. This project will create a large multi-institutional dataset
that will enable this project to make significant contributions to the broader
undergraduate STEM education enterprise's understanding of the importance of
CUREs and conference experiences while also encouraging and supporting efforts
to make CUREs more widespread by providing strong evidence of their efficacy and
impacts. Increased use of dNHC CUREs and including conference presentations and
participation will improve undergraduate education and increase the
accessibility of research for all students regardless of financial hardships,
personal obligations, or physical abilities that may otherwise limit their
participation. This project provides training for diverse early career
scientists in skills critical to a highly skilled STEM workforce and
opportunities for students to attend conferences to improve their sense of
belonging in science. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through its Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.