* 2235564
* Collaborative Research: An integrative approach to understanding variation in patterns of aging in primates
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Amy Lu, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Robin Bernstein
* 03/31/2026
* USD 417,856.00

Human lifespan has doubled in the last century, and this has been linked to an
increase in age-associated disease. These diseases stem from the natural age-
associated deterioration of bodily function but it is unclear how deterioration
across systems – for example, bone loss and decreased immune system function –
are related. It also remains to be determined whether patterns of aging and age-
associated disease in humans are further impacted by a mismatch between
contemporary and ancestral environments. Key influences on individual
differences in patterns of aging and timing of onset of age-related disease
remain to be uncovered. This project studies wild-living non-human primates to
examine the biological systems that deteriorate with age, and drills down into
the mechanisms behind individual differences in the rate of aging. This study
contributes valuable comparative data on aging that deepens an understanding of
human aging patterns through identifying specific social and life course factors
associated with age-related disease. This project supports the training and
professional development of a postdoctoral researcher and multiple undergraduate
students, local community outreach and engagement, and science outreach in K-12
schools in the U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on over fifteen
prior years of data collection on the same populations, which provides a rich
context of behavioral and demographic data from over 100 individuals. Social
adversity in early life and adulthood, cumulative reproductive effort, and
multiple markers of biological aging are included predictors of aging patterns
and outcomes. The main aims of the project are to identify: 1) the trajectory of
aging across the life course with respect to physical deterioration (as measured
by bone and muscle loss), physiological dysregulation (as indexed by hormone and
immune markers), and molecular hallmarks of aging, and compare the results with
existing datasets on aging from humans and other nonhuman primates; 2) the
factors and timing that exert the strongest influence on inter-individual
differences in the pace of biological aging, including social status, traumatic
changes in social group membership, poor social integration, and increased
reproductive effort. By coupling a rich longitudinal dataset with cutting edge
methods in physiology, medical imaging, molecular techniques, and comparative
methods, this study adds to a small, but growing number of nonhuman primate
models of aging in wild populations that can build an informative context for
understanding the evolution of, and variation in, human aging and aging-related
deterioration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.