* 2235754
* Conference: Symposium on Combinatorial Search (SoCS) 2023
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Richard Korf, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 07/31/2024
* USD 10,000.00

This grant supports student travel for select students participating in the
Doctoral Mentoring Consortium (DMC) at the Sixteenth Symposium on Combinatorial
Search (SOCS 2023) being held in Prague, Czech Republic, July 14-16, 2023. This
is the premier international workshop for researchers in heuristic and
combinatorial search across a fully international research community. This
consortium is oriented on research and career development for PhD students at
every stage of their education. The central activities for the DMC include
opportunities for students to present and discuss their work with their peers,
interact with senior researchers for advice on Ph.D. research, small group
activities, and a great opportunities for interactions with the international
research community, which might lead to future collaborative activity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sponsoring student travel to SOCS conveys many benefits
beyond the DMC program. The sponsored students have full access to a well-
developed program covering a diverse range of research areas in this community.
This is an opportunity for students to engage in discussion with scientists from
around the world and to explore new research directions and topics. SOCS is an
international symposium that will figure prominently in the research careers of
students who remain involved in heuristic and combinatorial search. Students
gain valuable research insights from the exchange of technical ideas in this
broader venue. In the process, they make valuable connections with potential
collaborators from around the world. As intelligent software and embodies
systems become more prevalent, it is clear that advances derived from this
community will continue to have significant impact in virtually any domain
imaginable, including such national priorities as health and well-being,
e-commerce, and national defense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.