* 2235183
* CyberCorps Scholarship for Service: A Clinical Rotation Approach to Professional Cybersecurity Workforce Development
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Rakesh Bobba, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 12/31/2027
* USD 1,727,359.00

This project establishes a new CyberCorps®: Scholarship for Service (SFS)
program at Oregon State University (OSU) to prepare highly qualified
cybersecurity professionals to serve in federal, state, local, and tribal
governments. Through a unique approach based on clinical rotations, the program
will produce professionals ready to protect the nation's infrastructure against
cyber adversaries. NSF funding will support scholarships of 29 undergraduate and
graduate students in four cohorts over five years. This project will emphasize
recruitment, retention, and placement of underrepresented and underserved groups
in cybersecurity including women, first-generation college students, and low-
income students, and will evaluate and refine the clinical rotations approach to
serve as a replicable model for developing a highly skilled cybersecurity
workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the goal of meeting the need for well-
qualified cybersecurity professionals, OSU developed the Oregon Research and
Teaching Security Operations Center (ORTSOC), a world-class security operations
center that serves as the cornerstone of a rotation-based model. OSU’s
cybersecurity degree option provides next generation of cyber defenders and
researchers a unique service-learning experience through for-credit rotations at
ORTSOC, while offering cybersecurity services to underserved government and
other public organizations throughout the region. Those rotations at the ORTSOC,
combined with OSU’s rigorous cybersecurity curriculum and extracurricular
activities, provide a unique blend of classroom and experiential learning
opportunities for our cybersecurity students. Research involvement for students
at both the undergraduate and graduate level will help further develop critical
and creative thinking skills in the students, better preparing them to thrive in
a rapidly evolving field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the
CyberCorps® Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which funds proposals
establishing or continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity and aligns with
the U.S. National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity workforce.
Following graduation, scholarship recipients are required to work in
cybersecurity for a federal, state, local, or tribal Government organization for
the same duration as their scholarship support.  
&lt;br/&gt;  &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.