* 2235937
* I-Corps:  Rehabilitation Technologies using Smart Insoles and a Smartphone for Treatment of Children with Idiopathic Toe Walking
* TIP,TI
* 08/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Marybeth Grant-Beuttler, Oregon Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of wearable technological advancements in the rehabilitation of
children who toe walk (such as Idiopathic Toe Walking (ITW), Cerebral Palsy (CP)
and children with autism). The proposed technology, consisting of computer
vision algorithms in smartphones and smart shoe insoles, may enable the health
care community to implement widespread gait evaluations as part of the clinical
decision-making process. The long-term broader impact is the applicability of
computer vision algorithms in medical diagnoses and foot contact assessment in
patients with gait deficits. In addition, by providing access to large-scale
objective data, gait patterns during toe walking that have previously been
difficult to document objectively may become the basis for understanding the
suitable options for clinical assessment, rehabilitation, and care of children.
In addition, since 5% of children are diagnosed with toe walking, a potential
product may have applications for home-based interventions. It is anticipated
that cost of care for treating toe walking children may be reduced and quality
of life may be improved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on
the development of computer vision algorithms for objective gait assessments and
intervention using smart insoles. The proposed technology has potential for both
societal benefits and technological advancements in rehabilitation for toe
walking. The proposed technology uses a readily accessible smartphone
application that may objectively quantify toe walking biomarkers and active
ankle range for clinical decision-making. Over time, clinical decisions may be
enhanced with increased accuracy in detecting more minor improvements in heel
placements and efficient treatment of children who toe walk. In addition, the
proposed system may be used to identify and track toe contact steps, detect foot
angle at contact, and treat toe walking in children. The long-term objectives of
this effort are to improve treatment outcomes and quality of life by replacing
subjective clinical assessments with objective, information-rich evaluations and
interventions. Integration of the smartphone camera-based gait analysis with
smart insole based rehabilitation of children who toe walk may transform current
clinical practice by providing accurate and objective information regarding foot
progression and reducing the long-term cost of toe walking rehabilitation and
care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.