* 2235524
* Conference: Interaction between wildfire, heatwave, clouds and precipitation over complex topography
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Rong Fu, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 07/31/2024
* USD 48,507.00

Wildfires have been increasing in the American West over the past several
decades, which has resulted in extreme public safety and economic problems. The
conditions that lead to significant wildfires are generally known to be high
temperature and low moisture. However, there is still uncertainty about how
these conditions form, as studies show that the large-scale circulations cannot
explain the strength of the heat and drought in mountainous terrain. This
conference will bring together scientific experts on various topics to discuss
the role of different aspects of meteorology on setting the conditions for major
wildfires in complex terrain. In addition to the downstream societal impact of
better forecasting conditions for wildfires, the conference will allow students
and early-career researchers the opportunity to network and learn from leaders
in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of California – Los Angeles
will host a two-day workshop titled “Interaction between wildfire, heatwave,
clouds and precipitation over complex topography” in Spring 2023. The goal of
the workshop is to identify the key science questions and gaps of knowledge, to
review current observational and modeling capability, and to assess feasibility
of a potential field campaign to clarify the key processes behind the
interaction between wildfire, heatwave, clouds and precipitation over complex
topography. Specific topics will include: 1) Biomass burning aerosol-cloud-
precipitation interaction and its potential role in amplifying heatwaves and dry
spells, 2) Land-atmospheric interaction and its role in amplifying fire weather
over complex topography, and 3) The influence of clouds and aerosols on
radiative energy over complex topography. The conference plan is for in-person
and remote participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.