* 2235999
* Improving Students’ Modeling Skills for Engineering Complex Systems
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Satya Aditya Akundi, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Karen Crosby
* 12/31/2025
* USD 284,583.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by helping students learn the
necessary skills to manage the full lifecycle for complex engineering systems in
collaborative virtual environments. Model-based Systems Engineering (MBSE) is an
emerging methodology that addresses the need to increase productivity, improve
quality, reduce risk, and improve communications in the engineering of complex
systems that include both hardware and software components. This project will
help students learn how to use MBSE in each phase of the system development
cycle including requirements, design, analysis, verification, and validation, by
developing a new course using project-based learning. Students will work in
geographically distributed teams that will include members from the University
of Texas Rio Grande Valley and the University of Texas at El Paso to learn how
to work in a virtual collaborative environment. A machine learning algorithm
will be developed to measure student sentiment during the course to identify
opportunities for improving how the course is taught in a timely manner. Project
results will be disseminated to the engineering education community through the
annual ASEE conference, systems engineering conferences, IEEE journal
publications, and an open-source website with information on MBSE training
materials, manuals developed, and a design and development guide of machine
learning algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to improve
the technical skills of the STEM workforce in systems engineering with a focus
on MBSE. The project will pursue four complementary objectives. First is to
develop an undergraduate MBSE course for third and fourth year students in
industrial and systems engineering, manufacturing engineering, and engineering
technology. Second is to provide a collaborative self-organizing dynamic team
experience for geographically separated student teams. Third is to develop a
machine learning technique to analyze and understand student perceptions of
using MBSE in geographically separated student teams. Fourth is to create an
open-source platform to share project materials and insights with academic
institutions that are interested in teaching MBSE. The machine learning model
for the analysis of text data from online technical discussion forums and team
communications in the course will help characterize students’ learning
experience. Student learning will be assessed at multiple levels of Bloom’s
Taxonomy including: (1) Are students able to create system diagrams and models
of engineered systems using Systems Modeling Language notations? (2) Are
students able to generate system requirements, model architectures, and define
specifications using MBSE? (3) Are students able to generate system verification
and test plans based on system models they generate? The models and documents
will be assessed by instructors to determine to what extent the students have
achieved the learning outcomes. This project is expected to advance knowledge
about working in collaborative virtual environments and the use of machine
learning to assess students’ perceptions. Through its Engaged Student Learning
track, the IUSE program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation
of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.