* 2235992
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track J: Dairy Protein Product Research and Innovation Hub
* TIP,ITE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Kumar Mallikarjunan, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Reksulak
* 11/30/2023
* USD 750,000.00

The world population is expected to reach 10 billion by 2050. A critical
challenge facing humanity is growing demand for nutrient-dense foods with longer
shelf-life and climate resilience to reach regions of the world most impacted by
extreme weather conditions, geopolitical turmoil, and mass migration. Milk is
nutrient-dense, containing vitamins and minerals, fat, and protein content used
to produce a range of products that are widely consumed across the world by
people of all ages, from infants to seniors. However, current dairy product
manufacturing methods are rate limited, and use outdated processing practices
that suffer from critical efficiency shortcomings in monitoring protein
integrity, separation science, and spray drying of protein powders. This project
will address the knowledge gap currently preventing adoption of state-of-the-art
technological solutions by creating a roadmap for the implementation of
intelligent sensing and advanced manufacturing technologies aimed at efficient
production of high-value products for consumers that address nutrition security
at a domestic and global level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project teamâ€™s use-
inspired approach targets farmers and rural communities, dairy processors, and
consumers of food products containing dairy protein powder ingredients. Dairy is
the single largest component of the Idaho agricultural economy, being driven
predominantly by farmers and processors in rural counties, where underserved
minority populations are increasing at a rapid rate in a state that is among the
fastest growing in the United States. This project will focus on educational
programs and workforce development for these underserved minority populations
through land grant university extension outreach programs, partnership with
dairy marketing and communication organizations (Dairy West), and organizations
dedicated to the training and workforce development pipeline for students to
careers in dairy processing (BUILD Dairy). University programs including the
Vertically Integrated Project curriculum and BUILD Dairy-sponsored projects,
offer students training essential for their employment in high-paying, benefit-
eligible positions in rural communities throughout Idaho and the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this Convergence Accelerator is to
modernize the dairy processing industry by fusing artificial intelligence,
chemometric sensing, and advanced manufacturing tools to achieve transformative
efficiency, quality, and quantity gains in the production of shelf-stable,
nutrient-dense, protein powder products. To achieve this convergence goal, a
team of academic researchers and industry stakeholders with exceptional
credentials, experience, and knowledge in food and dairy chemistry, computer
science/artificial intelligence, microbiology, rheology, food process
engineering, and food process technology has been assembled.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific deliverables are: (1) Develop artificial
intelligence-based chemometric solutions to automate the use of near-infrared
spectroscopy for the real-time analysis of proteins in milk during processing to
improve the quality of dairy products and reduce waste; (2) Implement and
optimize operating conditions for advanced manufacturing pulsed electric field
and extruder equipment into dairy facilities to improve processing efficiency,
product quality, reduce waste, conserve energy, and expand capacity; and (3)
Converge sciences, engineering, computer science, food science, nutrition, dairy
farming, supply chain management, and workforce training to develop innovative
protein products for early childhood development, adolescent and adult
nutrition, and senior care that are shelf-stable, nutrient-dense, and impactful
to a global market.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.