* 2235042
* Collaborative Research: CCRI: Grand: Quori 2.0: Uniting, Broadening, and Sustaining a Research Community Around a Modular Social Robot Platform
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Simon Kim, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Cindy Bethel
* 03/31/2028
* USD 140,870.00

Quori 2.0: Uniting, Broadening, and Sustaining a Research Community Around a
Modular Social Robot Platform&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One important challenge for
robotics research is the lack of a common robotics platform. Researchers use
robots with different shapes, sizes, sensors, and capabilities. This makes it
hard to compare results. To address this challenge, this project will build
fifty humanoid robots (called "Quori"). Selected research teams across the
United States will receive one of these robots and shared software for building
a shared infrastructure. This will create a standardized community robotics
infrastructure. The researchers who use the Quori robots will connect through
online collaboration tools. They will also attend events and trainings for
researchers to work together. This will create a community of roboticists who
can learn from each other and share ideas. The expected result is the rapid
advancement of U.S. robotics research. The project will include new teams of
robotics researchers from diverse institutions. Researchers experienced with
Quori will mentor the new team members selected. The goal is to grow and
diversify robotics and STEM research. This project will speed up the pace of
research in robotics and Human-Robot Interaction (HRI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
goal of this project is to create a common hardware/software platform for HRI
research. Another goal is to build a community of researchers around this
platform. This approach was inspired by similar prior research using another
robotic platform and the now very popular Robot Operating System (ROS). This
project uses lessons learned from the development of ten Quori prototype robots.
A small selection of U.S. research teams received these ten Quori robots to use
and test. One aim of this work is to improve the design of the robot by
enhancing the software drivers. A second aim is to improve the robot's
perception, expression, and mobility algorithms. These changes will make it
easier to manufacture Quori robots at scale. A third aim is to grow the robotics
research community. The project will use a wide range of selection criteria to
distribute the robots. This includes university types, locations, and researcher
characteristics (e.g., career stage, roles). The selected research teams will
receive onboarding and training. They will join community communication tools.
There will be resources provided for developing reproducible studies using the
Quori robots. A community governance and engagement structure will support the
sustainability of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.