* 2235375
* Investigating the Impact of an Immersive VR-based Learning Environment for Learning Human-Robot Collaboration in Construction Robotics Education
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Abiola Akanmu, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 01/31/2026
* USD 160,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by advancing the innovation
needed to enhance the work environments for construction workforce interacting
with robots. As the construction industry gears towards widespread acceptance of
robots, there is a need to prepare Construction Engineering and Management (CEM)
students to excel in highly technological work environments. However, the
current curriculum is inadequate to equip CEM students with the required
competencies for working alongside construction robots. This project intends to
investigate an immersive virtual reality (VR)-based learning environment to
develop students' experiential skills so that the students would interact safely
with robots in the construction industry after they graduate. The proposed
project has the potential to provide the CEM communities with tangible benefits
for advancing robotics in engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
interdisciplinary research seeks to advance the understanding of CEM students'
challenges when the students learn how to interact safely with robots during
construction work. The project will first identify the key competencies required
for CEM students to interact with construction robots. Next, the characteristics
of a virtual environment that can enhance those competencies will be
investigated. The immersive VR-based learning environment including an
interactive diagnostic will be developed to help students to cultivate the
hands-on skills of working with construction robots. The project intends to
implement and evaluate the learning environment in terms of learning outcomes
and improvement in competencies. In addition, the researchers plan to provide a
learning environment adaptable to different student demographics. The NSF IUSE:
EDU Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through its Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.