* 2235247
* CAREER: Cold plasma intensified perovskite membrane technology for CO2 utilization
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Maria Carreon, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 07/31/2028
* USD 424,698.00

Platform chemicals are the essential building blocks used by the chemical
processing industries to produce high-value chemical products. Conversion of
greenhouse gases (GHG) such as CO2 and CH4 to platform precursors could
significantly reduce atmospheric GHG while producing oxygenated chemical
feedstocks and fuels. Current production of oxygenated chemicals from GHG
requires large-scale, complex, high-pressure reaction processes, and
manufacturing operations with significant carbon footprints. Therefore, there is
a critical need to explore more sustainable routes to dry methane reforming
(DMR), the reaction between CO2 and CH4 to produce highly reactive hydrogen and
carbon monoxide. Non-thermal (low temperature) plasma-catalysis processes have
recently emerged as an alternative to current DMR. This electrically driven
approach will be investigated for one-step production of oxygenated species from
GHG under mild conditions, making use of renewable and decentralized electrical
power sources, potentially expanding US employment and regional business
opportunities. This research program will study the fundamental chemical and
physical mechanisms at work in plasma-enhanced conversion of GHG with the goal
of reaching chemical processing conditions that are energy flexible and
efficient. Over the next five years the research team will focus on
understanding plasma chemistry reaction mechanisms and the systematic design of
plasma-catalytic membrane reactor concepts capable of on-demand use of renewable
electricity. Education and outreach activities include developing an
undergraduate/graduate level plasma catalysis class and continuing a STEM Camp
for Girl Scouts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, atmospheric low-
temperature plasma catalysis will be investigated as an alternative to
conventional thermally activated reaction routes to oxygenated fuels and
chemical products based on high pressure Dry Methane Reforming (DMR). The key
feature of plasma-catalysis is the synergy between the plasma and the catalyst,
where the non-equilibrium plasma creates radicals and charged plasma-phase
species which react at the catalyst surface to form the chemical product
species; however, little is known in terms of fundamental understanding of
plasma/catalyst interactions and surface processes. This research will address
this knowledge gap by focusing on perovskite catalysts, selected for their
unique dielectric and polarization properties. The interaction between the
charged species in the plasma and perovskite catalysts may lead to drastic
changes in the perovskite structural and surface electronic properties,
potentially leading to unprecedented oxygenated species production rates. The in
situ diagnostic capabilities of the research team will make possible the
systematic synthesis of plasma-enhanced perovskite catalysts designed to operate
at low temperature (&lt;200 deg C) and atmospheric pressure, opening the door to
decentralized and modular production of oxygenated fuels and chemicals from CO2
and CH4. To further improve process performance, the catalyst will be fabricated
as a unique macroporous perovskite membrane with the objective of improving
selectivity to methanol. The proposed membrane reactor offers the advantages of
significantly reduced pressure drop typically found in packed bed reactors
enhancing process throughput. Specific research plans focus on: (1) Designing
nanocrystalline perovskite membranes for the synthesis of oxygenated chemicals
and fuels; (2) Fine tuning the catalytic active sites of selected perovskites
for the synthesis of methanol; (3) Evaluating the catalytic performance of
perovskite membranes under low-temperature plasma in the conversion of CO2/CH4
mixtures to methanol; (4) Elucidation and understanding of the synergism in
plasma-catalyst systems for the synthesis of oxygenated chemical
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.