* 2235771
* RUI: The evolution of circumorbital morphology in hominids
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Tesla Monson, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 06/30/2026
* USD 556,927.00

Investigating variation in the primate skeleton advances understanding of the
evolution of modern human biology. The skull is a particularly informative area
of the body as it contains most of the primary sensory organs, the mouth, and
the brain. Likewise, some of the most distinctive changes in human evolution,
including increased brain size, reduced jaw length, and a reduced brow ridge,
occurred in the skull. Hypotheses about brain size, climate, diet, social
structure, and even communication, have been proposed to explain these
evolutionary changes, but how and why they happened persist as key questions in
human evolutionary studies. This study focuses on the brow ridge and
circumorbital region of the face, which is linked to both the brain and vision.
The dataset built by this project contributes significantly to evolutionary
studies by providing the most detailed picture of extant primate cranial
variation to date and making these data openly available through online digital
repositories. The project supports early career researchers who are
underrepresented minority scientists at a U.S. primarily undergraduate
institution and creates opportunities for research and mentorship of students.
Novel curricular frameworks developed through this project integrate
evolutionary research into the classroom, providing active learning
opportunities and training relevant for health sciences careers. These
activities, combined with the mentorship and training of U.S. undergraduate
researchers, a Masters student, and a postdoctoral scholar, directly contribute
to the advancement of science education and the growth of a diverse scientific
workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study pairs 3D morphometrics with
phylogenetic comparative methods to test evolutionary hypotheses about the role
of circumorbital morphology in shaping human cranial evolution. The project
leverages 3D surface scans of the cranium for n=1700 extant haplorrhines and
n=54 fossil hominids. These data are used to address three major aims: 1)
characterize circumorbital morphology in hominids and other primates, 2)
quantify levels of integration between circumorbital morphology and other
skeletal structures of the cranium, and 3) assess the roles of body size and sex
in shaping primate circumorbital morphology. By building on foundational
morphometric studies in primates with functionally-informed hypotheses and new
phylogenetic and evolvability methods, this project has the potential to
transform theoretical frameworks and practical approaches to studying hominid
cranial evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.