* 2235715
* The Impacts of Pre-service Supervised Field Experiences on Elementary Teachers Retention and Effectiveness in Mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 02/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Leigh McLean, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Toya frank
* 06/30/2024
* USD 1,187,059.00

In the pre-service preparation stage, future teachers gain critical skills and
knowledge for teaching mathematics. Supervised field experiences, where student
teachers apply their skills and knowledge in classrooms under the mentorship of
cooperating teachers, have been shown to be particularly important in preparing
effective future teachers. However, there is still much to be clarified about
how supervised field experiences impact student achievement and important
teacher outcomes such as career retention. In this study, the researchers will
follow teaching candidates as they transition from the final stages of teacher
preparation into the first years of elementary teaching and will investigate the
impact of pre-service supervised field experiences on participants’ retention
decisions and their students’ mathematics achievement. This work will inform how
U.S. pre-service teacher preparation programs can better support pre-service
teaching candidates they serve, with a specific focus on the components of
supervised field experiences that have the most positive impacts on the outcomes
of teachers and students. This project is funded by the EHR Core Research (ECR)
program, which supports work that advances fundamental research on STEM learning
and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will follow approximately
1,200 teaching candidates longitudinally from their final year of pre-service
preparation through their first two years of teaching. They will connect
participants’ experiences in supervised field experiences to students’
mathematics achievement, attendance, and behavior, and teachers’ career
retention once in the career. They will further explicate the relations between
field experiences and teacher and student outcomes by exploring aspects of
teachers’ entry into the profession, including their mathematical knowledge for
teaching and self-efficacy, mathematics instructional quality, and well-being.
By focusing on both the cognitive and psychological aspects of career
preparation and entry, this research will inform the design and refinement of
university-based teacher preparation programs with the goal of ensuring that new
elementary teachers are not only equipped to provide students with instruction
that supports mathematics achievement, but that teachers themselves are equipped
to adjust to their careers successfully.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.