* 2235978
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track I: Energy-efficient MetaConductors for Convergence of Sustainable Electronics (E-MC2 of Sustainable Electronics)
* TIP,ITE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Jin Choi, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 11/30/2023
* USD 750,000.00

Due to a decades-long lack of onshore manufacturing capability and supply chain
inequality, the United States (US) suffers from a critical shortage of
semiconductor chips and electronic parts. Consequently, the US electronics
industry is currently in an unsustainable situation and faces a major economic
and national security threat. The goal of this work is to explore Energy-
efficient MetaConductors for Convergence of Sustainable Electronics (E-MC2
Sustainable Electronics) for future society and develop manufacturing
technologies to translate metaconductors to commercial use to meet the
signal/power integrity requirements for modern high-speed, broadband electronic
applications. E-MC2 Sustainable Electronics will generate multiple key areas of
intellectual property in the manufacturable metaconductor technology space,
establishing the US as the leader in both technology and accelerating technology
transfer to launch startups and adoption by industry, thus contributing to the
growth of the economy and job creation. The multi-disciplinary and multi-
institutional team will leverage its previous collaborations, new insights from
new alliances, and collective experience in engineering education. The outcome
of the inclusive educational activities will be a diverse, well-trained, and
globally competent workforce in semiconductor manufacturing and related fields.
The team’s unique collaboration with an advocacy group will facilitate
dissemination of knowledge to the general public in addition to conventional
venues such as professional conferences and journal publications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Creating Helpful Incentives to Produce Semiconductors
and Science Act of 2022 (CHIPS Act) aims to catalyze investments in domestic
semiconductor manufacturing capacity and to boost US competitiveness,
innovation, and national security. This is a timely intervention for the US
electronics industry that suffers from the lack of onshore manufacturing
capability and supply chain inequality. A semiconductor chip has two main
elements: active devices (transistors) and interconnects connecting devices.
Advances in active devices materials, such as new 2-D materials (MoS2, WS2, BN
etc.), phase change materials, and conventional Si, GaAs, GaN, InP have made
high-energy efficiency and memory/logic functions for system compactness
possible. However, interconnect materials still heavily rely on solid copper
technology, which has major limitations in lowering radio frequency (RF)
resistance. It is imperative to find high-efficiency conductor solutions to
enable high-speed computation and broadband communication technologies that
operate in the millimeter wave frequencies. Metaconductors consisting of
engineered multiple nanoscopic nonferromagnetic and ferromagnetic metals have
shown promise in suppressing the skin effect and thus lowering RF resistance and
power consumption. The goal of this project is to explore Energy-efficient
MetaConductors for Convergence of Sustainable Electronics (E-MC2 Sustainable
Electronics) for future society and develop manufacturing technologies to
translate the metaconductors to commercial use to meet the signal/power
integrity needs for modern high speed, broadband electronic applications. These
new metaconductors will be unique, provide significant energy efficiency, and
become a game changer for the next generation interconnect and passive
technology in tomorrow’s high-speed computing and broadband communications
applications. The project harnesses the investigators’ multidisciplinary
expertise in metaconductor design and fabrication, process design for
manufacturing, nanomaterial and fabrication, and engineering education and
workforce development. Through domestic and international collaboration with
local government (Osceola County, Florida), academia (Seoul National University,
Korea Institute of Energy Technology), and the private sector (Cisco, Intel,
Apple, Applied Materials, Samsung, and SkyWater), the team will: design
sustainable metaconductors, investigate their scalable manufacturing processes,
and create and implement an integrated education and workforce development
program. The impact of the project will be an effective technical solution for
future electronic conductors; knowledgeable and agile workforce that can rise to
global energy challenges in electronic systems; and contribution to the growth
of economy via startups and high-skill job creation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.