* 2235136
* Collaborative Research: CCRI: Planning-C: An Infrastructure and Dataset for Research in Android Testing &amp; Analysis
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2023,10/31/2024
* Kevin Moran, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 10/31/2024
* USD 66,250.00

Given the importance of mobile applications (apps), researchers have dedicated
considerable effort toward understanding, supporting, and automating mobile app
development tasks. However, researchers looking to contribute to this area of
work face several challenges related to building and maintaining tooling that
can keep pace with the rapid evolution of mobile platforms (e.g., new Android
updates) and the continuous process of mining apps and app-related data. This
project aims to carry out planning activities that will lead to the construction
of a new shared community infrastructure for conducting mobile app development
research. This infrastructure, called MODAL, will support work across the
disciplines of software engineering (SE), computer security, and human-computer
interaction (HCI) by offering various configurable components supporting key
steps of the research process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will (1)
conduct a preliminary survey of the SE, computer security, and HCI communities
to understand the mobile app research needs of these communities, (2) conduct
interviews to understand the barriers researchers face and how a specific
community infrastructure can mitigate these barriers, (3) host workshops to
facilitate the exchange of best practices used for mining data and building
analysis tools to guide the development of the infrastructure, (4) conduct a
working group to explore the design of the infrastructure with existing
researchers, researchers new to the topic, and educators of the topic, and (5)
conduct a summative survey to assess the proposed infrastructureâ€™s ability to
support mobile app research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The improved tools and
techniques proposed by this project will better support app developers, enabling
them to write higher quality applications, potentially impacting billions of app
users. This project will also explore the potential for using the envisioned
infrastructure to teach students how to effectively write mobile app software.
Finally, as part of the proposed planning activities, barriers and challenges
related to research on mobile app development will be uncovered that will inform
new types of classroom pedagogy and new tools that will benefit novice
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this project is the
creation of a sustainable open-source community centered around the proposed
research infrastructure. The community will be fostered by the development of
clear contribution guidelines, proper attribution of researcher contributions,
and the distribution of researcher contributions to the larger academic
community. During the planning period, we will maintain a website that contains
details related to the survey, workshop, working group, and summative report
outlining the proposed design of the research infrastructure. The website can be
found at the following link: www.sagelab.io/modal&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.