* 2235051
* Collaborative Research: NSFGEO-NERC: Understanding surface-to-bed meltwater pathways across the Greenland Ice Sheet using machine-learning and physics-based models
* GEO,OPP
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2026
* Ching-Yao Lai, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 01/31/2026
* USD 411,096.00

This is a project jointly funded by the National Science Foundation’s
Directorate for Geosciences (NSF/GEO) and the National Environment Research
Council (NERC) of the United Kingdom (UK) via the NSF/GEO-NERC Lead Agency
Agreement. This Agreement allows a single joint US/UK proposal to be submitted
and peer-reviewed by the Agency whose investigator has the largest proportion of
the budget. Upon successful joint determination of an award recommendation, each
Agency funds the proportion of the budget that supports scientists at
institutions in their respective countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is important
to understand how melting ice on the surface of ice sheets, caused by a warming
climate, affects the movement of the ice sheets. As the climate warms, melting
ice at the surface of ice sheets form ponds of meltwater. In order to have an
impact on the movement of the Greenland Ice Sheet, the meltwater must reach and
lubricate the bottom of the ice sheet. For example, lakes on the surface of the
ice sheet can drain through cracks and reach the bottom of the ice sheet within
a few hours. To understand the formation of these cracks and the cause of
draining lakes on the Greenland Ice Sheet, we plan to use deep learning, an
artificial intelligence algorithm, to find the locations of cracks and draining
lakes in satellite imagery. Based on this new dataset, we will use mathematical
models to understand the formation of new cracks and their impact on the
movement of the ice sheet. Our approach contains an exciting mix of observations
and mathematical models. The ability to use artificial intelligence to detect
cracks and draining lakes offers opportunities to drive new understandings at
the ice-sheet scale. Broader Impacts: This project will support (1) a US-UK
collaboration; (2) students and junior scientists; (3) the development of open-
source artificial intelligence codes for the Arctic sciences community; (4) the
production of a comprehensive and freely available database of the Greenland Ice
Sheet cracks and draining lakes; and (5) a community-led mentoring program
called COMPACT (COmmunity-led Mentoring Program for Advancing Cryosphere
Trainees), which will facilitate multi-mentor networks within the US and UK
cryospheric communities for minority doctoral students. Overall, this research
will help us understand how ice sheets respond to a changing
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Meltwater that forms on the surface of the ice
sheet can seep through moulins and fractures that connect the surface to the
bed, lubricating the bottom of the ice sheet and influencing its dynamics.
Surface-to-bed meltwater pathways are prevalent across the Greenland Ice Sheet.
However, we currently lack the continent-wide maps of moulins, crevasses, and
draining lakes needed to understand the formation of surface-to-bed meltwater
pathways. Utilizing deep learning techniques for automated detection and mapping
of ice sheet surface features can greatly enhance the glaciology community's
capacity to analyze high-resolution satellite imagery, leading to new
discoveries. By harnessing deep neural networks, this project aims to generate
continent-wide databases of surface features that can be used to mechanistically
model the ice sheet conditions that create new surface-to-bed pathways and their
impact on ice-sheet dynamics. The ability to scale up feature detection to the
ice sheet scale can enrich both remote sensing and modeling communities. This
project will foster a US-UK collaboration involving junior principal
investigators, postdoctoral researchers, and graduate students. The project aims
to develop open-source deep learning code, remote-sensing algorithms, and
subglacial hydrology model code for the broader glaciological community. The
resulting database of Greenland Ice Sheet surface-to-bed pathway locations and
supraglacial lake drainage dates and locations will be made open source. The
principal investigators will also collaborate to establish a community-led
mentoring program within the US and UK cryospheric community to promote the
retention of underrepresented doctoral students and junior faculty/scientists.
The societal benefit of this research will be a better understanding of ice
sheet processes and an improved ability to predict ice sheet change in a warming
climate. Understanding the evolving hydrology of the Greenland Ice Sheet remains
an important topic given the unknown, but potentially significant, role that
meltwater drainage via hydro-fracture may play in the ice-sheet’s dynamic
response to an expanding ablation area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.