* 2235460
* Quantifying the Extent of Student Learning and Affect Associated with Observed Levels of Instructional Reform
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Rachel Teasdale, Chico State Enterprises
* Standard Grant
* Keith Sverdrup
* 05/31/2026
* USD 164,956.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by quantifying the relationship
among teaching activities, student learning, and student attitudes and interests
so that instructors can make informed decisions about their teaching practices.
Many studies report that active learning strategies, also known as student-
centered teaching, support student success in science courses, but there is no
quantitative measure of how much student learning changes with different degrees
of student-centered teaching. This IUSE Track 1 Engaged Student Learning Level 2
project will fill this need for quantification. Better understanding of these
relationships will in turn allow science instructors to make data-enabled
modifications to their teaching practices to best support student
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to correlate student
learning and interest with different degrees of reformed teaching practices. The
project will design a series of introductory geoscience lessons that can be
classified as teacher-centered/didactic, transitional/ interactive lecture, and
student-centered based on the Reformed Teaching Observation Protocol (RTOP) and
Classroom Observation Protocol for Undergraduate STEM (COPUS) classroom
observation protocols. RTOP and COPUS are tools used to measure faculty teaching
methods and student engagement in STEM classrooms. The treatment lessons will be
interspersed in classrooms at four different institutions over the course of
multiple semesters so that students at each institution experience each lesson
at each level of reformed teaching at least one time. A series of conceptual
assessments and student interest questions will measure student learning,
students’ perception of their learning, and student interest. Observations using
the RTOP and COPUS protocols will measure the degree of student-centered
teaching practices in both treatment and non-treatment classes. Demographic data
will be used to assess if different degrees of student-centered instruction have
any differential impacts on the learning, perceptions of learning, or interest
for students with different demographic characteristics. The project will use a
model selection approach to determine which factors (degree of student-centered
teaching, student interest, student perceptions of learning, demographic
factors) best predict student learning gains. The outcomes of this project will
be a model that characterizes how student learning scales with different degrees
of student-centered teaching. By integrating student demographics with learning
and affect, this work will generate new information to characterize learning and
affect for students from traditionally minoritized groups and will provide a
framework that faculty can use to determine instructional practices they wish to
adopt based on a clear target for improved student success. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through its Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.