* 2235935
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A Bioarchaeological Investigation of Patterns of Health and Stress Among Enslaved Africans
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Mark Hubbe, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 03/31/2025
* USD 8,144.00

The transatlantic slave trade was an economic system designed to minimize labor
costs and maximize output, which had extreme adverse impacts on the health of
enslaved Africans. The impact of these practices on their overall health and
stress are also reflected in pathological indicators that can be observed in the
skeleton. This doctoral dissertation research advances knowledge about the
health of Africans sold through the transatlantic slave trades, within the
larger context of world history and using theoretical frameworks of is a
bioarchaeology and structural violence. More broadly, the project helps to
identify the origins of inequality and its biological impacts in the past,
present, and future. The project supports the training of a first-generation
student from a historically underrepresented minority in STEM as well as the
development of a database for the meta-analysis of health and stress in the
past. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project evaluates the prevalence of macroscopic
manifestations of stress and poor health for skeletal remains of Africans who
were enslaved on a sugar plantation. Skeletal indicators for these individuals
are compared to a growing collection of meta-data on health and stress. The
database for the meta-analysis includes information on dental health, skeletal
infection, degenerative joint disease, trauma, and nutritional deficiency from
populations representing different adaptive strategies and socio-economic status
worldwide throughout history. The project aims to address two major questions.
(1) How did the process of harvesting and refining sugar impact the
physiological health of enslaved Africans? (2) How does the severity and
prevalence of skeletal indicators of stress observable on enslaved Africans
compare to those indicators on other marginalized populations throughout
history? The PIs make several predictions about expected levels of stress,
including with reference to subsistence strategies and gender roles. The
comparative data used in the project are from both dominant and marginalized
populations throughout world history, which will assist in quantifying the
biological effects of slavery practices in multiple locations and time
periods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.