* 2235144
* CyberCorps Scholarship for Service: The Bulldog Cyber Scholarship
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Jie Yan, Bowie State University
* Continuing Grant
* Li Yang
* 12/31/2027
* USD 789,000.00

The Bowie State University (BSU) proposes a new CyberCorps®: Scholarship for
Service (SFS) program, called the Bulldog Cyber Scholarship (Bulldog) program.
The Bulldog program aims to increase the quantity and diversity of new entrants
to the government cybersecurity workforce by awarding two-year scholarships to
highly motivated students specializing in cybersecurity. These include students
from BSU's computer science major and those who transfer from community
colleges. The Bulldog program will allow students to enhance their knowledge and
develop technical skills by participating in undergraduate research. BSU has
been designated as a National Center of Academic Excellence in Cyber Defense
Education by the National Security Agency and Department of Homeland Security.
The Bulldog program will strengthen an existing infrastructure that attracts and
supports students to enter the cybersecurity profession. In addition, the
project will benefit from existing partnerships with community colleges through
which the pool of student talent gains BSU access and continues into the STEM
workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific objectives for the project are: 1)
Recruit 20 talented and highly motivated students to the program over five
years. 2) Work closely with the NSF SFS program office and U.S. Office of
Personnel Management (OPM) to ensure full placement of students into government
cybersecurity positions, with at least 70 percent of scholarship recipients
securing placement in the executive branch of the Federal government; no more
than 20 percent of scholarship recipients in a non-executive federal agency,
national laboratory, or state, local or tribal government organization; no more
than 10 percent in cybersecurity at qualified institutions of higher education
that provide SFS scholarships. 3) Provide the students with a robust support
system that includes advising, mentoring, and close monitoring to ensure the
scholars graduate within two years of entering the program. 4) Prepare students
for long-term career success and produce professionals who can contribute to the
defense of our nation through quality education, faculty-mentored research, and
collaborative skills-development activities.  &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is supported by the CyberCorps® Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which
funds proposals establishing or continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity
and aligns with the U.S. National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior
cybersecurity workforce. Following graduation, scholarship recipients are
required to work in cybersecurity for a federal, state, local, or tribal
Government organization for the same duration as their scholarship
support.  &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.