* 2235349
* A Universal Biosensing Platform Amplifying Signals Produced by NAD+/NADH-Dependent Enzymes
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Evgeny Katz, Clarkson University
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 05/31/2026
* USD 127,351.00

This project offers a novel approach to the analysis of different biomolecules
with ultra-high sensitivity. The analytical goals are achieved by creating a
universal biosensing platform that combines a biosensing part with a novel
biochemical amplification part. The basic science interest of the proposed study
is enhanced by the numerous applications of the novel biosensor and by simple,
easily exchangeable, biosensor configuration for identifying specific
biomolecules. The project opens novel possibilities in different areas of
biosensing, including biomedical, environmental, forensic, and homeland security
applications. The educational impacts include curricular developments as well as
PhD student education and participation of undergraduate researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program addresses the challenge of enzyme-
based biosensing with ultra-high sensitivity, particularly with the use of a
universal biosensing platform adaptable to different analytes with minimum
adjustments. A novel approach to signal amplification, providing the biosensing
with a sub-nanomolar or even picomolar detection limit is achieved using
artificial chimeric enzymes with allosteric properties. These enzymes are
composed of a biocatalytic part of PQQ-dependent glucose dehydrogenase (GDH) and
a biorecognition part selectively binding NADH or NAD+ cofactor that is combined
with NADH/NAD+-dependent dehydrogenases. The universality of the offered
approach is achieved because any NADH/NAD+-dependent dehydrogenase can be easily
combined with the same standard artificial allosteric GDH enzyme selective to
NADH/NAD+. The biocatalytic system including both enzyme types will be studied
in an immobilized form with a fluorescent response, then on a nanomodified
conductive electrode with an electrochemical (amperometric) response. The
primary reaction biocatalyzed by an NADH/NAD+-dehydrogenase produces a
stoichiometric response to the selected analyte in the form of the NADH or NAD+
cofactor. Then, the NADH or NAD+ molecules bind to a biorecognition part of the
artificial GDH enzyme resulting in its conformational change. This change will
be transduced to the biocatalytic part of the artificial GDH enzyme, switching
it from the initial mute (OFF) state to the active (ON) state, thus triggering a
biocatalytic cascade. Notably, the binding of a single NADH or NAD+ molecule
activates the biocatalytic reaction providing a non-stoichiometric amplified
response to the primary analyte. The study of amplified biosensing leads to
novel biosensors with adaptivity to different analytes while using various
target-selective NADH/NAD+-dehydrogenases in combination with the same
artificial allosteric enzyme selective to NADH/NAD+.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.