* 2235378
* Reading to Reason in Science (RtRiS): Teaching scientific processes through reading-to-learn in undergraduate biology lecture-based courses
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Paul Ode, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Julio Soto
* 06/30/2026
* USD 299,493.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving evidence-based
teaching practices in undergraduate biology courses. This IUSE Engaged Student
Learning: Level I project will examine how active learning strategies can
support students’ abilities to interpret primary scientific literature.
Undergraduate students need meaningful teaching strategies aimed at improving
understanding scientific literature. This skill is important for future
scientists and science students in general. Thus, research on effective reading
teaching strategies is needed. Hence, this project is significant because it
will design and test four reading-to-learn activities for 1,000 students at
three institutions: a public research university (Colorado State University), a
private undergraduate college (Colorado College), and a two-year college
(Hutchinson Community College, KS). This project is important because it is
intended to improve students’ scientific reading skills, as well as increase
their confidence in using these new skills across other science courses.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reading and writing are at the center of scientists’
professional activities, yet students still struggle to interpret primary
scientific literature. In addition, students tend to believe that their science
reading abilities are higher than what assessments indicate. The proposed
project will address the gap in the research on teaching scientific reasoning in
biology classes through reading prompts designed to focus on parts of scientific
arguments. We propose to test our instructional model in undergraduate biology
(i.e., introductory biology, ecology, and evolution) courses at three types of
institutions: a public research university (Colorado State University), a
private undergraduate college (Colorado College), and a two-year college
(Hutchinson Community College, KS). Reading-to-Reason-in-Science (RtRiS)
interventions center on four types of prompts designed to highlight scientific
processes and argumentation: (i) theory/ examples; (ii) hypotheses/ claims;
(iii) inductive/ deductive reasoning; and (iv) graphical or visual evidence. The
proposed project is organized around 3 objectives. First, the project team plans
to develop, modify, and test RtRiS interventions in biology courses. Second, the
project team will determine how engaging in RtRiS tasks affects student
performance and their perceptions of which tasks increased their performance and
confidence in each course. Third, the project team will examine how students
transfer their RtRiS skills to a writing task designed to evaluate their
understanding of constructing scientific arguments. Data collection and analysis
include (1) pre and post survey data on student perceptions and confidence in
reading and interpreting scientific literature and (2) thematic analysis of
written summaries of scientific arguments by the end of each course. At least
1,000 undergraduates (500/year) will benefit from the RtRiS intervention. The
NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.