* 2235461
* IUSE/PFE:RED A&amp;I: Project-Driven Learning for the Next Generation of Bioengineers
* ENG,EEC
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2027
* Song Li, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 05/31/2027
* USD 1,000,000.00

Bioengineering is a dynamic and interdisciplinary field that lies at the
intersection of engineering, physical sciences, life sciences, and medicine.
Over the past two decades, it has emerged as one of the fastest-growing
engineering disciplines, with a rising demand for bioengineers in various
sectors, including industry, research institutions, and healthcare. To meet
these evolving needs and foster a culture of innovation, inclusivity, and
interdisciplinary collaboration, a revolutionary approach to engineering
education is required. The proposed Revolutionizing Engineering Departments
(RED) Adaptation and Implementation (A&amp;I) project aims to integrate
evidence-based organizational change strategies into the Bioengineering
department to systematically transform the undergraduate curriculum. This
transformation will be centered around project-based learning, real-world
problem-solving, industry and clinical partnerships, and promotion of equity,
diversity, and inclusion (EDI) in education. By doing so, the Bioengineering
department at UCLA seeks to create a learner-centered environment that fosters
innovation, improves the learning experience for students, instructors, and
researchers, and aligns undergraduate education with industry and research
demands.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus on three main objectives.
Firstly, the integration of real-world projects and comprehensive skill training
will be incorporated consistently throughout the curriculum. This will enable
students to develop critical competencies such as technology proficiency, hands-
on experience, design capability, problem-solving skills, teamwork,
communication skills, and organizational management through project-based
learning. Secondly, the project will build the necessary infrastructure and
culture through partnerships with the university, medical center, and industry
to facilitate the transformation of the education program. This will involve
creating avenues for industry exposure, hands-on design experience, peer
collaboration, open-ended problem-solving, and communication skills development.
Lastly, the project will work towards creating an inclusive community for
bioengineering training and education at UCLA and beyond, with a focus on
promoting EDI in all aspects of the curriculum and educational practices. The
outcomes of this project will have broad impacts on Bioengineering undergraduate
education. It will equip the next generation of bioengineers with the skills,
knowledge, and mindset needed to thrive in the industry workforce and address
real-world challenges. Furthermore, it will promote EDI in engineering
education, reducing gaps in performance and retention among student groups, and
creating a more inclusive and diverse learning environment. Ultimately, this
innovative approach to education will benefit the healthcare system and society
as a whole, by producing bioengineers who are well-prepared to tackle the
evolving needs of the field and make meaningful contributions to
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.