* 2235080
* CyberCorps Scholarship for Service: Expanding the Cybersecurity Workforce and Curriculum Assessment Methods in the State of Wisconsin (CyberWIN)
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Keke Chen, Marquette University
* Continuing Grant
* ChunSheng Xin
* 12/31/2027
* USD 788,772.00

The CyberWIN project at Marquette University (MU), a National Center of Academic
Excellence in Cyber Defense Education (CAE-CDE), will recruit and train the next
generation of cybersecurity professionals to meet the needs of the public
sector. CyberWIN will support a total of 16 students across the accelerated and
traditional Computer and Information Science M.S. programs, with a
specialization in Information Assurance and Cyber Defense, and the Computer
Science PhD program, with cybersecurity-focused research. Apart from their
involvement in rigorous coursework, research projects in cybersecurity and
learning analytics, symposia, and hackathons, the 16 scholars will also mentor
Milwaukee high school students of the federal Trio program, Upward Bound Math
&amp; Science, with the goal of broadening participation in computing and
cybersecurity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CyberWIN has five goals: (1) produce 14
Master’s degree graduates and 2 PhD degree graduates in cybersecurity during the
five-year period of the project, (2) recruit prospective scholars with high
potential of academic success from diverse backgrounds, (3) provide high quality
instruction, especially in core cybersecurity classes, (4) cultivate a strong,
collaborative relationship with state and federal agencies to place scholars in
internships and full time appointments, and (5) contribute a novel program
assessment methodology, based on concept maps, to the learning analytics
community. Through this novel assessment, the project will further evaluate and
compare the professional development of specific groups based on, for example,
coursework, internship experiences, or demographics. CyberWIN has the potential
to uncover the high-impact practices that increase students’ commitment and any
effects that personal experiences may have on determining them. This framework
aims to capture the whole educational experience through rich, multi-dimensional
analysis that can be adopted by other institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is supported by the CyberCorps® Scholarship for Service (SFS) program,
which funds proposals establishing or continuing scholarship programs in
cybersecurity and aligns with the U.S. National Cyber Strategy to develop a
superior cybersecurity workforce. Following graduation, scholarship recipients
are required to work in cybersecurity for a federal, state, local, or tribal
Government organization for the same duration as their scholarship
support. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.