* 2235903
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Early Life Adversity and Gut Microbiota Composition
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Sara Lucci, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 03/31/2025
* USD 27,001.00

This doctoral dissertation research project examines the effects of alpha male
takeovers and infanticidal attacks on infant social adversity and gut microbiota
in wild primates. Infants may experience significant stress even if they survive
an attack. Stressors can cause the developing gut microbiota to destabilize,
which may negatively affect host digestion and immunity. The team investigates
whether gut microbiota changes are long-lasting or if they can be overcome with
stable environments later in life. The project advances research experiences for
first-generation researchers and women in STEM and provides training
opportunities in genetic laboratory methods for undergraduate and graduate
students at a Hispanic-serving public university. Research results are
communicated to site managers and the local community at the field location,
contributing to primate management plans and local conservation efforts of
critically endangered wild primates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines
how gut microbiota development associates with ecological and social stressors
experienced early in life. Leveraging 15 years of data from a wild population of
the critically endangered primate Colobus vellerosus, the researchers
investigate: 1) whether adverse conditions (i.e., low food availability, loss of
maternal kin, alpha male takeovers, and elevated infanticide risk) predict
infant gut microbiota composition; and 2) whether these adverse conditions,
either currently experienced and/or experienced as an infant, predict the gut
microbiota during juvenescence, subadulthood, or adulthood. Monthly ecological
data and weekly demographic data are used to determine food abundance,
competition for food, alpha male takeovers, infanticide risk, and presence of
maternal kin. The composition of the gut microbiota is determined from 16S rRNA
gene sequencing using C. vellerosus fecal samples from infants and from
individuals at later age life stages with known infancy conditions. The project
addresses immediate relationships between early life adversity and gut
microbiota in infancy and whether these potential changes associated with
adverse conditions in infancy persist into later life
stages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.