* 2235225
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track H: Leveraging Human-Centered AI Microtransit to Ameliorate Spatiotemporal Mismatch between Housing and Employment for Persons with Disabilities
* TIP,ITE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Weisong Shi, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 11/30/2023
* USD 613,621.00

Persons with disabilities (PWD) have historically faced significant employment
challenges mainly due to lack of transportation to employment-related Points of
Interest (ePOIs) such as work, education, and training locations. Paratransit
services that provide door-to-door and curb-to-curb services could alleviate the
first/last mile problem. However, they often require submitting pick-up requests
a few days to a few weeks in advance, which is not flexible enough to handle
more urgent requests to arrive at ePOIs on time. A main reason for such temporal
lags is the lack of accessible technology that helps make complex yet prompt
decisions for the determination of pick-up/drop-off location, routing,
scheduling, and re-routing. This project promotes disability inclusion in
workplaces by enhancing the availability and reliability of paratransit
services. Specifically, our vision is to deliver an open-source human-centered
Artificial Intelligence (AI) technology that aids microtransit services to
determine when and where to pick up/drop off PWD, and incorporates near real-
time routing algorithms to serve more urgent PWD requests between residential
and ePOI-rich regions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will be built on the
already established strong collaboration among several organizations operating
in the Metro Detroit Area, including paratransit service providers, disability
research institutions, workforce development institutions, outreach
communication services, and Wayne State University. Specifically, in this
project we plan to: (1) Organize outreach activities, focus groups, and
workshops to involve more organizations, have a convergent stakeholder
discussion to better understand their needs, how best to provide near real-time
paratransit services to meet identified needs, and identify data and ePOIs for
testing; (2) Study inflow and outflow of paratransit service demand across
regions and accessibility for PWD in the identified service area; (3) Create
measurement tools for success of our prototype for each stakeholder type (user,
service provider, employers). The data and measurement tools generated by this
project will shape the development and design of the proposed
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.