* 2235629
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Ecology, biology, and coexistence among multiple species of human ancestors
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Bernard Wood, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Bernstein
* 03/31/2024
* USD 10,828.00

Variation in the human fossil record from sites in eastern Africa is too great
to be attributed to one hominin species. It has been suggested that up to five
hominin species – Paranthropus boisei, Homo habilis, Homo rudolfensis, Homo
ergaster, and Homo erectus ¬– overlapped in space, time and in the dietary
resources consumed. This project identifies the extent and type of competition
between eastern African P. boisei and early Homo during the Pleistocene (after
c. 2.5 mya). Understanding how early Homo responded to competition with other
species at this critical early stage in the history of our genus allows us to
better appreciate our own anatomy, behavior and plasticity. This study also has
broader implications for ecological and biological research. Character
displacement, which is one of the factors that enables the coexistence of
closely related species, influences the structure of ecological communities, and
helps drive speciation and the distribution of biodiversity. The project also
creates lesson plans with education experts in the United States and
internationally and supports the training of a woman
scholar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers use 3D geometric morphometric (GM)
shape-change analysis to test whether interspecific competition influenced the
evolution of our genus Homo through time, and whether there were any significant
morphological effects of this competition. Conventional wisdom suggested that
early Homo led to the extinction of P. boisei over time through competitive
exclusion. However, this project applies an updated 3D GM shape-change analysis
methodology to test for ecological niche incumbency, a type of competition
hypothesis that has not typically been considered in paleoanthropology. The
investigators use molar morphological evidence from over a million years in P.
boisei and early Homo to investigate the nature and potential causes of any
interspecific competition. The results of this study may provide evidence of
competition between these genera through time and transform previous narratives
of Homo exceptionalism by showing how a non-ancestral hominin may have
influenced the trajectory of our own ancestral
lineage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.