* 2235364
* FuSe-TG: Cross-layer Co-Design for Self-Evolving Implantable Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Shimeng Yu, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 04/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Medical implantable devices have been widely adopted in many different parts of
the body for various applications in the past six decades. They are used to
self-manage diseases before or after diseases occur based on the sensed
physiological signals. However, the temporal patterns of the physiological
signals vary greatly for different individuals (i.e., inter-patient
variability). A hardened detection algorithm will not be adequate for all
patients to accurately detect the targeting disease (or events) with such
variability. The current implantable devices, once implanted, only allow the
parameter values of the detection algorithms to be iteratively tuned by doctors.
To address the challenges, this project aims to develop the next generation
implantable devices that are self-evolvable, allowing dynamic, continuous, and
automatic adjustment of both the detection algorithms and the hardware
configurations based on individual patient’s circumstances (e.g., data features,
ambient environments, device conditions) throughout the devices’ lifetime. A
self-evolvable design paradigm with software-hardware co-exploration will be
studied to enable low-power, low-overhead, and on-device model personalization
and inference for implantable devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The success of this
project will lead to higher detection accuracy, longer implantable device
lifetime, and higher quality of care for patients with implantable devices. More
importantly, this project will develop a novel cross-layer co-exploration design
paradigm for different types of implantable devices to conduct personalized
disease management. The education impacts of the proposed research include the
integration of various educational activities based on the resources available
to the PIs such as DAC System Design Contest and TinyML Design Contest at ICCAD;
outreach for local K-12 students through ND’s CS curriculum for K-12 students in
Indiana and an in-person webinar named KidSemicon; an online social forum that
allows students, researchers, and engineers to communicate, learn, and share
knowledge in the domain of reconfigurable semiconductor technologies;
undergraduate research with emphasis on minority participation, and course
integration of the research outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.