* 2235560
* Policies and Practices for Supporting Family Caregivers in STEM: Advancing Inclusive Excellence in the Wake of the COVID-19 Pandemic
* EDU,EES
* 01/15/2023,06/30/2024
* Ashley Bear, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Keri Sather-Wagstaff
* 06/30/2024
* USD 150,000.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has served to exacerbate the challenges facing students
and professionals in STEM with family caregiving responsibilities, while also
creating a greater sense of urgency to address longstanding issues. Research
indicates that the COVID-19 pandemic has had a major impact on the careers of
STEM professionals with family caregiving responsibilities and that without
evidence-based action the scientific enterprise could see additional attrition
of women, especially women of color, from these fields. To respond to this need,
the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine will carry out a
comprehensive consensus study that will outline promising and innovative
policies and practices for supporting STEM students and professionals with
family caregiving responsibilities, including childcare and/or eldercare. The
study will examine how the pandemic may be contributing to increased attrition
from STEM fields and inequities in opportunities for advancement into leadership
roles, among other impacts, and will culminate in a report that will provide
leaders in academia and government with evidence-based guidance on how to
implement equitable policies and programs to support the retention, re-entry,
and advancement of STEM students and professionals with family caregiving
responsibilities. The study will take an intentionally intersectional approach
and consider how the intersection of multiple identities (e.g. race, gender,
age) can affect the nature and extent of caregiving responsibilities. The study
will also investigate how intersectional identities affect access to and impact
of policies and practices intended to support work-life balance. The study will
explore the current patchwork of policies on this issue and detail strategies to
promote culture change in STEM. It will also identify areas where greater
coordination within and across the academic and governmental sectors is needed.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To carry out this study, the National Academies will
assemble a multidisciplinary, ad hoc committee of experts. The committee will
include a diverse range of individuals recognized for their roles leading and
evaluating effective policies, practices, and programs for supporting family
caregivers and work-life balance in STEM. The National Academies will also seek
representation from leading scholars and researchers in industrial and
organizational psychology, human resource management, labor law, economics, and
other relevant fields of study. The committee will carry out a comprehensive
review of the published, peer-reviewed and grey literature, which will be
augmented by original qualitative data collection and case study analysis to
address gaps in the available research. The committee’s work will be informed by
several public information-gathering meetings, as well as by closed session
deliberations during which the committee will draft the report. The report will
then go through the National Academies review process before publication and
dissemination. The study leverages NSF funds with funds from NIH, NIST, The
Doris Duke Charitable Foundation, The Henry Luce Foundation, and NASA (pending).
NSF support for the study comes from the Directorate for STEM education (EDU),
the Division of Equity for Excellence in STEM (EES), ADVANCE: Organizational
Change for Gender Equity in STEM Academic Professions, and the Office of
Integrated Activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.