* 2235968
* A Developmental Model to Understand the Process of Instructor Implementation of Evidence-Based Teaching Practices
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Mark Graham, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 01/31/2026
* USD 421,171.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by creating a model for
evidence-based teaching (EBT) training to better facilitate instructors’
transfer of professional development training into STEM classrooms. Researchers
at three institutions (Yale University, SUNY-Binghamton, and the University of
Connecticut) will collaborate to investigate why, after taking part in
professional development (PD) programs on EBT, some participants continue to
climb the "implementation curve" while others revert to previous strategies.
Moving away from a binary perspective of "implementers" and "non-implementers,"
this study aims to uncover how instructors translate professional development
training into classroom implementation. It will also aim to identify specific
ways of providing instructors support between the time of their EBT training and
the anticipated classroom implementations. The faculty participating in the
study are affiliated with twenty-one institutions including one community
college, two master’s granting institutions, three baccalaureate colleges, ten
high research activity (R1) universities, and five high research activity (R2)
universities. Such institutional diversity holds promise to add to the
generalizability of the project’s findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
intends to systematically identify themes of faculty EBT implementation, build a
model of the implementation process, test the model, disseminate findings to
improve PD programs, and locate associated measures so that implementation can
be assessed. This will be accomplished through a mixed-methods approach that
includes surveying and interviewing EBT-trained instructors, creating and
content-validating a model of EBT implementation, and developing a “model to
measures” inventory that locates measures associated with implementation stages.
Insights from the project should clarify the change process for instructors, as
well as aid professional developers in revising and evaluating their programs to
better support instructors as they embark on their transformation journeys at
their home institutions. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through its Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.