* 2235440
* FuSe-TG: OpenBrain: Open-Source Cross-Layer Design of RRAM-based Neuromorphic Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2025
* Boris Murmann, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 03/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

The OpenBrain project will create a shareable framework that assists researchers
in creating computer chips that can “think” in ways inspired by the human brain.
This teaming grant specifically brings together researchers with promising
specialties ranging from electronic devices to deep-learning applications so
that they may synergize across traditional system boundaries. The team will
engage the research and education communities through the accessibility of open-
source so that others may harness OpenBrain, reproduce results, and iterate upon
prior results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The OpenBrain project will advance computing
by creating sustainable smart devices that use brain-inspired techniques for
learning with improved power and performance over traditional computer
processors. These new computer chips will improve how we store, manage, and
harness information in sensor systems for applications in medicine, the
environment, transportation, and many other areas. The open-source nature of the
project will also foster education and workforce development by enabling
students to have insight into and work directly with leading-edge chip
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.