* 2235516
* Designing Integrated Structural Support for Epistemology, Growth Mindset, and Sense of Belonging in Introductory Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Morten Lundsgaard, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 04/30/2026
* USD 599,867.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by establishing practices to
improve student mindset and persistence in physics. This project plans to
investigate new methods for designing introductory physics courses to develop
productive student beliefs about their own learning. The target beliefs are
correlated with students' learning, academic achievement, and well-being. This
project hopes to advance the science of instructional design through the goal of
producing clear design principles for developing these target beliefs. Design
efforts will focus on how course curriculum and policies can tacitly communicate
and reinforce productive beliefs and promote student engagement. Because
introductory physics is an early core course in many undergraduate STEM majors,
the improvements developed through this project can improve early undergraduate
persistence in STEM and seed future success of STEM students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will iteratively design the course structures
of a large-enrollment introductory physics course to promote positive
development of three key aspects of students' beliefs about their own learning:
physics epistemology, growth mindset, and sense of belonging. Though approaches
for positively impacting these educationally relevant beliefs have been
developed in other projects, prior approaches often consider one kind of belief
in isolation, providing little insight into how these beliefs and their
development may be related. To investigate and improve students' beliefs about
their own learning, this project uses a design-based research approach. The
project will iteratively develop instructional design principles centered on how
these three beliefs can be coherently integrated with course activities and
instructor messaging through three classroom practices: (i) valuing learning
over time, (ii) talking about and resolving wrong ideas, and (iii) eliciting,
sharing, and engaging with others' ideas. Design iterations will be informed by
a mixed methods approach using student reflections, classroom observations,
interviews, and survey data. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through its Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.