* 2235336
* FuSe-TG: Heterogeneous module, array antenna, and IC co-design for energy-efficient D-band wireless communications and radar
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2025
* Mark Rodwell, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 05/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Future wireless communication and radar technologies above 100 GHz will enable
high-speed data transmission and high-resolution radar sensing, which will be
the foundation to enable people and things to connect and interact with one
another across physical and virtual spaces seamlessly. One of the key enablers
for these technologies is a large-scale antenna array module, where multiple
radio transmitters and receivers are integrated with a group of antennas for
high-speed data transmission over a longer distance. This project will address
the key co-design and integration challenges of implementing a large-scale
antenna array module above 100 GHz. The scope of the proposed co-design study
covers both high-performance-driven integration platforms for potential defense-
related applications and volume-driven cost-effective packaging technologies for
commercial use cases. The research insights from this project can be adopted via
industry engagement to develop new process technologies and therefore will
benefit a wide range of semiconductor manufacturing companies in the United
States. The success of the project will also help maintain the continuous
leadership of the United States in wireless technologies and semiconductors by
training students into innovative engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To overcome
severe path loss and limited transistor performance above 100 GHz, silicon-based
large-scale phased array transceivers are essential to realizing D-band (110-170
GHz) wireless communications and radar. For the development of D-band phased
array modules, the small size of antenna-in-package (AiP), which scales down
with wavelength, poses electromagnetic, thermal, and manufacturing challenges.
To address these, we propose a holistic IC/package/antenna/system co-design
approach based on heterogeneous integration for a scalable phased array module
above 100 GHz. We will study a scalable D-band aperiodic phased array
architecture without the constraint of Î»/2 antenna spacing as a stepstone
example to establish our teaming environment and demonstrate the proposed
approaches. For the heterogeneous integration of different chiplets and antenna
arrays at frequencies&gt;100 GHz, we will investigate emerging packaging
technologies such as fan-out wafer-level packaging (FOWLP) and SLIC to address
the combined electromagnetic, IC/signal routing density, and thermal challenges.
We will also develop new D-band antenna design principles using substrate-
integrated waveguide (SIW) based composite right/left-handed (CRLH) metamaterial
resonator for wide bandwidth and dual-polarization support. These collaborative
efforts will pave the way for the development of a scalable phased array module
above 100 GHz with more element count, higher energy efficiency, better thermal
management, and greater manufacturability. This will be the key enabler to
realizing next-generation ultra-wideband wireless communications and radar that
offer the potential for revolutionary applications including industrial
automation, immersive augmented and virtual reality, holographic telepresence,
and self-driving cars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.