* 2235762
* CAREER: Adaptive and regulatory diversity in natural CRISPR-Cas systems
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Alexander Meeske, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 02/29/2028
* USD 649,998.00

CRISPR-Cas systems are anti-viral immune systems widespread in microbial
genomes. Bacteria are “immunized” during viral infection when a fragment of
invader DNA (called a spacer) is captured and used as a sequence-specific
immunological memory to recognize and destroy matching sequences. This project
will investigate the mechanisms by which diverse CRISPR systems acquire
immunological memory, and to discover factors that bacteria use to control this
process. The programmable sequence-specific nucleic acid recognition and
biochemical activities of CRISPR-Cas nucleases have been exploited for a wide
range of biotechnologies. Understanding how these systems are programmed by
their natural hosts will better enable researchers to generate diverse CRISPR
libraries in vivo, and will benefit CRISPR-based technologies aimed at molecular
recording of cellular histories. This education plan of this project is
comprised of a course-based research experience in which undergraduate
participants will systematically measure interference by diverse CRISPR types
targeting different viruses. This course will give students hands-on experience
with the concepts of molecular biology and viral infection, and also represents
a defined framework for students to rapidly generate and publish novel
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to understand how
diverse CRISPR types acquire new spacers from foreign genetic elements. Listeria
seeligeri and its phages is a tractable model for studying four distinct CRISPR
types, including the RNA-targeting CRISPR-Cas13 system. This model bacterium has
been extremely useful for investigating the mechanisms and consequences of
Cas13-mediated interference during type VI CRISPR immunity. However, the
processes underlying the initial spacer acquisition events that establish
immunity remain unclear. This proposal will employ next generation sequencing to
detect rare acquisition events with high sensitivity. CRISPR-associated genes
will be systematically mutagenized to assess their contributions to
immunization. The CRISPR-Cas13 system uniquely targets RNA rather than DNA, and
the acquired spacers will be examined to understand whether and how this system
specifies the capture of transcribed target sequences. Finally, spacer
acquisition will be biochemically reconstituted to investigate the mechanistic
basis of spacer integration site selection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.