* 2235710
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Extraordinary circadian clocks in araneoid spiders: an integrative approach to understanding their evolutionary origins and underlying mechanisms
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Darrell Moore, East Tennessee State University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Renn
* 05/31/2026
* USD 403,551.00

Circadian rhythms are daily rhythms of behavior, physiology, and cellular
metabolism that are driven by molecular cycles of an internal biological clock.
Internal clocks remain in sync with the earth’s 24-h day by making small
adjustments to their own internal clock period. However, there are negative
physiological consequences if the clock is forced to make large adjustments
(e.g., jetlag) so most organisms’ clocks do not vary much from 24 hours.
Surprisingly, a group of spider species possess clocks that differ from 24 hours
by as much as 5 hours with no apparent consequences. In theory, these species
should not exist. However, the spider system provides a unique opportunity to
explore basic mechanisms of circadian clocks, particularly how organisms
synchronize with their environment. This multi-institutional project is designed
to understand: (1) the evolutionary changes in clock genes and circadian
properties in spiders, (2) the limits and physiological consequences of
synchronizing to the 24-h day, and (3) the fundamental molecular clockworks of
spiders. Overall, this project will develop a new, and uniquely powerful, model
system to understand circadian rhythms and, potentially, circadian illnesses.
Circadian rhythms are conceptually accessible to students and this project will
support rich opportunities for undergraduates in the Appalachian region to
participate in research at all three institutions. Societal impacts of this
project will include development of user-friendly, open-access applications for
rigorous analyses of circadian data, annual public outreach events including
nature/STEM programs for K-12 students as well as adults, and conducting
original experiments in local high schools.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Araneoid
spider circadian rhythms are unlike most others found on Earth. They exhibit
remarkably broad distributions of endogenous free-running periods (FRPs) both
within and among species, including species with exceptionally short or long
mean FRPs (17.8-29.1 hours). Rather than suffering negative consequences
typically associated with dissonance between endogenous circadian period and the
24-hour day, survivorship experiments suggest that these spiders are somehow
released from these selective constraints. Using an integrative, multi-level
approach, this project will exploit the apparent evolutionary shift in circadian
clock system function between araneoid and non-araneoid spider species to
identify changes in the clock mechanisms that enable these unusual araneoid
clocks to exist. Using genomic or transcriptomic-scale data to estimate rates of
evolutionary change in eight different chronobiological parameters for species
spanning the diversity of spiders will enable reconstruction of ancestral states
and pinpoint the timing of evolutionary shifts. Comparing survivorship among
araneoid and non-araneoid species will determine if araneoid spiders truly have
been released from the costs of entrainment to non-resonant light/dark cycles.
Classic phase-shifting and phase-response curve experiments will probe
differences in entrainment potential between araneoid and non-araneoid spiders.
Comparing canonical clock gene expression amplitudes between araneoid and non-
araneoid spiders and to established insect models will explore potential clock
function differences. Comparing the functionality of the clock component CRY1
between araneoid and non-araneoid species will test for differences in light
sensitivity of the circadian system. Using molecular, behavioral, and
phylogenetic approaches, this project explores the extent and functional
ramifications of circadian plasticity in wild clocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.