* 2235050
* Collaborative Research: CCRI: New: CoMIC: A Collaborative Mobile Immersive Computing Research Infrastructure for Multi-user XR
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Amitabh Varshney, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 04/30/2026
* USD 500,000.00

The last few years have witnessed the tremendous development of immersive
technologies such as virtual, augmented, and mixed reality (VR, AR, and MR),
which are often collectively referred to as extended reality (XR). While XR is
deemed as the killer application of 5G and beyond, existing work has mainly
focused on improving the quality of experience (QoE) for single-user scenarios,
and there is limited research on exploring the underlying infrastructure to
support emerging immersive applications, especially multi-user collaboration and
interaction involving participants from geo-distributed locations. This project
aims to design and develop the infrastructure for Collaborative Mobile Immersive
Computing (CoMIC), which fills this critical gap and lays the technical
foundation for realizing the grand vision of the Metaverse.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of CoMIC includes: (1) constructing
a research infrastructure with both software and hardware components for
advancing collaborative immersive computing and (2) serving the community by
empowering innovative solutions of multi-user XR. CoMIC will develop a first-of-
its-kind, open-accessible, and reconfigurable research infrastructure, which is
naturally required by various use cases such as education, training, healthcare,
and entertainment. It strives to offer a collaborative, visual-first, and
hologram-based computing space and a QoE-driven, multi-site, and immersive
communication framework by providing a shared environment for community users.
CoMIC will be open to and support in-person visits of community users to
facilitate their research projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
create broader impacts on research infrastructure, education and training,
societies, and economies, and broaden computing participation. Currently, the
research and development of multi-user XR have been hindered because the
underlying infrastructure with essential building blocks is still missing. CoMIC
will timely bridge this critical gap and significantly speed up the realization
of the Metaverse vision. The CoMIC platform offers a unique research opportunity
for students and will be used to educate and train the next generation of
researchers and engineers to master the key technologies and system design
skills in immersive computing and advance the frontiers of science and
engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project brings together
investigators from George Mason University and the University of Maryland to
build the CoMIC infrastructure. Its remotely accessible and programmable robots
mounted with XR devices and mmWave 5G edge networks can enable the comparison of
different solutions in a consistent way. Users can download the CoMIC software
to set up their own testbed, replace the CoMIC components in the reference
implementation, and experiment with their own multi-user XR solutions. The
website for this project is https://comic-
xr.github.io/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.