* 2235939
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Behavior and energetics of parenting
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2024
* Eduardo Fernandez-Duque, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Bernstein
* 03/31/2024
* USD 25,200.00

Cooperative infant care in which multiple individuals contribute to caring for a
single offspring is thought to have played a key role in human evolution by
reducing the energy mothers need to invest in their offspring. It can be
challenging to disentangle the relationship between energetic costs and benefits
of care provided by multiple individuals, and the study of this question can
benefit from the examination of other species with similar forms of cooperative
infant care. The simplest form, where infants receive care from only their
mother and father, is called biparental care. This Doctoral Dissertation
Research project measures energy expenditure related to infant care in primate
species with biparental cooperative infant care. Behavioral data, movement data,
and metabolic measurements of energy use during infant care are combined from
wild and captive populations to investigate how these monkeys distribute the
energetic costs of childcare responsibilities. The project supports long-term
research and scientists at a field station and produces short bilingual videos
to disseminate results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To quantify the relative investment
of male and female parents in the care of their infants, this research combines
behavioral data from both coppery titi monkeys with activity and energetics
data. Coppery titi monkey mothers and fathers each specialize in some caring
tasks: mothers nurse and fathers carry the infant. However, the extent of sex-
based specialization for other caring behaviors, such as grooming and tolerated
food theft remains unknown as does the energetic burden of these behaviors and
any compensatory changes in the parents’ activity. Activity data will be
collected throughout the entire period of infant care , andallows inferences
about the energetic investment parents make during infant care to be made on
both behavioral and physiological bases since the measures of energy use will be
in the context of behavior and activity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.