* 2235177
* The Role of Evolving Spatial Patterns of Anthropogenic Aerosol Emissions in the Trajectory of Climate Change
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Clara Deser, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 12/31/2025
* USD 998,793.00

The observational record of the past century is a critical resource for
understanding and addressing climate change, but the record is hard to interpret
as greenhouse gas (GHG) increases do not act alone in driving global warming and
regional climate evolution. Among the confounding factors perhaps the largest is
the cooling effect of anthropogenic aerosols (AAs), in particular haze from
tailpipe and smokestack emissions, which may have offset up to half of the
warming effect of GHG increases. The offsetting effect of AAs has prompted
numerous detection and attribution studies seeking to discriminate between GHGs,
AAs, and other factors by identifying distinct geographical climate response
patterns for each. These studies have commonly identified a single fixed pattern
as the response to AA cooling, which makes sense if the goal is to compare two
distinct periods of the record. But a single fixed pattern is a crude
approximation since emissions evolved considerably over the century, with the
mid-century dominated by AA sources in the eastern US and Western Europe
followed by a transition to dominant sources in China and India. The change in
source regions would naturally produce an evolving response pattern and could
also cause changes in the strength of the response, as climate is more sensitive
to forcing in some regions than in others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research under
this award considers the evolution of the AA response and the implications of a
time-evolving response pattern. One goal is to distinguish between the evolution
of the response due to changes in AA forcing and the evolution that occurs due
to the pace of the dynamical adjustments through which the climate equilibrates
to new forcing. Another is to understand how the evolving AA response pattern
affects estimates of climate sensitivity (the amount of warming caused by a
doubling of carbon dioxide) derived from the observed record. In addition to the
observational record the work takes advantage of ensembles of simulations from
the Community Earth System Model (CESM) and other climate models, which allow
the forced climate response to be separated from the noise of natural climate
variability. The ensembles used in the project include simulations forced with
all known external forcings over the 20th century and projections of climate
forcings over the 21st century, as well as single-forcing simulations in which
GHGs and AAs are applied in isolation. Additional simulations will be performed
with reduced complexity versions of CESM including an atmosphere-only version
and a version in which the ocean is replaced by a motionless
"slab".&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work has societal relevance given the need to
understand the anthropogenic climate change of the 20th century and its lessons
for the future. The role of AAs in the observational record is particularly
important as it complicates efforts to determine the sensitivity of climate to
GHG increases: the observed warming over the 20th century could either be due to
low climate sensitivity combined with weak AA cooling or high climate
sensitivity and strong AA cooling. The two possibilities essentially bracket the
spectrum of possible climate futures, thus results that favor one over the other
would be uniquely valuable. In addition, the project supports a postdoctoral
researcher, a graduate student, and an undergraduate, thereby building the
future climate science workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.