* 2235984
* Improving Outcomes for At-Risk STEM First-Year Students through Course-Based Undergraduate Research Experiences
* EDU,DUE
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2025
* Sharon Pochron, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 12/31/2025
* USD 293,933.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by implementing Course-based
Undergraduate Research Experiences (CUREs) for first-year students who run the
risk of taking more than four years to graduate with a degree. Undergraduate
degree completion in STEM has been decreasing since 1970, threatening the
historical preeminence in science and technology that the United States has
enjoyed for the last 60 years. To promote STEM interest, motivation, and
persistence, this project provides two CURE interventions for at-risk students.
The first CURE intervention uses evidence-based pedagogical elements. The second
CURE intervention uses both pedagogical and STEM-belonging elements. Both CURE
interventions aim to improve GPA, fidelity to a STEM major, and retention in
college through graduation. After each semester-long CURE intervention, the
project will gather data on student success and perceptions of STEM
belongingness to assess the importance of each pedagogical and social element
independently. This project will identify successful strategies within the two
types of CUREs to assist instructors and departments as they build appropriate
courses and scale them to support at-risk STEM students across US
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate research experiences (URE)
positively impact student retention and persistence in STEM, and an increasing
number of well-controlled, large-scale, and longitudinal studies indicate that
UREs can attract, retain, and ultimately improve the success of undergraduates
in STEM. However, UREs traditionally occur as research apprenticeships where
students work as part of a faculty member’s research group, and apprenticeships
do not easily scale to serve entire cohorts of STEM-interested students. CUREs
provide authentic and early research experiences to students at scale, engaging
more students relative to traditional apprenticed research experiences. The goal
of this project is to identify a critical gap in understanding what pedagogical
and social elements would allow improved scalability and transferability. This
project will provide an advanced understanding of a very specific question: How
do CURES successfully support first-year STEM students who are at risk of
failing to graduate in four years? By the end of this project, over 500
undergraduate students will benefit from this experience. This project will
implement a suite of elements identified in the literature as pedagogically
impactful including experiential active learning, authentic assessment,
scaffolded mentorship, and civic engagement, all of which are designed to
increase a sense of STEM belongingness in students. The project’s findings will
contribute to the growing body of knowledge around CUREs and the ways they may
be implemented to the benefit of students and their institutions. The NSF IUSE:
EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through its Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.