* 2235597
* CAREER: Frequency Comb-Based Multidimensional Coherent Spectroscopy and Microscopy at the Nanoscale
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Bachana Lomsadze, Santa Clara University
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 03/31/2028
* USD 217,182.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Bachana Lomsadze from Santa Clara University is
developing a new tool that combines near-field optical microscopy with frequency
comb multidimensional coherent spectroscopy to improve both the spectral and
spatial resolutions for super resolution imaging for better understanding of the
chemical and physical properties of two dimensional materials. Understanding
material properties at small length scales is critical for correlating how
structural variations influence chemical reactions and specificity as well as
energy transfer locally. Dr. Lomsadze and his group are developing a new tool
that provides spatially and spectrally resolved chemical and physical
information about the two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides. Their
discoveries could lead to better understanding of the chemical and physical
properties of materials on a single particle level, aid efforts to develop
quantum devices, and find use outside the laboratory for applications such as
chemical sensing or biomedical imaging. Dr. Lomsadze is also developing
classroom activities for non-science majors to help students understand and
appreciate basic science and technology that is impacting society
today.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Lomsadze lab will combine a near-field optical
microscope with frequency comb multidimensional coherent spectroscopy with an
eye toward improving the spectral and spatial resolution for super resolution
imaging of two dimensional materials in the infrared spectral region. While
current methods can successfully evaluate the chemical and physical properties
of two dimensional materials routinely, most methods are limited by large signal
backgrounds, slow acquisition times, spatial resolution, or spectral resolution.
The Lomsadze group is developing methods that have the potential to result in
two-dimensional coherent spectra per pixel, that are collected in seconds, with
high (i.e., tens of nm) spatial resolution, and with comb spectral resolution.
These improvements in spatial and spectral resolution could lead to new
information about the chemical, physical, and optical properties of materials
with implications in many fields ranging from forensics to biomedical imaging
and field analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.