* 2235294
* FuSe-TG: A Co-Design Model for Advanced Manufacturing and Workforce Development to Enhance Future Semiconductor Technologies
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2025
* Manjeri Anantram, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 02/28/2025
* USD 400,000.00

Manipulating information at the sub-cellular scale inspired Richard Feynman to
imagine biological approaches to miniaturize computing architectures. At the
time of his now prescient lecture, There’s Plenty of Room at the Bottom, this
possibility seemed like science fiction. Today, technology exists where we can
explore the possibility of integrating biology with semiconductor materials to
manipulate matter at the atomic scale in order to enable novel computing
architectures. This project aims to do exactly this by building a team capable
of integrating DNA-nanotechnology with emerging 2-dimensional materials. This
approach could lead to new fundamental understanding of the limits of future
semiconductor technology. This teaming grant brings together expertise from the
Pacific Northwest and Mid-Atlantic regions of the United States to develop an
integrated theoretical-computational-experimental co-design framework which can
enable the discovery of novel physical phenomena which will reduce energy
consumption across the computing spectrum, accelerating the deployment of
functional high-performance materials and energy-efficient device structures
that will revolutionize non-von Neumann technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this team-forming grant is to cultivate a broad coalition of
researchers&lt;br/&gt;capable of advancing the future of semiconductor
manufacturing through a co-design&lt;br/&gt;approach combining experiments and
computation. We aim to establish a new&lt;br/&gt;semiconductor manufacturing
paradigm which merges computational sciences and&lt;br/&gt;experiments at the
nexus of DNA nanotechnology and 2-dimensional (2D) materials&lt;br/&gt;to
develop novel energy-efficient neural computing devices which can help
reduce&lt;br/&gt;global computing related energy demands. Specifically, we will
design DNA nanostructure templates for atomically precise patterning and doping
of 2D materials in order to create 2D synapses and their neuromorphic circuits.
Close collaboration with our Industrial Advisory Board and community college
partners will enable a skilled workforce capable of leveraging both synthetic
biological processes and emerging 2D materials in the design and development of
next generation computing paradigms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.