* 2235617
* Harnessing the Aggregation Behavior of Near-Infrared (NIR-II) Fluorophores via Supramolecular Nano-scaffolds
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2022,01/31/2026
* Davita Watkins, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 01/31/2026
* USD 154,999.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program
in the Division of Chemistry, Davita L. Watkins of the University of Mississippi
is developing polymeric systems that can encapsulate biocompatible organic
fluorophores for fluorescence imaging. Fluorophores are dyes that contain
special carbon-carbon double bonds called pi-bonds. When these pi-bonds are
irradiated with light of a certain wavelength, it enables the fluorophores to
re-emit that light but with a different wavelength and much higher intensity.
This unique characteristic makes them particularly useful for bioimaging
applications. In this research, biocompatible amphiphilic polymers containing
both water-loving (hydrophilic) and oil-loving (lipophilic) segments will first
be prepared. Their amphiphilic properties resemble those of other artificial
compounds such as soaps and detergents, or even naturally occurring
lipoproteins. Synthesized polymers will then be assembled to create well-defined
nanosized capsules which are capable to trap fluorophores. Various dynamic
processes that will occur during polymer assembly and encapsulation will be
studied using several spectroscopic techniques. Results associated with this
research have the potential to advance the field of bioimaging and further
understanding of optical properties of fluorophores in nanoconfined
environments. This work is a multi-disciplinary study in which fundamental
aspects of development will provide fertile ground for the training of early
career scientists and offer design guidelines toward functional polymeric
materials. Specific outreach endeavors will focus on research activities for
transfer students and/or students having nontraditional academic paths as they
make up a significant portion of the collegiate population in the state of
Mississippi. The research will equip the next generation of scientists with the
skills, collaborative spirit, and creativity to solve complex societal problems.
A diverse scholastic population will also become more exposed to the emerging
and dynamic area of fluorescence imaging, preparing them to contribute to an
expanding STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop new approaches to biocompatible
organic fluorophores for fluorescence imaging. Specific emphasis will be placed
on developing linear-dendritic block copolymers and dye-polymer conjugates with
optical properties in the second near-infrared window (NIR-II, 1000–1400 nm),
which has emerged as a high-priority in recent years due to poor stability and
biocompatibility of current agents. By employing amphiphilic substrates, the
fundamental mechanism of self-assembly that results in well-defined, uniform
nanostructures ideal for fluorescence imaging will be elucidated. From the point
of view of macromolecular design, linear-dendritic block copolymers will be
synthesized with hydrophobic blocks consisting of polyesters such as
polylactides and polycaprolactones. Hydrophilic dendritic branches will be
composed of polyamidoamines. NIR-II fluorescent dyes with aggregation-induced
emissive molecular frameworks capable of self-assembling into monodisperse
micellar structures will be strategically designed with thienothiadiazole and
thienoselenadiazole units as the core acceptor structures. This research is
cross-cutting with relevance to principles of organic and physical chemistry,
and materials science. The work has the potential to contribute to bio-imaging
development by providing a deeper understanding of unconventional related
photophysical phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.