* 2235227
* Enhancing Engineering Students’ Ability to Think Deeply about their Learning Through Formal and Continuous Reflection
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Heidi Diefes-Dux, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 06/30/2026
* USD 597,668.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving engineering
students' ability to reflect deeply on their learning. An ability to reflect is
a necessary workforce skill. It helps one to learn on their own at work. It is
needed for U.S. innovation and economic competitiveness. This project is
significant because it focuses on investigating the use of reflection activities
across entire engineering degree programs. Engineering teachers will be trained
to create and use reflection activities in their classrooms. Practical teacher
resources to build reflective capacity will be created. One target outcome is
students with a well-developed ability to use reflection to guide their learning
as they do engineering work. A second outcome sought is a change in engineering
teaching practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to
investigate how purposefully embedded student reflection, supported by a
consistent framework, across a degree program, impacts students’ metacognitive
strategies as an indicator of preparation for workplace learning. This project
is significant because of its focus on the impact of formal and continuous
reflection on students’ development of metacognitive strategies over time
through theory-based analysis of students’ reflections rather than relying
solely on quantitative measures of students’ perceptions. The overall research
questions are: What is the impact of the theory-driven integration of reflection
across engineering curricula on students’ metacognitive regulatory abilities?
How does the integration of reflection activities impact instructional team
members’ beliefs about reflection in engineering education and teaching and
learning beliefs? The research questions will be addressed through four project
aims: (1) co-design reflection integration strategies appropriate for different
course types, academic levels, and desired learning outcomes, (2) illuminate the
longitudinal development of metacognitive strategies that students use across an
engineering curriculum, (3) explore instructional team experiences with
reflection integration, and (4) co-develop practical resources for engineering
course- and program-level integration of reflection. These aims will be
accomplished through quantitative and qualitative data collection methods
including student reflections and surveys as well as instructional team
interviews. Dissemination of the project results is intended to lay groundwork
for institutional improvement in STEM education. Project dissemination includes
research venues (e.g., conferences, archival journals) and research-to-practice
venues (e.g., engineering discipline conferences). The NSF IUSE:EDU Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.