* 2235337
* Transforming Grading Practices in the Computing Education Community
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Stephen Edwards, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 05/31/2028
* USD 570,422.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by transforming grading
practices in the computing education community. Most computing instructors grade
assignments by deducting points for each mistake made by a student from the
maximum possible score on an assignment. Grading practices that rely on
deducting points often discourage student achievement and can be influenced by
implicit bias that disproportionately impacts students from low-socioeconomic
backgrounds and students of color. The use of equitable and inclusive grading
practices has been shown to promote self-regulation of student learning and can
be easily incorporated by instructors when they are given the proper training
and support. This project seeks to transform grading practices across the
community of computing educators by developing and implementing a unified theory
of equitable grading for computing education (UTEG-CE). An implementation of
UTEG-CE will result in the adoption of equitable and inclusive practices, and
promote self-regulation of student learning, leading to improved learning and
retention throughout the computing education
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project leverages support in automated
grading systems and grading by hand to transform grading practices. To produce
this transformation, this project will pursue four objectives. First is to
develop grading resources to facilitate and promote adoption, including
recommended practices for learning management system features and support for
commonly used automated grading tools. Second is to deploy a full-scale
professional development campaign to institute and nurture a community of
practice (CoP) focused upon these grading strategies. Third is to measure the
impact on computing educators, including the extent of adoption. Fourth is to
measure the impact of this approach on students, considering achievement,
motivation, stress, and anxiety, with a focused consideration on the
differential impact on members of communities who have been marginalized in
their participation in STEM fields of study, and computing in particular. The
NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.