* 2235467
* Conference: HSI Intersectionality Community of Practice for Student Success (HSI-ICPSS)
* EDU,EES
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Nancy Lopez, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Elsa Gonzalez
* 08/31/2023
* USD 49,938.00

Institutions of higher education generally define underserved student
populations using one-dimensional metrics, such as first-generation college
status, PELL recipient, Latinx origin, African American origin, and Native
American origin and gender. Yet, research shows that reporting higher education
outcomes by race alone, gender alone or class alone is insufficient for
documenting and eliminating inequities. Intersectionality or attention to the
constitution of race, gender, class, and other axes of inequality as both
analytically distinct and simultaneous systems in a given sociohistorical
context is a powerful tool for making inequities visible and helping
institutions of higher education create effective actions for advancing
undergraduate student success in STEM and beyond. The HSI Intersectionality
Community of Practice for Student Success (HSI-ICPSS) project will bring
together 25 HSIs for a year-long community of practice through a virtual
conference series. It will convene participating HSIs for four half-day
conferences. Key stakeholders, including faculty, staff and other leaders with
expertise in equity and inclusion and undergraduate success initiatives focused
on STEM will be invited. A key goal of the virtual conference series is to share
state of the art scholarship on the use of intersectionality in higher education
and the transformative potential of intersectionality as inquiry and praxis for
equity metrics and developing effective strategies for advancing student
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intersectionality as inquiry and praxis has a long
genealogy in both academic and practitioner communities. Yet, the power of
intersectionality has not been brought to scale for catalyzing enduring and
system-wide equity transformations in equity metrics and distribution of
resources in higher education. The long-term goal of HSI-ICPSS is to build
capacity for intersectionality as inquiry and praxis as a new gold standard in
higher education equity metrics for distribution of resources. The HSI-ICPSS
project will result in three written products for each participating HSI: 1)
Data Policy Brief outlining institutional consensus values, current data
collection and analytical strategies and alternatives that center
intersectionality inquiry for equity impact; 2) Action Plan describing their
theory of change, stakeholder engagement, anticipated roadblocks, as well as
practical solutions in their intersectional community of practice; and 3)
Communication Strategy outlining updates to websites and university-wide
institutional equity reports on admissions, retention, graduation, including
undergraduate STEM degrees. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM
education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will
also generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.