* 2235778
* CAREER: Advancing Light-mediated Ni Catalysis using Data Science and Physical Organic Techniques
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Ana Bahamonde, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Tong Ren
* 03/31/2028
* USD 434,428.00

With funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Chemistry Division, Dr.
Bahamonde of the University of California-Riverside will study Ni/photoredox
catalysis. The scarcity and high cost of using transition metal catalysts based
on Pd, Rh, Ir, and Ru has spurred intense interest in the development of
complementary catalytic processes employing earth-abundant transition metals.
Among these, the distinct one-electron chemistry and photochemical reactivity of
Ni complexes has enabled new modes of reactivity that are largely inaccessible
to the aforementioned metals. For the implementation of these new technologies
in industrial settings, it is critical to further increase catalyst performance
and selectivity. However, currently, scientists do not completely understand how
these reactions can be controlled to selectively produce the target molecule
over competing byproducts. In this project, Dr. Bahamonde aims to gain a deeper
understanding of what Ni-catalyst features drive these reactions and use this
information to develop new catalysts that are more selective. Dr. Bahamonde will
actively engage in outreach activities that build upon her research to promote
engagement of students in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) disciplines. These activities, which include summer research internships
in Dr. Bahamonde’s laboratory and networking events at local community colleges,
will be directed at stimulating the interest of high school and community
college students to pursue higher education and STEM careers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research in this project will be focused on Ni/photoredox
catalysis with a special emphasis on understanding the ligand features that
favor the selective formation of new C–C and C–N bonds. Chiral Ni complexes will
be utilized to explore enantioselective amide and C(sp3)–H functionalization in
order to access nitrogen, alpha-heteroatom, and remote functionalizations. To
expedite reaction optimization, multivariate linear regression models
correlating observed enantioselectivity to compute molecular descriptors will be
developed. Understanding what ligand characteristics can facilitate selective
access to either of these alternative manifolds will be investigated as well.
Dr. Bahamonde will engage in outreach programs focused on narrowing the gender
gap in STEM research, the transfer of community college students to 4-year
universities, and high school student research
internships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.