* 2235411
* FuSe-TG: Advanced Device and System Opportunities for future Neuromorphic Integrated Circuits (NICs) and Their Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2025
* Jeffrey Davis, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 01/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

The semiconductor industry has improved beyond imagination over the past 50
years. In 1971, the first Intel microprocessor contained 2,300 transistors. Now,
in 2023, Tesla's self-driving chip contains roughly 6,000,000,000 transistors.
This improvement of six orders of magnitude of added capability is unheard of in
any other industry worldwide. Although the semiconductor industry has made
significant progress over the years, it is now reaching the physical limits of
silicon, where a transistor contains only a few silicon atoms. Hence the
question is, "What is the future of semiconductors over the next 50 years?" The
objective of this project is to address this question by building a research
team to develop a co-design approach that includes materials, devices, and
systems to create a revolutionary breakthrough for shoring up US capabilities in
the next generations of the semiconductor industry. The research team in this
award represents an interdisciplinary cross-section of several important
disciplines within engineering. In addition, the project revolves around
participation from underrepresented groups by involving them in science and
technology.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The neuromorphic integrated circuit (NIC)
developed in this project uses the monolithically integrated 3D stacks of a
novel floating-gate carbon nanotube field-effect transistor (FG-CNFET) to create
a revolutionary breakthrough in semiconductor technology by extending Moore's
law beyond transistor scaling in a single layer. It is an enabling technology
that provides additional non-deterministic computing capability to conventional
deterministic computing hardware to perform complex computation in a highly
energy-efficient analog circuit. Moreover, due to its massive parallelism and
reconfigurability, the proposed NIC hardware is inherently fault-tolerant,
perfectly suitable for devices compatible with monolithic 3D integration, but
typically suffers from high defect rates, as for instance exhibited by FG-
CNFETs. The proposed NIC has three distinctive features that no existing
technology can offer: 1) reconfigurable and scalable neuromorphic architecture,
2) built-in analog signal processing units capable of highly energy-efficient
non-deterministic computing, and 3) utilization of advanced devices that are
compatible with monolithic 3D integration, rectifying their
imperfections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.