* 2235568
* Investigation of Faculty Perceptions of Course-based Undergraduate Research Experiences and Barriers to their Implementation
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Jessica Martin, Northeastern State University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Davis
* 12/31/2025
* USD 287,614.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by increasing the
implementation and visibility of Course-based Undergraduate Research Experiences
(CUREs) in STEM courses, with a focus on introductory level STEM courses. At
Northeastern State University, which is both a Minority Serving Institution
(MSI) and a Native American Serving Non-Tribal Institution (NASNTI), CUREs are
expected to impact a significant number of students historically
underrepresented in their pursuit of STEM fields of study, especially NSU’s
Native American student population. This project at NSU will explore strategies
to ensure faculty are fully committed to the use of CUREs in their courses using
a workshop and mentoring program. The project is designed to host a broadly
available workshop and presentation about the value of CUREs in undergraduate
STEM education followed by a fellowship opportunity at NSU. STEM faculty will
have the opportunity to apply for the fellowship program. The selected faculty
will be paired with a mentor to participate in a series of training workshops,
and develop a new CURE for one of their courses. The following semester, they
will teach the course with the new CURE. Throughout the project, data regarding
faculty perceptions, current barriers to implementation of CUREs, and student
outcomes will be collected and analyzed. The results from this project may help
guide future projects to increase use of CUREs in STEM courses at other
institutions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will explore strategies
to ensure faculty are fully aware of and committed to the use of CUREs in their
courses. The project will seek to meet the following five objectives. First is
to increase the use of CUREs in STEM courses by 200% (from 4 to 12 STEM
courses). Second is to recruit an additional 45 students into STEM majors,
including an additional 20 students from underrepresented backgrounds. Third is
to improve the sense of self-efficacy among 90% of students in introductory STEM
courses taught by participating faculty. Fourth is to decrease the rate of
students who drop, fail or withdraw (DFW) by 10% in introductory STEM courses
taught by participating faculty. Fifth is to disseminate the results of the
project to others including other minority serving institutions. To accomplish
these objectives, the project team will design a workshop focused on increasing
knowledge of CUREs as a pedagogical tool, and on examining models for
successfully integrating CUREs into classroom teaching. Following the workshop,
the participating faculty will have the opportunity to apply for one of the CURE
fellowships that will provide the time needed to develop, implement, assess, and
revise at least one CURE in each fellow’s course load. Each fellow will also be
assigned a CURE mentor who will provide ongoing feedback and support through the
process. Another key goal of this project is to explore two questions that are
essential to promoting these highly impactful experiences for undergraduates.
(1) Why are STEM faculty hesitant to incorporate CUREs experiences into their
undergraduate classes? (2) Will the proposed workshop and fellowship program be
effective in promoting implementation of CUREs? The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through its Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.