* 2235102
* CyberCorps Scholarship for Service: Cybersecurity Research and Education for Service in Government (CREST)
* EDU,DGE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Manish Agrawal, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Victor Piotrowski
* 12/31/2027
* USD 1,868,135.00

The Cybersecurity Research and Education for Service in Government (CREST)
program at the University of South Florida (USF) will recruit and mentor at
least 28 graduate and undergraduate students to serve as cybersecurity
professionals in federal, state, and local governments, and other public sector
organizations. In conjunction with USF’s cybersecurity related academic
programs, campus professional development activities, and federal, state, and
local internship opportunities, the CREST program will establish a
transformative community of practice to produce next-generation, national
cybersecurity leaders. CREST scholars will receive extensive coaching and
mentoring on public service ethos from former military and federal civilian
leaders, as well as from agencies and members of a unique Advisory Council. The
CREST program will target 50% of SFS scholarships to be awarded to groups
historically underrepresented in computing (including women and
veterans).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;USF’s CREST program is centered on three
overarching goals: recruitment and selection, professional development and
retention, and cybersecurity placement in the public sector. Students will be
selected from 12 cybersecurity-related degree programs across two USF colleges.
CREST scholars will complete cybersecurity-related degree programs, conduct
undergraduate and graduate research in cybersecurity supervised by faculty
mentors, and participate in structured USF and Cyber Florida professional
development activities. The project will also develop a mock Security Operations
Center (SOC) with real-world incident data for training CREST scholars to
elevate their expertise in cybersecurity operations. A special focus will be
placed on developing a public service motivation in students. Through volunteer
activities, CREST scholars will engage the next generation of aspiring
cybersecurity professionals by sharing their STEM journey as well as knowledge
and passion for cybersecurity and AI with K-12 students in the Greater Tampa
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the CyberCorps®
Scholarship for Service (SFS) program, which funds proposals establishing or
continuing scholarship programs in cybersecurity and aligns with the U.S.
National Cyber Strategy to develop a superior cybersecurity workforce. Following
graduation, scholarship recipients are required to work in cybersecurity for a
federal, state, local, or tribal Government organization for the same duration
as their scholarship support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.