* 2235603
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Wild primate responses to variation in feeding habitat quality
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Ian Gilby, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 12/31/2024
* USD 25,200.00

Shifts in habitat likely served as powerful drivers throughout human evolution.
While the fossil record provides evidence for physical adaptations related to
changing habitats and diets, it remains unclear how the evolution of human
social behavior was shaped by changes in food availability. To address this gap,
non-invasive research on wild nonhuman primates can provide comparative data for
reconstructing the potential behaviors of early human ancestors. This doctoral
dissertation research project leverages data from a long-studied, wild nonhuman
primate population that has undergone significant habitat change. The research
focuses on two potential mechanisms shaping social behavior: the distribution of
food in a landscape and its quality. The project promotes the progress of
science by advancing our understanding of primate sociality and how major
climatic shifts may have shaped human social evolution. Additionally,
understanding the consequences of long-term habitat change for an endangered
primate can inform conservation research and activities. The project also
promotes international research collaborations, provides scientific training to
undergraduate students and community members, and strengthens community
relationships and promotes environmental stewardship through outreach events
that highlight habitat recovery in protected landscapes.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chimpanzees show wide variation in sociality and the
quality of landscapes they inhabit. Researchers suspect that differences in food
availability drive chimpanzee social variation; however, research sites also
differ in terms of ecology and methods, which has largely prevented studies
directly comparing populations. Long-term data on one population of chimpanzees
provide a unique opportunity to explore the consequences of temporal and spatial
habitat variation on behavior. Systematic data collection beginning in the 1970s
has captured detailed behavioral observations across six decades of significant
habitat recovery from anthropogenic disturbance. Supplementing 66 community-
years of existing behavioral observations and 20 years of phenology data, the
researchers collect original focal follow data and non-invasive urine samples
for energetic biomarker analysis. They also use historic feeding data and
remote-sensed landscape metrics to construct spatial models of plant food
species distribution from 1980-2020. Together, these data are analyzed to
establish linkages between food availability, diet composition, individual
energetic state, and behavior. The researchers also identify how food
distribution influences ranging and sociality, as well as the impact of a given
individual’s range quality on their ability to engage in energetically demanding
social behaviors. Overall, this research expands understanding of hominin social
evolution, the drivers of intraspecific behavioral differences in chimpanzees,
and the behavioral consequences of habitat recovery in an endangered
primate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.