* 2235437
* FuSe-TG: Towards TeraCity in South Texas: Sub-TeraHertz City-scale Wireless Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Jinghong Chen, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 05/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Sub-THz, which is usually defined as the spectrum between 100 and 300 GHz, can
provide enormous bandwidth with 10s-GHz-wide channels for unmatched
communication throughput, and is widely considered to be a promising frequency
band for beyond-5G communications. To truly harness sub-THz bands in large-area
city-scale wireless networks, we need semiconductor and wireless technology
breakthroughs to simultaneously support wide coverage, ultra-large bandwidth,
and high node mobility. The goal of this project is to build a team in South
Texas with expertise covering different aspects of the communication system
design and to investigate key technologies in the sub-THz bands. This project
also involves a coherent workforce development and outreach plan to develop a
diverse workforce that is critical to the semiconductor industry and address the
every-growing talent gap it faces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are three research
thrusts in this project to realize the vision of TeraCity, involving co-design
of sub-THz devices, circuits, antennas, packaging, and algorithms. (1) Power
thrust: to develop high-power and energy-efficient sub-THz radio front-end. (2)
Bandwidth thrust: to develop high-speed high-resolution data converters. (3)
Mobility thrust: to develop new beamforming methods to generate highly
directional beams yet can track node mobility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.