* 2235328
* The Dynamics of Early Bilingual Experience
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2027
* Katharine Graf Estes, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Leher Singh
* 02/28/2027
* USD 752,048.00

This research project provides new insights into how young bilinguals learn two
languages by examining how bilingual parents helps their infants understand and
say words in two languages. Most studies of early language development have
examined children’s learning in only one language, but millions of children in
the U.S. grow up learning two or more languages. This means that the fields of
developmental science, linguistics, early education, speech-language pathology,
and medicine have an inaccurate view of how children learn to communicate. This
research project produces a richer and more inclusive understanding of early
learning in language by examining how bilingual and monolingual parents play
with their infants. The project investigates how features of parent-child play
relate to children’s growing understanding of language. The findings from this
project provide important information that may help parents, teachers, speech-
language therapists, and doctors support the development of young bilinguals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To investigate how parents support language development,
project staff travels to families’ homes to record parents while they play with
their infants. The project also collects measures of parents’ and infant’s
language understanding and how they use different patterns that they hear in the
language. The project focuses on Mexican heritage families, monolingual and
bilingual, because many American bilinguals have Mexican heritage and speak
Spanish in addition to English. The project analyzes links between parents’
language, their gestures and actions, and how they follow and guide their
infants’ attention. We also analyzes how infants respond to and guide parents’
behaviors, and how these may influence the emerging vocabulary knowledge of
infants. This research reveals dimensions of parent-infant interactions that
occur across monolingual and bilingual Mexican heritage families and also
features that are specific to bilinguals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.