* 2235785
* CAREER: Enhanced Sampling Methods to Characterize Nucleic Acid Structure, Recognition Mechanisms and Function
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2027
* Alberto Perez, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 11/30/2027
* USD 650,000.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods (CTMC)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Alberto Perez of the University of Florida
will develop new computational methods directed at better understanding nucleic
acids. Nucleic acids are the repository of genetic information and have numerous
functional roles in biology as well as having applications in fields such as
nanotechnology, nanoelectronics and sensor technology. Despite their importance,
the tool kit is still limited to enable the successful modeling and prediction
of the most likely conformations (three dimensional disposition of atoms)
nucleic acids adopt. Alberto Perez and his research group will pursue the
development of new computational tools that address challenges in the structure
prediction of DNA (2'-deoxyribonucleic acid), RNA (ribonucleic acid), and their
complexes with proteins. The new methods are designed to connect the structures
of these molecules with their functional roles to help decipher their mechanisms
of action. The tools are to be made freely available to the community to
increase their impact on chemical biology and biotechnology. Additionally, Dr.
Perez and his group will train new generations of scientists through immersive
virtual reality activities that place students in the role of molecular
modelers. These interactive modules will enable students to develop STEM-related
skills through an inquiry-based approach. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The highly
charged and flexible nature of nucleic acids has hindered progress in the
development of docking and simulation tools to sample conformational changes,
including those involved in three dimensional folding and binding. Alberto Perez
and his team aim to address the problem of sampling large conformational
transitions in nucleic acids and to derive a physico-chemical understanding of
sequence-function relationships. To achieve this goals, Dr. Perez and his group
will develop approaches based on generalized ensemble methods that sample large
conformational changes, especially those involving a phase transition (e.g.,
binding or folding). They will further develop new strategies based on Bayesian
inference to leverage experimental data that is insufficient on its own to
determine the structures of nucleic acids and their complexes. These
methodologies are expected increase sampling efficiency, robustness, and
reproducibility of simulation results. Finally, to provide guidance for the
combinatorial explosion of available nucleic acid sequences and derive a
physico-chemical understanding of structure-function relationships that scale
with sequence length, Dr. Perez and his team will develop and apply methods
based on Markov State and Dynamical Graphical Models. If successful, in the
longer term, these methods will help rationalize the mechanism by which protein-
nucleic acid recognition takes place.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.