* 2235865
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track J: Food EducatioN for Nutritional security and Empowerment in Local communities (FENNEL)
* TIP,ITE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Yasser Sanad, University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff
* Standard Grant
* Michael Reksulak
* 11/30/2023
* USD 750,000.00

Finding sustainable solutions for food and nutrition security is very
challenging because the reasons behind the lack of access to food vary greatly
between communities in Arkansas. The project is being led by the University of
Arkansas at Pine Bluff (UAPB), which is located in southeastern Arkansas, an
agricultural community but paradoxically a food desert because of poverty and
poor socioeconomic factors. As a historically black college/university (HBCU)
and 1890 land grant institution, UAPB is well-positioned to document the
specific challenges of the local community and identify government, non-profit
and private sector stakeholders to converge and develop sustainable solutions.
The project involves a robust set of activities to engage local communities in
addressing nutritional insecurity through educational and outreach tailored
approach to address the community needs. The effectiveness of education-based
interventions, including demonstrations in urban farming followed by novel
methods of cooking and preserving our farm raised fresh produce, and connecting
with local restaurants that are willing to participate in recipe development,
testing and serving of healthier menu options will be tested. Results will be
presented as case studies to other institutions of higher education and
stakeholders, who can adopt this community-centered data-driven approach to
develop sustainable solutions for their own communities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sustainable solutions to food and nutrition security have
been elusive in under-served and marginalized communities, because community-
specific challenges and local consumer behaviors towards consumption of healthy
food is not well documented. The University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff is located
in a rural agricultural region, where generational poverty and poor
socioeconomic and health outcomes are prevalent. The region is also underserved
by the research community with very little published public-health research when
compared to similar populations on the eastern side of the Mississippi River. A
user-centered methodology will be developed to engage the local community to
document barriers to food and nutritional security, identify stakeholders and
converge expertise to jointly develop sustainable and culturally acceptable
solutions. In Phase 1, survey data will be collected before and after conducting
pilot-scale education-based interventions in southeastern Arkansas aimed at
college students, local food businesses and the general public. Results will be
compiled into case studies to disseminate this model of engagement to
agriculture Extension Offices in other states to scale a method for developing
culturally appropriate solutions. This approach is named Food EducatioN for
Nutritional security and Empowerment in Local communities (FENNEL). Outreach
activities and participation in interdisciplinary research opportunities will
improve recruitment and retention of minority students in STEM fields and
strengthen competitiveness of the US workforce. Activities aimed at the general
public will improve health literacy and well-being amongst underserved and
minority communities. Socially disadvantaged farmers will benefit from improved
health outcomes leading to better productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.