* 2235473
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track H: Developing Experiential Accessible Framework for Partnerships and Opportunities in Data Science (for the deaf community)
* TIP,ITE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Caroline Solomon, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 11/30/2023
* USD 750,000.00

This project will create university-to-industry use-inspired research
partnerships, curriculum in Data Science, and projects geared specifically for
deaf learners, to empower deaf data scientists in the workforce. DEAF PODS will
collaborate with partners in industry and academia to create strategic
initiatives to overcome barriers and biases that deaf individuals face in the
workplace. Developing Experiential Accessible Framework for Partnerships and
Opportunities in Data Science (for the deaf community) ["DEAF PODS"] will enable
75 deaf and hard of hearing students to work in teams on data-driven projects
with mentors. These interdisciplinary partnerships will span several applied
domains. These research stipends will be available for deaf undergraduate
students from any college in the USA. The materials for data science training
will be available to be used in the many use-inspired research projects in the
Convergence Accelerator program. DEAF PODS will also provide nationwide
coordination of accessible research experiences for deaf students (from any
university) in the data sciences. The DEAF PODS model is designed to be
reproducible at other universities. DEAF PODS will strengthen and support the
experience of students whose universities cannot (or will not) invest sufficient
funds for isolated deaf learners. A key goal is to align faculty, students, and
companies, to work closely on use-inspired research. This project will foster a
welcoming research culture throughout the year. A key expected outcome is a
broader pathway for deaf college students to graduate school and/or to data
science careers in industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will use
culturally responsive pedagogical strategies to teach data science content to
deaf populations. Deaf mentors and students will organically develop the fast-
developing language of data sciences in American Sign Language and will freely
share this data science content online. Because ASL expression is heavily
influenced by the subject's context, it is imperative to work directly with deaf
business owners and deaf scientists who are domain experts. A key strategy for
success is the emphasis on deaf-deaf mentoring: deaf employees and fluent
signers mentoring deaf students. While deaf employees share domain expertise
with student learners, the mentors will also benefit by picking up new data
science skills during their mid-career. Industry culture and pathways are key
aspects of the planned project. The investigators will partner with dedicated
corporate partners who have committed to cultivating a welcoming environment,
with a culture where deaf data scientists can thrive. DEAF PODS and the greater
STEM community have a timely opportunity to create career pathways in data-
intensive industries, by offering use-inspired research experiences for deaf and
hard of hearing students and mentors. DEAF PODS will use flipped classrooms with
active learning, in projects (not lectures) as a crucial piece of the student
learning environment. One expected outcome of the project is the integration of
captioning, transcripts, and bilingual videos, in both ASL and English, as well
as front-loading new vocabulary, immersive examples, and vignettes. Gallaudet
has also just begun a new Data Science program. The project will start the work
toward building a Corporate Partners program at Gallaudet during Phase 1. Purdue
will help to integrate 9-month academic year Corporate Partners experiences for
deaf students at Gallaudet, providing working data science experience and
professional development. RIT/NTID is also building new data science programs;
the team of investigators will work closely with RIT during Phase 1, with plans
to expand and build on these activities in Phase 2. DEAF PODS has a
comprehensive recruiting and supportive mentoring plan for students to
participate remotely in all activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.