* 2235789
* EAGER: Spintronic extreme sub-wavelength and super-gain active electronically scanned antenna (AESA) enabled by phonon-magnon-plasmon-photon coupling.
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2022,07/31/2024
* Supriyo Bandyopadhyay, Virginia Commonwealth University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2024
* USD 220,000.00

A serious shortcoming of conventional antennas is that their efficiencies
plummet when they are made much smaller than the wavelength of the
electromagnetic radiation they transmit. This is an impediment to building
ultra-small antennas that can be medically implanted in a patient or embedded in
a stealth device for defense or crime-fighting. This roadblock has been recently
overcome by a novel genre of antennas implemented with magnetostrictive
nanomagnets built on a piezoelectric substrate. A periodic electric field
applied to the substrate periodically strains the nanomagnets, which makes their
magnetizations oscillate in time and emit electromagnetic waves. The phenomenon
that underlies this effect is phonon-magnon-photon coupling. The efficiencies of
these novel antennas were found to exceed the theoretical limits on the
efficiencies of traditional antennas by more than 100,000 times. The present
research will introduce an additional feature by coupling electric charge
oscillations (called plasmons) into the antennas by modifying their structure,
which can significantly improve the antenna performance. Moreover, by
manipulating the direction of the periodic electric field applied to the
substrate, the direction of the strain wave propagating in the substrate can be
changed, which may allow capability to steer the radiated electromagnetic beam
in space, thereby implementing an active electronically scanned antenna (AESA).
These antennas will have the potential to open up many new embedded
applications, e.g., medically implanted devices that communicate with external
monitors while consuming miniscule amounts of energy, ultra-small stealthy
listening devices, personal communicators and wearable electronics. Apart from
the fundamental knowledge and technological impact the proposed research will
benefit society by producing graduate and undergraduate students trained in
nanofabrication, characterization and measurement, as well as in device
simulation and design. Particular attention will be paid to entrepreneurship
opportunities, increasing K-12 and minority participation through various
programs, and educating public through popular lectures and internet
blogs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently it has been demonstrated in the PI’s group
that periodic arrays of magnetostrictive nanomagnets deposited on a
piezoelectric substrate (a two-dimensional artificial multiferroic crystal), can
generate a novel genre of spintronic electromagnetic nano-antennas whose gain
and radiation efficiency exceed by several orders of magnitude reaching
theoretical limits as compared to traditional (electromagnetically actuated)
antennas of the same dimensions. A low frequency (~100 MHZ) surface acoustic
wave (SAW) launched into the substrate excites magnetization precession in the
nanomagnets via the Villari effect and the precessing magnetization radiates
electromagnetic waves in the surrounding medium at the SAW frequency, thereby
resulting a novel antenna A high frequency (~10 GHz) SAW, on the other hand,
resonantly excites confined spin wave modes in the nanomagnet via phonon-magnon
coupling and these spin waves then radiate electromagnetic waves (photons) into
the surrounding medium via magnon-photon coupling at the same frequency as the
SAW. This constituted tripartite phonon-magnon-photon coupling. The proposed
research will extend the concept by introducing surface plasmons into the mode
mixing to study four-way phonon-plasmon-magnon-photon coupling which is expected
to enhance the mode conversion efficiency from phonons to plasmons to magnons to
photons, thereby enhancing antenna properties. Additionally, it has been
observed that the antenna radiation pattern changes if the direction of SAW
propagation changes with respect to the easy axes of the nanomagnets. The goal
of this project is to exploit this feature to electronically steer the radiated
beam by changing the direction of SAW propagation in an effort to implement an
active electronically scanned antenna (AESA).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.