* 2235159
* Collaborative Research: Research Infrastructure: CCRI: ENS: Enhanced Open Networked Airborne Computing Platform
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Junfei Xie, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 04/30/2026
* USD 314,818.00

The project aims to develop an enhanced open networked airborne computing
platform to facilitate the design, implementation, and testing of an airborne
computing platform that seamlessly integrates control, computing, communication,
and networking. The project will provide community support based on the flywheel
model, and to attract and engage community users through organized support from
four regional sites in the nation, hands-on workshops, testbed access, and
technical user services. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit lies in a
new set of enhancements to facilitate more advanced research and applications of
airborne computing. Specifically, the proposed infrastructure is enhanced in
four major areas. First, hardware/middle-ware update to facilitate distributed
control, which includes phased array antennas, next generation of mobile system,
and Robot Operating System (ROS) 2. Second, enhancement of communication and
networking, which include software-defined radio (SDR), long-term evolution
(LTE), and software-defined networking (SDN). Third, enhancement of airborne
computing services, which include the target recognition and tracking service,
mobile edge computing (MEC) service, and airborne LiDAR (Light Detection and
Ranging) data processing service. Last, the incorporation of security features,
which include the development of a secure and privacy-preserving federated
learning platform and integration of security packages to fulfill essential and
advanced security requirements, such as confidentiality, integrity,
authentication, and secure computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative
project brings together investigators from the University of North Texas (UNT),
the University of Texas at Arlington (UTA), San Diego State University (SDSU),
and the University of Puerto Rico at Mayaguez (UPRM). All four participating
universities are minority-serving (UPRM) or Hispanic-serving (UTA, UNT, and
SDSU) institutions with a large number of underrepresented minority students.
The project will reach out to local communities through K-12 activities, and
also pursue broad dissemination through organizing student design competitions,
tutorials, and workshops, participating in national demonstration efforts, and
engaging domain professionals. The proposed education and outreach activities
will produce a profound impact on broad communities and benefit a large number
of underrepresented minority students. The proposed project on enhanced open
networked airborne computing platform will address the design and evaluation
needs of many researchers in the CISE community and benefit a wide range of
applications in the emergency, energy, environment, and transportation
sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project website
https://utari.uta.edu/research/airborne/ will be the portal to access detailed
design documents, hardware and software tools, tutorial, datasets, training
materials, conferences and workshops, and other project-related materials to
extend the research capabilities of the broader community during and beyond the
project span.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.