* 2235687
* Examining the Link Between Spatial and Communication Skills among Engineering Students
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2025
* Sheryl Sorby, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 05/31/2025
* USD 299,998.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by exploring possible
relationships between engineering majors’ spatial thinking skills and their
communication skills, including their use of gestures when verbally
communicating their design ideas. In general, engineering majors tend to have
strong spatial thinking skills but education and industry leaders would like to
see stronger technical verbal and written communication skills among engineering
graduates. Given this context the project team will investigate the relationship
between visualization skills and communications skills. It will investigate
questions such as: Do engineering majors who are high visualizers struggle to
put into words things they think are inherently spatial? Results from the
research will be informative to engineering instructors and curriculum
designers, as well as to engineering education researchers, as they design
interventions to help engineering majors strengthen their technical
communication skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this exploratory
research will investigate the hypothesis that spatial thinking and technical
writing/oral communication skills are inversely correlated. The project will
also advance understanding about the interaction between spatial skill levels
and/or verbal fluency and gesture production. Approximately 150 second-semester
engineering majors who completed a first-semester engineering design project
will complete two tests of spatial cognition and a verbal analogy measure.
Seventy-five students will be purposefully sampled based on gender and spatial
test scores and invited for a second session of testing. The second session of
testing will include measures of semantic and phonemic fluency as well as
written and oral communication skills tasks where students describe their design
project products from the previous semester. To study engineering majors’ use of
gesturing, participants will be asked to describe the process used to wrap a
present. Since the use of gestures has been shown to be related to spatial
thinking skills, gesture production among student participants will demonstrate
the extent to which spatial thinking plays in a person’s ability to communicate
verbally. The NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports research and development projects
to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through its
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.