* 2235398
* FuSe-TG: Domain-Specific 3D ReRAM-based Processing-in-Memory Accelerators for Streaming Time Series Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2025
* Philip Brisk, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Erik Brunvand
* 05/31/2025
* USD 400,000.00

Crossbar Array-based Processing-in-Memory (CBA-PIM) technology can be integrated
in 3D with domain-specific heterogeneous compute-engines to achieve
unprecedented improvements in application performance and power consumption.
This FuSe-Teaming Grant will establish a collaboration between researchers at UC
Riverside (UCR), Arizona State University, the Georgia Institute of Technology,
and Washington State University. A pilot research project will define domain-
specific CBA-PIM accelerators for streaming time series data analytics
algorithms, integrate state-of-the-art techniques to achieve fault tolerance and
reliability, and advance the state-of-the-art in monolithic 3D layout tools to
ensure that the proposed devices can be physically realized. An Education and
Workforce Development Plan will provide a comprehensive learning experience for
graduate and undergraduate student trainees through which they will learn to
design, layout, characterize, and program crossbar arrays, through which they
will be exposed to a variety of open-source Electronic Design Automation (EDA)
tools and crossbar simulators. It will also provide trainees with Diversity,
Equity, and Inclusion (DEI) competencies that will prepare them for employment
working with future semiconductor technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Moore’s Law
has characterized miniaturization in semiconductor microelectronic systems for
decades. With the slowing and inevitable end of Moore’s Law on the horizon,
advances in general-purpose computing technology can no longer sustain
semiconductor industry growth. Subsequent advances are projected to occur
through application-specific specialization that synergistically exploits future
semiconductor technologies. By exposing trainees to these challenges and
empowering them to explore potential solutions, the proposed activities will
contribute to the development of the skilled technical workforce. The project
leads plan to recruit trainees from underrepresented backgrounds to participate
in the project; UCR is a Hispanic Serving Institution (OPEID-00131600). Research
and education-related materials will be disseminated via a public-facing website
dedicated to the project, and research outcomes will be integrated into a
graduate course taught at UCR. This material will be also shared with the other
project participants and with the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.