* 2235106
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Expectations and Noisy-Channel Processing of Relative Clauses in a verb-initial language
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2025
* Nicole Dodd, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 02/28/2025
* USD 18,550.00

Expectations about the grammatical structure of a sentence and the meaning of
that sentence strongly affect how humans process and interpret language. In some
cases, sentence structures and meanings align with our expectations and
sentences are easier to process: people can understand them more easily and are
more likely to interpret them correctly. However, sometimes our expectations
conflict with the actual interpretation of the sentence and make the sentence
more difficult to process. This research investigates how the brain generates
these expectations and how they are used in understanding sentences. The project
studies this in an understudied language in experimental research, monitoring
people’s eye movement as they read sentences, with a diverse set of native
speakers in the U.S. and abroad. This research improves our understanding of the
various factors that interact to affect how humans process language, which helps
inform developments in areas such as technology and medicine.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation project specifically answers
the question, how do language comprehenders make use of statistical expectations
about sentence structure in light of conflicting input (e.g., input using less
common sentence structures)? The project investigates this question by further
testing existing theories of language processing, such as memory- and
expectation-based theories of processing difficulty, alongside other theories of
language comprehension, in particular good-enough and noisy-channel processing
theories. The project tests these theories by recording eye movements during
reading, and identifying how these eye movements change while reading a
difficult sentence as compared to an easy sentence. The researchers additionally
test the readers’ understanding of each sentence with comprehension questions,
evaluate how a reader’s expectations about the structure and the meaning of a
sentence affect their final interpretation of the sentence, and evaluate
findings through Bayesian mixed effects regression
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.