* 2235390
* Integrating the Human Sciences to Scale Societal Responses to Environmental Change: A Workshop
* SBE,BCS
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Thomas Thornton, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 08/31/2023
* USD 49,953.00

This project convenes a public workshop of social scientists to examine societal
responses to environmental change. The workshop focuses particularly on the ways
that societies mitigate the effects of environmental change and adapt to its
impacts. The workshop committee is composed of members with diverse expertise in
the social sciences, including sociology, anthropology, psychology, economics,
and political science. A goal of the workshop is to advance societal capacities
for responding to climate change at multiple geographical scales. Members of the
workshop draw together diverse insights from the social, behavioral, and
cognitive sciences to inform potential societal responses to the compounding and
disruptive effects of environmental change and natural disasters. A product of
the workshop is a published proceedings, which informs key stakeholders and the
broader public of the presentations, discussions, and outcomes of the
workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop, convened by The National Academies
of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine, addresses the ways that social science
insights can be leveraged to promote effective societal responses to
environmental changes. The workshop highlights case studies, methods, and theory
from a diversity of social science perspectives. Committee members address the
ways that social and behavioral sciences can be further developed, integrated,
and deployed to engender resilient and adaptive communities that can respond
capably to the anticipated impacts on social and environmental systems. In
considering a diverse range of cases, tools, and social-environmental contexts,
the workshop is expected to be relevant to a wide range of critical societal
challenges and opportunities posed by climate change at the local, regional, and
national levels. The workshop also contributes to broadening participation in
science by involving members with diverse orientations and career
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.