* 2235678
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track I: OpenMatFlo: A Platform for Designing, Producing, and Supplying Greener Inks for Additive Construction under Uncertainties
* TIP,ITE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Robert Ries, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 11/30/2023
* USD 744,893.00

This convergence accelerator project is intended to address the issue of carbon
dioxide (CO2) emission of the construction industry, where the concrete sector
is a top source of global CO2 emissions. The burgeoning technology of additive
construction, or three-dimensional construction printing (3DCP), might
exacerbate the situation. Because concrete (inks) used in 3DCP consists of much
more binders (mostly Portland cement) compared to conventional concrete, the
increasing adoption of 3DCP is now speeding-up the consumption of cement in the
construction sector. The innovation in the 3DCP inks needs to be accelerated to
change the situation - greener inks need to be designed, produced, and supplied
to the market more quickly. The carbon embodiment and other aspects, including
energy consumption, the supply chain efficiency, the broader economic and
environmental impacts, are seldom considered holistically in the life cycle
design of most general-purpose concrete, not to mention the 3DCP concrete. The
uncertainties associated with these aspects make it more challenging.
Significant gaps exist between the material science, printer manufacturing,
concrete producing, supply networks, governmental legislation and policies, and
the 3DCP end users. Therefore, this convergence accelerator project will develop
a novel framework, OpenMatFlo, for accelerating the convergence at the concrete
industry and 3DCP nexus. The research can have fundamental socioeconomic impact
by contributing to the innovation of new materials for the 3DCP industry. While
the project context is focused on the 3DCP sector, the new capabilities can be
ported to other areas. The project can provide transformational insights,
cutting-edge simulation and data accessibility toolkits for the 3DCP community,
as well as STEM education and research opportunities for a diverse cohort of
students, postdocs, and early-career scientists. The society will benefit from
the accelerated adoption of greener 3DCP, in terms of fighting against carbon
emission and climate change. The platform will be scalable to the globe and
extendable for other industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will bring
together knowledge from mechanics and construction, material research and
production, printer manufacturing, life cycle and environment management,
uncertainty quantification, computer science and blockchain, disaster science
and community resilience, and urban/social science to build a convergent
platform for designing, producing, and supplying greener inks for 3DCP towards
built environment sustainability. The researchers will employ an open and
crowdsourcing paradigm for incentivizing community data-driven material
innovation; a market-based strategy will be employed to promote the adoption of
life cycle-aware and lower carbon solutions in the concrete and construction
industry (with an emphasis on the 3DCP sector); a blockchain technology will be
developed to enhance the transparency of the ecosystem under uncertainties;
tools will be created for scenario- and performance-based project planning,
accounting for socioeconomic benefits of communities under chronic/acute
stressors of the natural and built environment. Through rigorous data collection
and analysis, the Phase 1 team will identify stakeholders in the nexus of 3DCP
and co-design a holistic platform that facilitates its growth in a sustainable
way, by data sharing and holistic tracking of carbon emissions and continuous
material flow analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.