* 2235299
* Global Exploration of the Conditions of Downward Terrestrial Gamma-ray Flash (TGF) Production
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* David Smith, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 01/31/2026
* USD 810,271.00

This program seeks to understand when, where, and why terrestrial gamma-ray
flashes (TGFs) accompany lightning. TGFs are intense bursts of high-energy
radiation that were first discovered by satellites orbiting Earth when
thunderstorms were taking place below. They emit enough radiation to pose a
health risk to humans aboard an aircraft within a few hundred meters of the
region of energy release. Perhaps most mysteriously of all, the vast majority of
lightning flashes don't produce a TGF, and we don't yet understand what's
special about the ones that do. Most of the TGFs that have been observed have
been directed upward toward space, but there are also downward TGFs, which have
had far fewer observations and appear to be associated with very different types
of lightning. Radiation sensors will be deployed to environments around the
world that are all rich in lightning but otherwise diverse -- high and low
altitude sites, and sites with strong summer lightning and strong winter
lightning. TGF detections and non-detections will be compared with data on radio
waves that show what kind of lightning occurred. This will help sort out when
TGFs are most likely to be expected, lending insight as well into how they
happen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deployment sites will include Mt. Santis in
Switzerland and Mt. Fuji in Japan, where it has very recently been shown that
summertime lightning produces TGFs, and the west coast of Japan, where it has
been known for several years that winter thunderstorms produce TGFs close to the
ground. TGFs in these environments have been produced by positive and negative
intracloud lightning, by natural negative cloud-to-ground lightning, and by
negative cloud-to-ground lightning initiated by an upward positive leader from a
tower. Observations will be made with newly developed detector arrays that have
accurate (microsecond) timing and detectors of a range of sizes to dramatically
improve dynamic range (so that faint/distant and bright/nearby TGFs can be
easily characterized). A new type of detector will be deployed alongside the
existing ones; this is a digital dosimeter with sub-second time resolution that
will quantify the radiation dose from TGFs so close that all the conventional
detectors go into saturation or shut down. Characteristics of the TGFs and
associated sferics will be searched for systematic differences between TGFs
associated with cloud-to-ground and intra-cloud lightning; TGFs associated with
uniquely powerful sferics and those with only weak sferics; and, from the other
perspective, characteristics of lightning that produces TGFs versus lightning
that doesn't, all with the goal of clarifying the production mechanisms (e.g.
relativistic feedback in different geometries versus production of seed
electrons by leaders).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.