* 2235858
* CAREER: Defining the mechanistic role of striosomal microcircuits in decision-making
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Alexander Friedman, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 02/29/2028
* USD 600,000.00

Of the many decisions animals make daily, many entail choices that involve cost
and reward. Since the dawn of neuroscience, researchers have sought to answer
the question of how connected brain regions combine to produce decisions to
complex problems. Previous work by the researchers of this project showed that
the striosomal patches of the striatum are essential for integration of cost and
benefit. In this project, the researchers test a multifaceted model of brain
regions involved in complex decisions using advanced computational and
experimental techniques. The model seeks to define the computational principles
behind complex decisions involving cost and reward. To test this model, the
researchers record and manipulate striosomal neuronal circuits in rats carrying
out a novel, naturalistic cost-benefit decision-making task. The researchers
apply novel machine learning concepts to aid identifying a mechanistic basis for
the shift in circuit activity and decision-making between different decision-
making contexts. In addition to pursuing the scientific objectives, the
researchers develop and establish undergraduate and graduate courses that focus
on the mechanisms of decision-making, and the analytical and experimental tools
to study decision-making and neural circuit recordings. These courses aim to
train future researchers to serve as critical thinkers that bridge experimental
neuroscience and computation. A large fraction of the students benefiting from
these educational activities comes from underrepresented minorities in STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Every day, humans and other animals make
hundreds of decisions regarding food preference, cost avoidance, reproduction,
and social interaction. The investigators’ recent research has provided the
first clues that the striosomal compartments of the striatum are crucial
gateways that affect the balance between the pursuit of reward and avoidance of
costs during decision-making. Notably, striosomes selectively project to the
lateral habenula (LH, predominant source of cost) and the dopaminergic neurons
(DA) of the substantia nigra compacta (SNC, predominant source of reward). This
Striosomal-DA-LH circuit is conserved across humans, monkeys, cats, rats, and
even lampreys, and, therefore, understanding the role of this circuit in
decision-making has broad implications. The investigators test the hypothesis
that striosomes are a hub that affects interaction between the crucial players
of the brain’s cost/reward evaluation system and, thus, influences subjective
valuation of costs and rewards. To test this hypothesis, the investigators
record and manipulate specific striosomal circuits in rats engaged in a novel,
high-throughput decision-making task. Specifically, the investigators use high-
throughput electrophysiology and Ca++ imaging to dissect the role of striosomal
LH- and DA-projecting populations and an optogenetic approach to determine the
causal role of each pathway in decision-making. Furthermore, using advanced
computational modeling techniques, the investigators identify the computational
principles that define how these circuits collectively mediate context-dependent
decision-making states and influence choice behavior. The work is expected to
reveal the role of striosomes in context-dependent perceptions of cost and
benefit and their integration into one subjective value that affects decision-
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.