* 2235068
* Collaborative Research: CCRI: Grand: Virtual Experience Research Accelerator (VERA)
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2027
* Tabitha Peck, Davidson College
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2027
* USD 29,049.00

Researchers conducting lab-based human subject research in XR (Virtual Reality,
Augmented Reality, and Mixed Reality) typically find themselves working very
hard, over considerable time, to run studies that end up producing very narrow
findings for a limited population. With extensive interactions with the XR
community, the Virtual Experience Research Accelerator (VERA) project will
develop a transformative new CISE community research infrastructure in the form
of a human-machine system (hardware, software, and people) that combines and
extends aspects of distributed lab-based studies, online studies, research
panels, and crowdsourcing, into a unified system for carrying out XR-based
research. VERA was designed with and for the XR community to tackle this field’s
research needs, supplying the demand for big data from diverse subjects at high
scalability. The system will enable researchers to conduct XR user studies
online, concurrently across a very large, carefully curated, diverse, dedicated
standing pool of XR study participants. Access to the infrastructure will
fundamentally change the way XR researchers develop and conduct research,
enabling them to break free from the intractability of the lab-based study
paradigm, and to dramatically accelerate the quality and quantity of new
knowledge. Access will also increase equity by providing opportunities for XR
researchers (including students) from all parts of the nation to do high-impact
research even if they do not have access to XR labs and equipment at their local
university. It will enable innovative research with large and diverse
participant samples, longitudinal and replication studies, as well as large
diverse data set generation for machine learning and other purposes. As part of
this effort, the VERA team will implement and publish mechanisms to make studies
more accessible and inclusive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project includes a
significant community-engaged approach to development of the platform through
strategic partnerships with industry and community-based organizations who will
help in building the platform and disseminating the work throughout the XR
community. The infrastructure will provide a transformational tool for XR
researchers by leveraging the large and rapidly growing base of XR systems in
the homes of the general public, and the abilities of the owners to use them.
With consent from these users, VERA will enable CISE researchers to conduct very
high-quality studies very quickly. VERA is also designed to tackle this field’s
research agenda, supplying the demand for big data from diverse human subjects
at high scalability. It will enable innovative research with large and diverse
participant samples, longitudinal and replication studies, as well as large
diverse data set generation for AI, machine learning and other
purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.