* 2235311
* Developing Open Response Assessments to Evaluate How Undergraduates Engage in Mathematical Sensemaking in Biology, Chemistry, and Physics
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2027
* Michael Fleming, California State University-Stanislaus
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 02/28/2027
* USD 119,212.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing new tools to
assess how students engage in making sense of quantitative problems in biology,
chemistry, and physics. Mathematical sensemaking in science focuses on studentsâ€™
ability to blend core disciplinary science ideas with cross-cutting mathematical
concepts, such as patterns and proportions, while engaging in scientific
practices such as computational thinking, making predictions, and reasoning from
evidence. Current visions for undergraduate STEM education stress the need to
integrate i) key disciplinary ideas and ii) crosscutting concepts with iii)
authentic scientific practices, resulting in what is called three-dimensional
learning. This requires developing new assessments with the ability to detect
when students engage in three-dimensional learning and reveal this to
instructors. This project seeks to extend previous work to identify
opportunities to observe mathematical sensemaking in science in the classroom.
The project plans to develop open-ended questions to explore undergraduate
mathematical sensemaking in science using three dimensional learning
assessments. This serves the goal of improving STEM education at the
undergraduate level by providing engaging and authentic assessments capable of
revealing student thinking. Findings from this project should help inform
teaching practice in undergraduate STEM courses and help students foster
computational thinking skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will target two
aims. Aim 1 is to apply an evidence-centered design process to develop open-
ended assessment items that elicit mathematical sensemaking in science (MaSS)
and align with a three-dimensional learning (3DL) assessment framework. The
evidence-centered design approach for the assessments will provide an
opportunity to collect validity evidence throughout the process and allow
development of similar items across disciplines. Assessment tasks and coding
rubrics will be based on frameworks for 3DL and MaSS, and will be iteratively
revised to elicit and categorize student MaSS. The project will conduct
interviews with undergraduates to examine their MaSS while completing the
assessment items, and with college faculty to ensure alignment with disciplinary
topics and phenomena common in college courses. Aim 2 is to administer
constructed response items across undergraduate science disciplines to explore
how undergraduates engage in MaSS across biology, chemistry, and physics. The
project will administer the assessment items from Aim 1 at a diverse set of
undergraduate institutions to collect student responses. These responses will be
used to establish evidence of the validity, reliability, and fairness of the
items quantitatively. Further, the responses will be used to explore how
undergraduates engage in MaSS in varied science disciplines. The project meets
the need for developing rich, formative assessment items for undergraduate 3DL
that reveal student thinking, which is essential for instruction aimed to foster
MaSS. The project will also advance understanding of how undergraduates
integrate thinking about key STEM concepts and mathematics across disciplines by
following a 3DL assessment framework. The NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports
research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education
for all students. Through its Engaged Student Learning track, the program
supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices
and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.