* 2236618
* CAREER: Tools for User and Community-Led Social Media Curation
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Amy Zhang, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 08/31/2028
* USD 129,105.00

This research will develop tools that can empower everyday users and communities
to customize the algorithms and interfaces underpinning their online social
environments. A large fraction of our society now engages in social activity
online on a regular basis, but the current centralization and homogenization of
social activity onto platforms that provide only a small number of possible
configurations is counter to enabling an inclusive society. People who do not
conform to the majority must struggle against configurations that were not built
with them in mind. For instance, users from marginalized backgrounds must
contend with platform-wide content filters that cannot discriminate between
harassing and non-harassing content targeted at them, while neurodiverse users
have trouble retaining control over their social media usage. This research will
have a significant impact on the social computing industry, and consequently, it
will benefit millions of users on these platforms. The education and outreach
plan will help future computer scientists to realize the social ramifications of
the applications they build and engage students and the public in imagining
alternative social media designs that improve society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
achieve the goal of furthering inclusivity on these social platforms, this
research will focus on learning from and designing for those who face the
greatest challenges and barriers from current social media designs, such as
journalists and content creators, neurodiverse users, and marginalized
individuals who often face harassment. It will then develop new strategies to
lower barriers for users to participate in social curation, so that anyone who
does not have technical skills or lots of time to dedicate can still benefit.
Empirically, this research will use a mixed-methods approach to gather a large
dataset of curations that marginalized users would like to have for their social
environment. It will make technical contributions through the building of novel
techniques and collaborative systems that implement ways for users to perform
desired curations using minimal effort or technical skills. In particular, it
will investigate novel user affordances that embed small curation tasks into a
user's everyday experience on social media, as well as collaborative models that
allow groups of people to share or collectively build up custom configurations.
Finally, it will build and release a flexible research toolkit that embeds the
findings from the empirical work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.