* 2236773
* CAREER: Establishing Coherent Frameworks for Massive Galaxy Formation and Inclusive Astronomy
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Katherine Whitaker, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Glen Langston
* 08/31/2028
* USD 527,050.00

Studies on how galaxies form show that early galaxies were surrounded by large
gas reservoirs that were sustained by the cosmic web, which should have allowed
for a steady formation of new stars. However, only three billion years after the
Big Bang, half of these massive galaxies stopped forming new stars. The goal of
this program is to better understand these galaxy ecosystems on a larger scale
and figure out why they formed so quickly and stopped forming stars so early.
This team will use data from the Large Millimeter Telescope and Subaru Telescope
to map the distribution of galaxies and their molecular gas throughout most of
the history of the universe. They will also establish a program at the UMass
Amherst to provide research opportunities for underrepresented groups in STEM
fields. They will conduct annual workshops and externships for girls from low-
income school districts, giving them hands-on experience with real data. This
will help to promote inclusion and equity for all aspiring
astronomers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will address fundamental
questions about massive galaxy evolution. By mapping degree-scale statistical
populations of massive galaxies, the investigator will connect their
environments from the Subaru Telescope/Prime Focus Spectrograph to their cold
gas, as traced by dust using the TolTEC instrument on the Large Millimeter
Telescope. By using the most sophisticated cosmological simulations to date that
include the physics of dust formation, growth, and destruction, the investigator
will further perform an apples-to-apples analysis of mock galaxies to understand
systematics and calibrate observations. Through linking star formation and cold
gas across diverse galaxy habitats, the investigator will develop a physical
model explaining the key processes responsible for the assembly of early massive
galaxies through to the present day. These three pillars combined allow us to
mimic observational techniques on simulated data â€” this is the only way to both
map wide enough area but also to control for systematic
uncertainties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.