* 2236365
* CAREER: Dispelling Chemical Misconceptions to Discover New Pnictogen-Chalcogen Bonding/Reactivity and Enhance Transfer Student Success
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Timothy Johnstone, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* John Gilje
* 05/31/2028
* USD 447,094.00

With funding from the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Dr. Timothy Johnstone of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
California–Santa Cruz, will explore the synthesis and reactivity of chemical
bonds involving heavy elements of the pnictogen family with elements of the
halogen family and the role of chemistry misconceptions in the educational
outcomes of transfer students. Chemical bonding is the bedrock of the
understanding of chemistry. The discovery of new types of bonds opens access to
new, often unexpected types of chemical compounds and reactivity. This project
will prepare heretofore unknown compounds of the heavy atoms antimony and
bismuth with double bonds to oxygen, sulfur, selenium and tellurium. These
heretofore unkown bond types may allow reactivity that has historically been
accessible only using very expensive metals such as platinum and gold. Such
advancements allow the diversify the sorts of chemical platforms that may be
accessed and exploited across the chemical sciences - very fundamental. The
educational plan of this proposal focuses on understanding whether chemical
misconceptions, which play a role in the learning of all chemistry students,
differ between students that transfer into a four-year degree program from the
community college system (transfer students) and students that enter directly
into a four-year degree program (non-transfer students). The differences in
chemical misconceptions held by transfer students and non-transfer students will
be elucidated with surveys conducted at UC Santa Cruz. The efficacy of active-
learning interventions developed to specifically target these misconceptions
will then be tested.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will target the synthesis
of compounds featuring unsaturated bonds between heavy pnictogens (antimony and
bismuth) and chalcogens (oxygen, sulfur, selenium, and tellurium): pnictine
chalcogenides and pnictinidene chalcogenides. Pnictine chalcogenides feature the
pnictogen in the 5+ oxidation state and pnictinidene chalcogenides feature the
pnictogen in the 3+ oxidation state; each bears a distinct type of unsaturated
bond between the pnictogen and the chalcogen. In cases where there is a
significant electronegativity difference between these two elements, the
unsaturated bond is highly reactive. To prevent premature quenching of this
reactivity, sterically bulky groups will be installed on the pnictogen center to
kinetically stabilize the target compounds. Once isolated, their reactivity will
be systematically explored, with an emphasis on stoichiometric and catalytic
small-molecule activation reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.