* 2236118
* Creating Autonomy-Supportive Learning Environments Using Undergraduate Student Pedagogy Advocates
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Emily Bonem, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Kim
* 04/30/2026
* USD 599,992.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by enhancing learning
environments in introductory STEM classes through the use of undergraduate
students as collaborators and partners. This project hopes to advance
understanding of ways in which undergraduate students, in partnership with
instructors, can help to implement evidence-oriented teaching practices that
support students’ basic psychological needs for autonomy, competence, and
relatedness. The satisfaction of these basic psychological needs in turn should
foster the creation of student-centered, autonomy-supportive learning
environments that increase student engagement, motivation, and ultimately
success. This partnership between undergraduate students and instructors has the
potential to bridge the gaps between these two groups. The significance of this
project lies in the potential for such partnerships to implement pedagogical
practices rooted in particular classroom, disciplinary, institutional, and
cultural contexts. Students serving as partners and advocates are able to
contribute their experience and knowledge to the process of generating,
collecting, and interpreting feedback on teaching interventions rooted in
evidence-based practices. This project will advance understanding of factors
that lead to successful implementation and effective integration of research-
based teaching practices in STEM to help foster student
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project will be to study the
factors leading to the effectiveness and successful implementation of
pedagogical practices fostering autonomy-supportive learning environments, as
taught in Purdue University’s IMPACT (Instruction Matters: Purdue Academic
Course Transformation) initiative. The Student Pedagogy Advocates (SPA) program,
drawing on the student-faculty partnership model, pairs faculty with
undergraduate students (SPAs) not enrolled in the class. The SPAs attend and
observe class sessions and meet weekly with faculty members to offer insights
and perspectives on the classroom environment. The semester-long partnership
between the student and faculty member creates an ongoing feedback loop to
empower faculty to create and foster autonomy-supportive learning environments
(ASLE) and support their students’ basic psychological needs of autonomy,
competence, and relatedness. The research team will investigate the conditions
under which the SPA model creates ASLE in large introductory STEM courses at a
large public institution. The scope of this investigation will include classes
across numerous STEM disciplines. The research team carry out its work by
identifying underlying principles that make such partnership programs effective
through a study of how the program fosters the satisfaction of basic
psychological needs for instructors, SPAs, and students enrolled in these STEM
classes. The NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports research and development projects to
improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through its
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.