* 2236610
* CAREER: Mapping the Mechanisms of Photoredox Catalysis with Multidimensional Optical Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2028
* Vanessa Huxter, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 01/31/2028
* USD 260,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms A (CSDM-A)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Vanessa Huxter of the University of
Arizona is using advanced spectroscopic methods to study the initial steps of
light-driven catalytic reactions that generate both simple and complex molecules
under mild conditions. To understand how these reactions work, Dr. Huxter and
her students will use pulses of light as short as a millionth of a billionth of
a second (one femtosecond), to track the chemical species produced by light-
triggered chemical reactions over a wide range of times. The project will
address the knowledge gap between the short lifetimes of intermediate radical
species that are implicated in driving such reactions, and the longer timescales
of diffusion required for those reaction to happen. Their discoveries could lead
to a better understanding of catalysts used in the synthesis of industrially and
pharmaceutically important chemicals that are otherwise difficult to produce. In
addition, graduate students working on this project will receive advanced
training in multiple disciplines, including optics, chemistry, and physics, and
the project will engage students of underserved communities through the
development and deployment of 3D-printed spectrometers that will bring hands-on
learning to students from historically underrepresented groups.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Huxter group uses time-resolved fluorescence,
ultrafast broadband transient absorption, and two-dimensional electronic
spectroscopy across a wide range of time and energy scales to study photoinduced
single-electron transfer in photoredox catalytic systems. The initial steps of
organic photoredox catalytic processes will be tracked to reveal the free energy
landscapes associated with such reaction mechanisms. This research will identify
the driving forces and intermediate states for photoredox catalytic reactions,
which could open pathways to design new, efficient catalysts. This work could
contribute to the resolution of a controversy regarding the mismatch between the
short lifetimes of radical intermediates and the requirement for diffusion-
limited bimolecular interactions. The role of radicals as intermediates in
photoredox catalysis will be further studied using isolatable neutral radicals.
In addition, the Huxter group will investigate the influence vibrational modes
on photocatalytic charge transfer events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.