* 2236654
* CAREER: Stratified Mixing in Sheared and Zero-Mean-Shear Turbulent Environments
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Blair Johnson, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 03/31/2028
* USD 416,290.00

Mechanisms by which mass transport and mixing occur remain to be well-understood
in flows for which there are interacting sources of energetic turbulence. The
primary aim of this project is to evaluate various types of mass transport that
occur from the interaction between mean shear stress (i.e. generated by velocity
gradients in unidirectional flow) and instantaneous and localized shear stress
generated by chaotic turbulence in the presence of density stratification.
Findings from this work will improve understanding of deep ocean mixing, brine
discharges in bays or subglacial lakes, saltwater intrusions in rivers, and
avalanches, among others. The work will include mentorship of a graduate student
and undergraduate researchers through the Graduates Linked with Undergraduates
in Engineering program that supports women in STEM. The PI will develop large-
scale public engagement events surrounding environmental mixing processes
through art exhibits and educational modules. Further, the research team will
partner with a local science museum to develop a permanent exhibit as well as a
hands-on laboratory workshop for K-12 home-schooled students to study gravity
currents; data generated from these experiments will be shared with the research
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this research is to
comprehensively evaluate the independent and combined roles of energetic
turbulent flows with and without current-generated shear acting upon density-
stratified fluid systems. This will be achieved via a comprehensive laboratory
approach using unique and highly controllable facilities that allow full
quantification of links between flow energetics, buoyancy, and fluid properties
with mixing and mass transport dynamics. Three distinct flow scenarios will be
considered: turbulence with no mean current, a density current released into
fluid with background turbulence, and advection of turbulence over a density
interface. Non-invasive quantitative imaging techniques will be used to measure
velocity and mass concentration fields to characterize flow dynamics. This
systematic approach will provide an understanding of how competing sources of
turbulence contribute to mixing and transport, particularly when shear-driven
flows act in conjunction with background turbulence. Impacts are expected to be
far-reaching, with direct and practical means for implementing the scientific
knowledge gained through the laboratory and synthesis efforts. Additionally,
significant outcomes are expected via the complementary educational and public
outreach activities designed to engage women and home-schooled K-12 students,
along with the general public. These activities will be assessed annually
throughout the duration of the proposal period to foster continued improvement
of equity, diversity, and inclusivity in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.