* 2236987
* CAREER: Toward a Specialized Edge for Augmented Reality
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Tian Guo, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 05/31/2028
* USD 262,837.00

Augmented Reality (AR) applications are a popular media that benefits millions
of users. Domain experts and the public use AR applications for daily tasks,
including safety training, tourism, and online shopping. However, existing edge-
assisted AR systems often fall short in handling noisy sensor data, managing
edge resources under dynamic workloads, and mitigating visual privacy risks. The
proposed work will lay the scientific foundations for a specialized edge by
designing a generic device-to-edge pipeline that AR developers can use to
implement and deploy efficient and privacy-preserving AR tasks. The proposed
techniques will complement and extend existing approaches for mobile AR
frameworks and edge resource management. The proposed research thrusts include:
(1) techniques for high-quality data capture, adaptive and scalable data
sharing, and resource-efficient execution; (2) methods and datasets for AR
researchers to gain new insights, and resource management techniques for
developers to improve the performance of their AR applications; and (3) privacy-
preserving approaches that help AR developers mitigate privacy risks associated
with AR development and deployment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
techniques will span development through deployment and improve AR applications'
end-to-end performance. The PI regularly open-sources systems and datasets,
promoting adoption and benefiting the research community. The research program
will support the inclusion of undergraduate researchers by providing
opportunities to students with diverse technical backgrounds to engage in mobile
and edge computing research. The PI will create and pilot interactive course
materials on mobile AR in the PI's existing courses and make them publicly
available. Collaboration with AR technology leaders and domain experts will ease
technology transfer and expose students to real-world AR
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.