* 2236160
* Collaborative Research: Large-Amplitude, Easy-Plane Spin-Orbit Torque Oscillators
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Satoru Emori, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2026
* USD 311,499.00

The rapid growth of information and communications technology continues to have
an outsized impact on global energy consumption. It is therefore crucial to
create new, energy-efficient electronic components that benefit this technology.
One such essential device converts a constant voltage input into an oscillating
voltage output. The goal of this research is to develop a new class of
microscale electronic oscillators, called easy-plane spin-orbit torque
oscillators, which are compatible with standard industrial fabrication
techniques. By exploiting novel device geometries and recently-discovered
phenomenon in ferromagnetic materials, easy-plane spin-orbit torque oscillators
could address many problems plaguing conventional oscillators, such as small
output signal, nanoscale confinement, and thermal instability. Applications for
these new oscillators range from microwave communications to brain-inspired
computing. This project also has an outreach component designed to teach K-12
students, especially those from schools underserved in science, how to build
simple magnetic motors from household items, with the goal of sparking interest
in science at an early age.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to produce
foundational knowledge for new spin-orbit torque oscillators based on current-
in-plane spin valves, in which the free-layer magnetization precesses at a large
cone angle of nearly 90 degrees. The research is inspired by a recent discovery
that an electric current in an in-plane magnetized film produces an out-of-plane
spin current. This novel spin current can then generate an antidamping torque,
driving large-angle precession in the free layer of the spin valve. The first
thrust of the research will identify the mechanisms of the out-of-plane spin
current and the resulting antidamping torque in spin valves. To this end, first-
principles calculations and spin-torque ferromagnetic resonance experiments will
be performed on spin valves with systematically varied compositions and
structures. The second thrust of the research will determine the critical
requirements for stable, large-angle precession in spin valves through
micromagnetic simulations and electrical device characterization. A successful
outcome will lead to easy-plane oscillators with more than an order of magnitude
higher signal and stability compared to existing spin-orbit torque oscillators,
owing to a larger swing in magnetoresistance and stronger immunity against
thermal fluctuations. Furthermore, the research will produce crucial fundamental
knowledge on unconventional spin currents and spin torques, which can control a
variety of magnetization dynamics (e.g., perpendicular magnetic switching,
superfluid-like exchange flow) in next-generation spintronic
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.