* 2236537
* CAREER: Characterizing Attack Resilience of Multi-agent Dynamical Systems with Applications to Connected Autonomous Vehicles
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2028
* Shaunak Bopardikar, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 04/30/2028
* USD 396,476.00

Our society is currently witnessing a surge in new transportation technologies
that include autonomous vehicles such as self-driving cars, automated buses, and
drones. These technologies promise several benefits such as reduced roadway
fatalities and congestion, and efficient last-mile delivery. However, the race
to achieve autonomy can make autonomous vehicles increasingly susceptible to
attacks on their sensors, communications, and control signals. This CAREER
project will create an integrated research and education program focusing on the
pressing need to make mobile dynamical systems (or agents) including autonomous
vehicles resilient – guaranteeing that they meet their intended objectives, even
under sensing, communication, and control attacks. There are three core research
objectives. The first involves designing a novel modeling and analysis framework
based on game theory that factors in the inherent asymmetry when a single agent
operates in adversarial environments. The second is to extend the framework to
include cooperation and the use of learning between multiple agents to
collectively minimize the impact of attacks. The third is to address the
scalability challenge that arises in solving the resulting games with limited
onboard computation. The proposed methodology will be evaluated through
realistic emulations using a ground robotic testbed and scenarios with full-
sized autonomous vehicles. The educational plan includes creating a pool of
activities based on innovative games related to attack resilience that will
combine engineering and the arts for effective student engagement and personnel
training. Presentations to the public and law enforcement agencies will help
shape future practices for root-cause analyses of security incidents and deter
attacks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will result in a holistic framework
to study the mathematical underpinnings of security problems arising in multi-
agent dynamical systems. This framework will be a major advancement compared to
existing frameworks that focus on specific aspects of the security problem. The
project will advance multiple sub-fields in game theory and computation. First,
it will combine multi-agent security games and learning techniques to provide a
novel solution to attacks that leverage environmental uncertainty. Second, this
work will build on the progress in randomized algorithms to solve large
optimization problems arising in multi-agent games. The approach will enable a
new probabilistic paradigm for robust multi-criterion optimization and multi-
agent learning. It will characterize the tradeoff between the system’s attack
resilience and the computation involved. Third, layered evaluations that include
a real mobility testbed with autonomous vehicles will facilitate the transition
of this framework to real-world applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.