* 2236966
* CAREER: Taming the size, complexity and longevity of OS kernels via enhanced OS kernel extensions
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Daniel Williams, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 04/30/2028
* USD 234,873.00

Operating system (OS) kernels are the most fundamental
software&lt;br/&gt;component society depends on, underpinning the computing
industry,&lt;br/&gt;from the clouds and datacenters that manage our data to the
smart&lt;br/&gt;phones and other devices we all use daily. Unfortunately, they
have&lt;br/&gt;grown to be complex and have not kept pace with advances
in&lt;br/&gt;programming languages and modular software design, instead
struggling&lt;br/&gt;to meet modern security and reliability threats to our
computing&lt;br/&gt;infrastructure. Moreover, there appears to be no clear path
to&lt;br/&gt;incrementally evolve them and their unchecked complexity has become
a&lt;br/&gt;significant barrier to entry for students and practitioners to
learn&lt;br/&gt;or innovate at the kernel level. This project seeks to remedy
this&lt;br/&gt;issue by create a safe kernel extension framework within the
legacy OS&lt;br/&gt;kernel that enables it to be replaced in part or in its
entirety with&lt;br/&gt;safe components. Through this extension framework, the
project will&lt;br/&gt;enable a practical, incrementally-adoptable mechanism
for&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate, graduate students and practitioners to evolve
kernels&lt;br/&gt;to be safer and more reliable, improving national security and
leading&lt;br/&gt;to higher productivity for society and the national
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to achieve three goals for the
OS kernel: security&lt;br/&gt;and robustness through language safety, robustness
and incremental&lt;br/&gt;update through componentization, and practical
relevance through&lt;br/&gt;building upon existing kernel extension frameworks.
The key insight in&lt;br/&gt;our approach is that a safe kernel extension
framework can be created&lt;br/&gt;within the legacy OS kernel that enables any
part of it to be replaced&lt;br/&gt;via bypass extensions, evolving the kernel
towards a safe,&lt;br/&gt;componentized architecture, or in its entirety with a
safe and&lt;br/&gt;specialized in-situ kernel. Our integrated research and
education&lt;br/&gt;plan involves three broad research thrusts. First, we will
explore&lt;br/&gt;expressiveness/safety tradeoffs for kernel extensions, and
will design&lt;br/&gt;a new Rust-based kernel extension environment that
provides similar&lt;br/&gt;safety guarantees with a more expressive programming
environment than&lt;br/&gt;the popular eBPF kernel extension framework in Linux.
Second, we will&lt;br/&gt;explore to what extent our enhanced safe kernel
extensions can replace&lt;br/&gt;individual kernel components with bypass
extensions and explore new&lt;br/&gt;component boundaries in Linux. Finally, we
will explore to what extent&lt;br/&gt;an entirely new in-situ kernel can be
created from extensions,&lt;br/&gt;ultimately in the context of Linux. Our
educational plan integrates&lt;br/&gt;the research in courses and other
initiatives involving open source&lt;br/&gt;and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.