* 2236897
* CAREER: A Multidisciplinary Approach for the Discovery and Characterization of Hormone Inducers of Natural Product Biosynthetic Gene Clusters
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Elizabeth Parkinson, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 01/31/2028
* USD 477,041.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes program in the Division of
Chemistry, Elizabeth Parkinson of Purdue University is studying the regulation
of Streptomyces natural product biosynthesis by hormones and their repressors.
Natural products from the soil-dwelling bacteria Streptomyces are a bountiful
source of medicines, agricultural products, and chemical tools for manipulating
and studying biological processes. While genomics data suggests that hundreds of
thousands of novel natural products likely to have interesting bioactivities
remain to be discovered from Streptomyces, many are not produced when grown in
the laboratory. This is likely because the bacteria are not exposed to the same
chemical stimuli that they encounter in the soil. Unfortunately, the chemical
signals that regulate the production of the majority of these natural products
remain a mystery. Understanding these signals is critical to accessing these
natural products and ultimately maximizing the natural product potential from
Streptomyces. The proposed experimentation is directed at developing improved
methods for accessing novel hormones and determining the natural products they
regulate. The project will also implement an education plan to improve rural
student access to science, science identity and interest. Specifically, a
project-based learning laboratory for rural high schools focused on isolation of
antibiotic-producing bacteria from their backyard will be developed.
Additionally, a modified version of the lab appropriate for younger students to
perform at rural children’s museums will be
generated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;γ-Butyrolactones and butenolides are two of the
known classes of Streptomyces hormones that regulate natural product
biosynthesis. Over half of Streptomyces strains are predicted to have genes
regulated by these hormones, but few examples are known because 1) hormones are
produced at very low quantities and 2) no rapid, efficient assays exist to
identify them. The central hypothesis of this research project is that
repressors in sequence similarity networks cluster based on the structure of
their hormone ligands and their DNA-binding domains. To test this, divergent
synthetic routes that allow easy access to an expanded library of hormones will
be developed. This library includes hormones predicted based on the hormone
biosynthetic gene clusters that exist within the genomic neighborhood of the
receptors. High throughput methods (i.e. GFP-reporter assays and DNA affinity
purification sequencing) will then be utilized to explore ligand and binding-
site specificity for a library of receptors. These assays are expected to
provide valuable insight into the mechanisms by which hormones affect natural
product biosynthesis. They will also allow for testing of the hypothesis that
sequence similarity networks of receptors are predictive of ligand and DNA-
binding specificity. If correct, this will enable development of a predictive
model for hormone activation that will likely permit the discovery of novel
natural products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.