* 2236433
* CAREER: Understanding How Moist Processes Shape Tropical Motions in Observations and General Circulation Models
* GEO,AGS
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2027
* Angel Adames-Corraliza, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 12/31/2027
* USD 810,537.00

Expeditious advances in our understanding of tropical weather systems have been
made during the last decade. However, there is still much to be learned, and
many climate models still struggle to simulate the tropical weather systems. The
goal of this project is to leverage recently developed theories to develop a
series of criteria aimed at identifying the key physical processes that govern
the tropical systems. These criteria will be used to evaluate the representation
of the Madden-Julian Oscillation and tropical depression-like disturbances in
climate models. The outcome of this study will elucidate the importance of water
vapor-cloud interactions in the tropical weather systems, interactions that are
currently not well-captured in climate models, and will identify opportunities
to improve our current theoretical thinking of tropical weather systems. Along
with training students and a postdoc, the work will also create high-quality
educational resources for Spanish speakers in the form of a layperson-friendly
podcast titled “Tiempo, Clima y Tierra” and educational online workshops for
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Free-tropospheric water vapor
plays an important role in the occurrence and organization of tropical
convection. This realization has led to numerous advances in our understanding
of tropical weather systems. One such advancement is the recognition that
“moisture modes” may exist, a type of tropical system in which water vapor plays
a central role in its evolution. Furthermore, there is evidence that horizontal
moist static energy advection can play an important role in the development and
growth of tropical depression-like systems, leading to “moisture-vortex
instability.” This proposal will leverage these recent advancements in our
theoretical understanding of tropical weather systems to develop a series of
criteria aimed at identifying moisture modes and moisture-vortex instability in
observations. Budget equations for the systems that are identified as moisture
modes or growing from moisture-vortex instability will be compared with those
from linear theory. The results of this analysis will be used to evaluate the
representation of the Madden-Julian Oscillation and tropical depression-like
waves in the various model simulations. The proposal will also produce high-
quality educational resources for Spanish speakers in the form of a layperson-
friendly podcasts and educational online workshops for undergraduate students.
Even though Spanish is one of the most widely spoken languages in the world and
one of the fastest-growing spoken languages in the US., there is a lack of high-
quality educational resources that cover different topics of the geosciences in
Spanish.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.