* 2236846
* CAREER: A Multi-dimensional Study of Electromagnetic Interference in Wide Bandgap Power Electronics: Modeling, Estimation, and Mitigation
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2028
* AYAN MALLIK, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mahesh Krishnamurthy
* 03/31/2028
* USD 416,493.00

In the advancing domain of wide bandgap (WBG) semiconductor technology,
electromagnetic interference (EMI) is one of the major concerns, resolving which
needs significant research focus. The objective of this research is to perform
multi-physics modeling and characterization of EMI and develop new active EMI
mitigation methodologies to facilitate noise immune and high-density WBG power
conversion. The novel filtering solutions as a product of this research are
applicable to a broad family of power converter topologies with a variety of
applications including motor drive, avionics, military, space, and data centers.
Multi-physics EMI modeling and solutions developed in our research can be
extended to application specific integrated circuit (ASIC)-level and power
management IC-level high-speed micro-electronics. The research components of
this project integrate electrical science, computer science, and mathematical
optimization to advance the realization of next-generation WBG power electronics
with physics-informed EMI models. The highly interdisciplinary nature of the
project will benefit next-generation students with systems engineering,
electrical, and electronics engineering backgrounds who will gain scientific
knowledge and acquire engineering skills to develop noise-immune power
electronic circuits. Overall, the long-term goals are to (a) employ the advanced
EMI modeling theories into next-generation power electronics applications, and
(b) train the diverse group of engineers to make them aware of the major design
challenges in the power electronics field and well-prepared for addressing the
future energy needs of the United States. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
research, we propose new methodologies for analytical modeling of the EMI
sources, propagation paths, and the coupling dynamics of parasitic noises by
identifying the resonating circuit paths in a high-frequency power converter,
and thereby synthesize new active-hybrid filtering compensation schemes. The
fundamental breakthroughs proposed are: (a) development of mathematical model
equivalents for common mode (CM) noise sources followed by estimation of
parasitic components in high-frequency power converters, (b) studying the
coupling effect of EMI on the control loop stability and dynamic performance in
high-frequency power conversion, (c) formulation of a unified methodology for
multi-constraint volumetric optimization-based EMI filter design for high-
density power conversion, and (d) coupled topological integration of CM and
differential mode (DM) filter networks for volumetric optimization and component
count reduction. It is estimated that the topologically integrated active-hybrid
EMI filters can achieve a power density of 50 kW/L, with a shrinkage of 70%
volume compared to state-of-the-art fully passive solutions, while maintaining
an efficiency of 99.8% and superior power quality (&lt;1 degree phase
displacement) and improved CM performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.