* 2236504
* CAREER: A Unified Multiscale Modeling Approach for Processes in the Atmospheric Boundary Layer
* GEO,AGS
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Paola Crippa, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Yu Gu
* 01/31/2028
* USD 136,002.00

Weather phenomena, including wind characteristics, are the result of atmospheric
processes occurring at multiple scales, spanning from planetary and regional
systems that vary across thousands of kilometers to fine turbulent processes
that vary every few meters. The properties of the atmosphere close to the
surface vary at sub-kilometer resolution in less than one hour, thus they are
challenging to characterize using existing weather models. This research will
develop a unified multi-scale modeling framework to improve predictions of
atmospheric properties at fine resolution that are critical to address issues of
high environmental and societal relevance, such as assessment of renewable
energy resources, air pollution health risks, wildfire risks and urbanization
impacts on the local and regional climate. The project will also broadly impact
society by promoting teaching, training and outreach activities. Specifically,
it will create atmospheric science-related lesson plan kits to support education
in local elementary and middle schools. The project will also develop new course
material for undergraduate and graduate education in Environmental Engineering,
Applied Mathematics and Statistics, and will train one postdoctoral researcher,
one graduate and one undergraduate student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing
weather models and their physical parameterizations are formulated for specific
scales and assumptions. Performing simulations designed to capture very
different scales (i.e., coupling meso- to micro-scale simulations) is
challenging and requires substantial computing time, thus identification of the
key drivers of fine scale atmospheric processes is critical to optimize the
simulation design. This research aims to improve understanding of atmospheric
boundary layer processes by developing new physics-based and data-driven
approaches to enhance predictive and modeling capabilities across a wide range
of spatio-temporal scales. Specifically, it will address the following
objectives: 1) to develop a unified multi-scale framework to overcome current
theoretical and modeling challenges for real case studies; 2) to explore the
sensitivity of weather model output to physics schemes and model setup to
identify optimal modeling practices and improve understanding of drivers of
microscale flows; and 3) to develop a hybrid modeling approach integrating a
machine learning model with a physics-based model to improve simulations of
atmospheric flows. This proposal will also leverage data from NSF-funded field
experiments designed to explore the complex dynamical interactions between
geographical, terrain and synoptic conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.