* 2236064
* I-Corps: Development of a Power Substation Blackbox
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Chee-Wooi Ten, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of power substation blackbox that will foster enhanced collaboration
between insurance and utility businesses. The energy control center framework
has evolved from a monolithic to a networked environment, allowing substation
systems to reliably and efficiently communicate with a control center for
coordination of grid-related disturbances. The computing platform for these
systems has gradually adopted standardized communication protocols and
information technology practice, which inherently introduces existing software
vulnerabilities into the critical network. Cybersecurity issues are a known
challenging issue that has been studied by university researchers to investigate
the fundamental issues between the cyberphysical relations and the associated
potential risks. The proposed technology aims to allow a seamless exchange of
aggregated risk profiles of substations in the insurance market.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of information
retrieval, anomaly detection frameworks, and cyber-based contingency analyses
for power grids. The proposed technology is a trustworthy mechanism that will
allow exchange of information between a substation network and insurance
markets, as well as federal entities for compliance purposes. Algorithms may
allow identification of a programming platform and software integration. The
commercialization potential includes the hardware/software integration to
extract anomalies across a substation network, which allows the attributes of
the cybersystems to be correlated within a substation as well as between
neighborhood substations. The understanding of how supply chain security is
deployed for substation solutions is crucial in developing working relationships
with stakeholder communities where the existing networks with industry partners
will be strengthened.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.