* 2236150
* Project CLASSIFIES: Common Language Assessment in Studying Statistics with Instructional Feedback and Increased Enrollment Scalability
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2025
* Dennis Pearl, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 02/28/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing new tools to
support instructors' assessment of written problems in large enrollment
statistics courses. Writing is particularly crucial in statistics, and short
answer questions provide students with important opportunities to interpret
problems and consider multiple paths to a correct solution. Because students
must formulate their answers in their own words, short answer questions are more
robust for authentic assessment of student competencies and misconceptions than
other short-form problems, such as multiple choice or true/false questions. For
all assessments, timely feedback is well established as important for learning.
Unfortunately, providing timely, quality feedback on student writing can be
challenging in large classes. This can lead to assessment methods being poorly
aligned with learning goals in the courses that reach the most students. This
Level 1 project in the Engaged Student Learning track of the IUSE: EDU program
addresses this long-standing obstacle to the effective use of free-form
questions in large-enrollment classes. The project will develop, test, and
refine a grading support platform that combines human and machine assessment.
Specifically, the tools developed will sort students' solutions to short-answer
problems into one of three categories: essentially correct, partially correct,
or incorrect. Partially correct solutions are then sent to the course instructor
for further review. The project engages partner institutions throughout the
country to collect diverse data on statistics question prompts and student
answers. The project-developed tools will give students more opportunities to
strengthen their reasoning skills through exposure to short-answer problems and
will give instructors a tool to monitor learning more
closely.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project’s goal is to advance understanding
and study effectiveness of innovative tools that pair instructor expertise with
natural language processing (NLP) techniques to provide students with rich
feedback. Integrating the project platform into introductory statistics courses
will allow for the frequent use of short-answer tasks in large enrollment
statistics classes. Large-enrollment course instructors will be able to provide
detailed feedback much like students might expect in a class with 25-30
students. The project utilizes a collaboration of prominent experts in NLP,
statistics education, and assessment to pursue the three aims of 1) developing
an interactive, scalable, human/software partnership, 2) field-testing the
methods across diverse student populations, and 3) creating open access
resources of software, assessment tasks, and student data to foster future
research on free-form formative assessments. The project will utilize a mixed-
methods evaluation plan to assess progress towards key goals and the project-
developed platform will be made freely available to interested users. The NSF
IUSE: EDU Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.