* 2236138
* CAREER: Single-Atom Alloy Catalyst Design for the Electrocatalytic Reduction of Nitrate to Ammonia: Linking Electronic Structure to Geometry and Catalytic Performance
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Bryan Goldsmith, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2028
* USD 457,594.00

Nitrate (NO3−) is among the most ubiquitous groundwater pollutants in the world
and a serious threat to human and ecosystem health. Thus, there is a compelling
need to manage nitrate waste across industry, food, and water systems. The
electrocatalytic nitrate reduction reaction (NO3RR) is a promising approach to
convert nitrate into valuable ammonia (NH3); however, critical scientific
questions and challenges surrounding NO3RR limit its practical use. The proposed
research focuses on computationally addressing multiple scientific questions to
better understand NO3RR to ammonia on single atom alloy catalysts. This project
integrates the research with an educational outreach plan in collaboration with
the Museum of Natural History at the University of Michigan and the Washtenaw
Community College to promote STEM education and catalysis
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research focuses on addressing two
scientific objectives to enhance NO3RR to ammonia. Prior results showed that the
maximum NO3RR activity and selectivity on transition metal electrocatalysts is
hindered by linear energy scaling relations (LSRs) between adsorbates. The 1st
scientific objective aims to answer mechanistic questions of NO3RR by single-
atom alloy (SAAs) electrocatalysts, with the goal to break these LSRs. SAAs are
a promising class of catalysts in which small amounts of isolated metal atoms
are present in the surface layer of a metal host. Yet SAAs have hardly been
explored for NO3RR. Using state-of-the-art Grand Canonical Density Functional
Theory, we will test the hypotheses that 1) judiciously selected SAAs will break
LSRs that limit NO3RR activity on pure metals, and 2) quench N-N coupling to
favor NH3 selectivity. The second scientific objective aims to elucidate how
geometry and electronic structure of SAAs link to NO3RR activity and
selectivity. These insights will help design SAA catalysts that break LSRs for
NO3RR. The expected outcomes of this research are new mechanistic understanding
of SAAs and their ability to break LSRs for NO3RR, design rules for SAAs that
link their properties to reactivity, and general insights into the role of
solvent and applied electrochemical potential on NO3RR. The proposed educational
activities are: (i) Creating a “Research Station” museum exhibit that will teach
the public about catalysis and the nitrate problem; (ii) Engaging middle school
students through a summer science research program; (iii) Teaching and
practicing science communication through a Science Communication Fellows
Program; and (iv) Serving as summer research mentors to first-generation
Community College students. The proposed integrated research and educational
activities will support multidisciplinary research training, enhance STEM
equity, diversity and inclusion, and increase USA economic
competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.