* 2236352
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track H: Next Generation Augmentative and Alternative Communication Technology Powered by Artificial Intelligence
* TIP,ITE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Slobodan Vucetic, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 11/30/2023
* USD 749,960.00

Communication is a basic human need, a fundamental human right, and an elemental
human power. It is through communication that all individuals participate and
affect change within their daily lives. For millions of Americans, communication
is restricted by limitations in speech and language. These restrictions can
include a lack of speech, speech that most communication partners do not
understand, and limited language understanding. Individuals with communication
limitations are severely restricted in their participation in life, including in
educational, vocational, and social activities. Augmentative and alternative
communication (AAC) devices aim to help people with speech and language
limitations express their thoughts, needs, and ideas. Despite the evidence that
AAC devices can improve social interaction with family, friends, and
communication partners; participation in educational contexts; and participation
in vocational life, the existing technology has yet to reach its full potential.
The challenges include teaching users to interact with AAC devices,
personalizing the devices to fit the communication needs of each user, and
making communication as effortless as possible. We hypothesize that by
leveraging recent advances in Artificial Intelligence (AI), we can enhance AAC
technology and redefine how the users interact with it, ultimately achieving a
transformative impact on the lives of many people with communication limitations
and their communication partners, including their families. &lt;br/&gt;This
convergence project aims to spearhead a new generation of AI-powered AAC
technology through a convergent and multidisciplinary effort involving experts
in AAC, AI, human-computer interaction, and software design, as well as AAC end
users, caregivers, and stakeholders. The AAC embodiment studied in this project
will be a prototype of an AAC application for mobile touchscreen devices. The
envisioned AI-powered AAC application will be able to (1) ingest and analyze
multi-modal contextual information about the user and their environment to
provide personalization, (2) produce dynamic grids and visual scene displays
informed by best practices in AAC and inclusive design and driven by AI to
maximize communication efficiency, (3) include a virtual conversational partner
able to guide the AAC user, and (4) support virtual activities aimed at
encouraging frequent AAC use and promoting language development. Through a
collaborative, iterative process, the research team will gather stakeholder
input, conduct a use-inspired exploration of AI-powered AAC concepts, and
evaluate the concepts through rapid prototyping and user testing.
&lt;br/&gt;Improved communication support would result in better educational
outcomes and increased participation in the workforce for individuals with
communication limitations, thus leading to a more abundant society. This project
stands to support a more equitable world for the millions of Americans with
communication limitations who benefit from AAC. The project team will interact
with technology transfer experts and AAC industry leaders to lay out the best
path towards developing and deploying the next-generation AAC devices and
putting them into the hands of end users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.