* 2236389
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track J: Network Of User-engaged Researchers building Interdisciplinary Scientific infrastructures for Healthy food (NOURISH)
* TIP,ITE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Matthew Lange, University of California-San Francisco
* Standard Grant
* Michael Reksulak
* 11/30/2023
* USD 744,721.00

Low-income communities in the US have food systems saturated with
ultraprocessed, hyperpalatable foods– industrially produced “fast foods” that
are cheap, convenient, and habit-forming. Meanwhile, fresh food is hard to find.
The proliferation of these “food swamps” is a national challenge that is driving
twin epidemics of obesity and chronic disease, as well as significant
environmental harms and profound health inequities. The urgent need to address
this national challenge has been recognized by the National Academy of Medicine,
the US Food Department of Agriculture, and the National Science Foundation. The
Network Of User-engaged Researchers building Interdisciplinary Scientific
infrastructures for Healthy food (NOURISH) will develop technical solutions that
help people transform food swamps into healthy food
systems.&lt;br/&gt;Ultraprocessed and hyperpalatable foods comprise about two-
thirds of the US food supply, leaving most Americans to encounter them daily.
But food swamps leave their residents with few food options other than these
unhealthy products. To solve the problem of food swamps, we must equip
responsible business entrepreneurs situated within these communities with data
and information for developing and marketing healthy, sustainable foods. This
includes information on what consumers in their markets want in terms of taste,
convenience, and affordability, as well as information on how to source fresh
produce affordably and open a small business.&lt;br/&gt;Bringing high technology
and advanced data to a cell phone application and online dashboard, NOURISH will
enable local food entrepreneurs to grow businesses that produce, prepare, and
market food that is naturally appealing, without the industrial production
processes used to make hyperpalatable foods. There already exists a large,
national network of community-based nonprofit food justice groups seeking this
transformation. There is also a vibrant community of philanthropists, investors
and social enterprise firms who want to invest in, and support, healthy food
businesses in under-resourced communities. NOURISH brings these groups together
with scientists to innovate technical solutions that work for
everybody.&lt;br/&gt;The NOURISH system will connect local food entrepreneurs
and investors, equipping them with a high-technology system that accelerates
their efforts to transform food swamps. Features of the system will
include:&lt;br/&gt;● a national food swamp map,&lt;br/&gt;● crowdsourced data on
local consumer food preferences and affordable pricing,&lt;br/&gt;● access to
supply chains for fresh foods,&lt;br/&gt;● resources for launching a small food
business, and&lt;br/&gt;● a social networking feature that builds and connects
stakeholders in healthy food nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NOURISH advances a
novel scientific perspective that is grounded in equity research, one that
points to profound market failures in our current food system as a key factor in
both the existence of food swamps and their eradication. The NOURISH team
expands upon an existing community-academic partnership, bringing together
expertise in social inequities, public health nutrition, food chemistry,
foodsheds, community engagement, indigenous and racial equity, food justice,
agriculture, regional planning, business, addiction, and data
science/AI.&lt;br/&gt;This team will prototype a dynamic, reusable, place-based
cyberinfrastructure developed via community engagement. The NOURISH system will
combine publicly available data and crowdsourced information using a
heterogeneous information integration platform. It will have an updatable,
ontology-based knowledge graph that provides users with information on regional
supply chains in fresh foods and local market data on consumers preferences. The
system will include specific recommendation algorithms and visual analytics
tools that allow end users to explore the efficacy of different recommended
solutions. A series of three workshops will gather insights and feedback from
stakeholders in the food justice and investment communities, exploring different
use cases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.