* 2236885
* CAREER: Elliptic Dichroism Microscopy for Cellular Stereochemistry Analysis
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Dali Sun, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 08/31/2028
* USD 404,035.00

The 3D structure of biomolecules plays a prominent role in their function.
Inexpensive and broadly accessible tools for measuring biomolecule structure in
live cells remain inadequate. This Faculty Early Career Development Program
(CAREER) project aims to develop and validate an elliptical dichroism microscopy
(EDM) system that will provide a low-cost bioimaging platform to advance
stereochemical cellular study. The research activities will be linked to
educational activities, creating high-quality course content on translational
biomedical device design. Outreach activities will engage young and senior
generations through student-led STEM seminars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER
project aims to develop a novel elliptical dichroism microscope that will
significantly expand the scope of cellular analysis, provide deeper insight into
cell homeostasis in a real-time and label-free way, and find broad applications
in areas spanning basic biological research to cancer diagnosis. The
stereochemical imaging signature over diverse adenocarcinoma cell types will be
investigated, with the goal of linking cellular stereochemical signature and
biological functions. The project will enable new biological studies into
stereochemical properties of cellular proteins, cell classification through
stereochemical signature, cellular energy distribution by localization of
featured structures, and biological functions of featured structures. The
research goals integrate with the educational objectives of introducing product-
oriented learning (POL) on advanced microscopy in class. The outreach activities
will focus on senior citizens by hosting student-led educational seminars about
basic cancer knowledge and advanced optical cancer
detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Biophotonics Program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.