* 2236953
* CAREER: Measuring and Supporting Creativity in Developing Software Requirements
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2028
* Tanmay Bhowmik, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 05/31/2028
* USD 329,205.00

New products and new companies in the software industry often compete against
existing software. This makes it important for new products that better meet
people's needs and that differ from existing ones. Creativity in Requirements
Engineering (RE) emphasizes the key role of developing creative requirements
that are both novel and appropriate for a given application. Existing approaches
to promote requirements creativity, including multi-day workshops, tools, and
frameworks, are time-consuming, often ineffective, and largely dependent on the
requirements analyst's own creativity. Moreover, creativity has a number of
facets that should be assessed independently, but the field of RE has few good
tools for evaluating creativity. This project's goal is to use a range of
artificial intelligence-based techniques both to help assess requirement
creativity and to help software engineers develop more creative requirements.
This will involve both developing interfaces that help engineers consider a
wider range of possible requirements and a framework for evaluating creativity
in RE. The research work will also support curriculum development, mentoring of
student researchers, and creativity-focused training workshops for K-12
students, teachers, and software startups. The success of this project will
advance fundamental knowledge in creative software development and impact local,
state, and national economies by helping developers become creative software
professionals and increasing the chance that products and companies
succeed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on two main objectives. The
first main objective is to use data mining, machine learning, and natural
language processing techniques to generate potentially creative ideas based on
existing online software-related content such as reviews, product descriptions,
issue tracking systems, and forum discussions. These techniques will then be
integrated into a support system to explore and select creative requirements
with guided human intervention. The second main objective is to develop a
comprehensive framework for evaluating the creativity of software requirements,
based on well-established dimensions of creativity that include relevance and
effectiveness, novelty, elegance, and genesis. These tools and scales will be
validated through user studies including professional software developers and
experts in RE. Providing an automated mechanism to support the discovery of
creative requirements and a novel framework to evaluate the creativity of
requirements, this project addresses the fundamental issues that act as barriers
to the wide adoption of creativity in software requirements
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by Human
Centered Computing (HCC), the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR), and Software &amp; Hardware Foundations
(SHF).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.