* 2236543
* CAREER: Unusual phonons in bulk ferroelectric HfO2 single crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Junjie Yang, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 06/30/2028
* USD 98,871.00

Non-technical Abstract: &lt;br/&gt;Due to extraordinary properties and
compatibility with silicon technology, HfO2 is today's most promising material
for next-generation non-volatile, high-density, and high-speed technologies.
However, the microscopic origin of HfO2's properties remains elusive, hindering
the development of HfO2-based devices. This project aims to fill the important
gap in understanding by revealing the microscopic origin of HfO2's unique
properties. The results will build the scientific foundation of HfO2 for future
atomic-scale applications. The results of this project will provide new
knowledge in the field of quantum materials, in addition to helping the rational
synthesis and fabrication of better HfO2-based devices. The research activities
involve the study of large crystals performed at world-class neutron facilities
located at national labs. The PI effectively integrates the research activities
with education at all academic levels (K-12 students, undergraduates, and
graduates) to train the next generation of scientists. In particular, the PI
collaborates with the Liberty Science Center, Franklin Mineral Museum, Rutgers
University, and local high schools and develops a “Natural Minerals &amp;
Quantum Materials” educational project that provides great learning
opportunities for K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;HfO2 exhibits extraordinary ferroelectricity: it is the only binary
compound with switchable polarization, which is robust down to atomic scales.
More importantly, HfO2 shows excellent complementary metal-oxide semiconductor
compatibility. Thus, HfO2 is today's most promising material for next-generation
non-volatile, high-density, and high-speed ferroelectric memories. However, the
microscopic origin of HfO2's ferroelectricity remains elusive, hindering the
development of HfO2-based ferroelectric devices. Recent theoretical work
suggested that HfO2's ferroelectricity may originate from exotic flat polar
phonon bands, and these flat bands are directly associated with the atomic-scale
separation of polar and space layers, which can enable atomic-scale manipulation
of polarization. This project aims to fill the important gap: utilize the laser
floating zone crystal growth method to stabilize the metastable ferroelectric
phase in large bulk crystals and the inelastic neutron scattering technique on
the crystals to validate the scenario of flat polar phonon bands. The inelastic
neutron scattering method can detect phonon bands in a wide range of wavevectors
and energies. Flat bands in quantum materials, such as flat bands of electrons,
have been known to cause various novel quantum phenomena, such as
superconductivity. However, the function of flat polar phonon bands is poorly
understood. This project would reveal the effect of flat polar phonon bands on
ferroelectricity, which can be directly relevant to atomic-scale ferroelectric
manipulation. The results would also provide a new approach for improving the
ferroelectric properties of HfO2-based materials, e.g., fine tunning the
ferroelectric properties by engineering the flat polar phonon bands. The PI
effectively integrates the research activities with education at all academic
levels (K-12 students, undergraduates, and graduates) to train the next
generation of scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.