* 2236190
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track I: Mind over Matter: Socioresilient Materials Design: A New Paradigm For Addressing Global Challenges in Sustainability
* TIP,ITE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2023
* James Saal, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 11/30/2023
* USD 750,000.00

This project, NSF Convergence Accelerator Track I: Mind over Matter:
Socioresilient Materials Design (SMD): A New Paradigm For Addressing Global
Challenges in Sustainability (MoMaTS), will be an innovative, convergent cross-
sector and cross-disciplinary effort to fundamentally re-think, re-shape, re-
direct, and accelerate emergent technical capabilities in materials research and
development towards more environmentally, socially, and economically sustainable
materials-based products and materials-driven outcomes. Increasingly, our
materials infrastructure and systems are faced with climate shocks which amplify
environmental and social injustice issues over long periods of time. The current
state of circular materials design approaches are insufficient to address
challenges, and even have potential to simultaneously degrade resiliency, as
well as to create downstream unintended negative societal impacts. This project
brings together a team from industry (Citrine), academia (MIT, Cornell,
Swansea), and the social sector (Station1) to focus on this issue via the
intentional design of materials which foster the equitable capacity of human
communities to cope with, adapt to, and recover from stresses and shocks,
through consideration of the often bridging technical, environmental, and social
systems. This project is critical for, and has great potential to, advance
environmental protection and resource conservation, social well-being and
equity, economic prosperity and continuity, infrastructure resiliency and
national security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop the new field
of “Socioresilient Materials Design” (SMD) by building upon the classic
materials design paradigm (structure - property - processing - performance
relationships) through a core convergence approach - integrating circular design
principles, powerful emergent materials computational capabilities (i.e.
multiscale computational materials design based on physicochemical laws such as
molecular dynamics and density functional theory, artificial intelligence (AI) /
machine learning (ML), evolutionary optimization algorithms), and rigorous
humanistic and social sciences methodologies to understanding and fostering
socioresilient societal impacts. This project will develop a SMD framework,
inventory of metrics, knowledge base of novel design approaches, advanced
computational methods, exemplar use case studies, datasets, and an open software
tool, for utilization in decision-making processes. SMD parameters, metrics, and
constraints, in addition to traditional material properties, will be
incorporated into advanced computational materials design workflows for multi-
objective optimization and to quantify and understand the inherent trade-offs
present. Methodologies and software tools will be developed to visualize and
assess such trade-offs between technical and SMD metrics in multi-parametric
design spaces. The codification and dissemination of project research results
will have a broad reaching impact across disparate disciplines including open
software, publications for scholarly audiences, contributions to pedagogy and
curriculum, influence on emergent research in the academic and start-up
communities, the creation of new collaborations, and translation of research
outcomes into opportunities for public engagement. This research will serve as a
basis for undergraduate curriculum development and delivery and include
broadening participation through research projects for STEM undergraduate
students from historically under-represented backgrounds with an emphasis on
participation by students enrolled in under-resourced higher education
institutions across the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.