* 2236145
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Cognitive ecology of a nocturnal primate and its implications for primate cognitive evolution
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* John Dalton, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 03/31/2024
* USD 25,098.00

Primates such as apes and monkeys are known for their unusual brain size and
cognitive complexity. However, there is uncertainty about whether these
exceptional traits have evolved across the entire spectrum of primate diversity.
To better understand the evolution of complex intelligence in primates requires
comparative data. Towards that end, this doctoral dissertation research project
examines the ecology, sociality, and cognitive behavior of an understudied
ancient primate lineage. Results can provide key insights into how cognitive
complexity has evolved in primates. The project supports mentorship of student
researchers and international research collaborations. It also involves an
interdisciplinary collaboration that integrates ideas from biological
anthropology and electromechanical engineering to develop novel remote
biologging technologies. This collaboration can facilitate the future collection
of spatial and movement data on many smaller-bodied nocturnal species for which
this type of data has been traditionally unattainable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to identify ecologically and socially relevant cognitive
adaptations in a wild population of nocturnal strepsirrhine primates, thick-
tailed galagos, to determine how socioecological pressures shape patterns of
cognitive evolution in nocturnal strepsirrhine primates compared to diurnal
gregarious primates. The researchers utilize manual behavioral observation,
newly developed biologging technology, vocalization playback experiments, field-
adapted cognitive tests, and comparative statistical analysis to collect and
analyze relevant cognitive and behavioral data on thick-tailed galagos. If
similar cognitive abilities are observed in the galago lineage as in gregarious,
diurnal primate lineages, then there may be a preserved evolutionary blueprint
of specific socioecological conditions selecting for specialized sets of
cognitive adaptations in primates that predates the divergence of the galagos.
Comparing cognitive adaptations between thick-tailed galagos and other primates
presenting similar socioecological traits can help determine how specific
socioecological pressures affect primate cognitive evolution across taxa and
help contextualize the ultimate evolutionary origins of human cognitive
abilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.