* 2236074
* Personalized Adaptive Learning in Undergraduate Mathematics: A Meta-Analysis
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Debbie Hahs-Vaughn, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Elise Lockwood
* 12/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by examining prior research on
personalized adaptive learning (PAL) specific to mathematics curricula, to
identify where, when, and for whom PAL is helpful toward improving undergraduate
students’ mathematics performance. PAL uses intelligent learning systems,
incorporates preferences of the learner, and analyzes and incorporates
individual learning data to create a unique learner pathway to maximize the
chance of student success. This project will examine PAL within the population
of undergraduate students enrolled in mathematics courses broadly along with a
more focused study of its use in algebra. Each study will examine the overall
student population as well as underserved students. Using meta-analytic
procedures, the proposed research will investigate the extent to which PAL is
effective in improving student learning outcomes in undergraduate mathematics
courses and will provide insight on PAL for improving mathematics instruction,
including mathematics course design and redesign. The meta-analytic approach
will examine published literature, synthesizing findings across single studies
using quantitative statistics to compute an overall measure of effectiveness.
The results of this study are expected to help increase undergraduate student
success in mathematics, undergraduate student retention and degree completion,
and access to career opportunities and economic stability.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meta-analysis will begin with a thorough literature
review, conducted using comprehensive keywords. Studies identified in the
literature review will be examined to determine if they meet inclusion criteria.
Abstracts of included studies will be screened by two coders, followed by full-
text reviews. At the full-text stage, quantitative data needed for computing
effect sizes will be extracted and then analyzed using multilevel meta-analysis.
Moderator variables coded will include: student, type of PAL, class, and
institutional characteristics. Robust variance estimation will be used to
estimate standard errors and hypothesis tests, addressing dependencies of effect
sizes within studies. Subgroup analyses will be used to evaluate the
relationship between moderator variables and the magnitude of the effect size.
Cochran’s nine standard criteria for assessing risk of bias in studies with a
separate control group will be applied. Reporting bias will be assessed visually
with funnel plots which assist in identifying small-study effects (of which,
non-reporting bias may be the culprit). Dissemination efforts will aim to reach
general audiences, practitioners, and researchers/scholars. The results have
implications for improving faculty professional development, mathematics course
redevelopment and redesign, course support services, and student advising, all
of which may help to improve student success in mathematics. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through its Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.