* 2236099
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track I: Enhanced Biobased Textiles and Composites Via Microbially Produced Silk Proteins
* TIP,ITE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Runye Zha, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 11/30/2023
* USD 745,000.00

The fashion industry is one of the biggest contributors to climate change, with
estimated greenhouse gas emissions between 5-10% of all global emissions. This
number exceeds that of other sectors of concern, such as aviation and shipping,
and is expected to grow another 30% by 2030. Materials derived from crude oil
and methane account for around two-thirds of all textiles. These synthetic
textiles have driven the growth of cheap, short-lived clothing associated with
the “fast fashion”, fueling even higher consumption and emissions. This fast
fashion business model accelerates a linear take-make-waste plastics economy,
where virgin feedstock is predominantly used, and clothing are only worn a
handful of times before being landfilled or incinerated. Because most synthetic
textiles are not biodegradable, increase of plastic pollution in the environment
is an inevitable consequence of the fashion industry today. The goal of this
project is to explore the fabrication of fossil-free biodegradable textiles and
fibers that exhibit performance attributes suitable for replacing conventional
materials in the fashion industry. Such conventional materials include synthetic
fibers, such as polyesters, polyurethanes, and nylons, as well as non-
sustainable natural materials, such as leather. Specifically, this project will
develop manufacturing processes for fabricating renewable fossil-free yarns,
dyes, and leather-like fabrics that combine fungi/plant-derived biomass with
artificial silk protein for enhanced performance in consumer textile
applications. This project will also explore the use of recombinant proteins and
dyes that are produced by microbial upcycling of waste recalcitrant plastic,
thus increasing the sustainability impact of the materials innovations. Non-
academic collaborators will include industry and non-profit participants who
will provide market and supply chain insight as well as materials design and
processing expertise. Technoeconomic analysis will help identify strategies for
technology, market, business development that promote adoption by underserved
customer bases, including Black, Hispanic, and low-income communities. This
project will also develop outreach programs for K-12 students regarding
sustainable fashion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most biomaterials
development efforts to date primarily focus on a single biopolymer class.
Nature, however, extensively leverages the synergy of different biomolecular
classes to yield materials that exhibit almost paradoxical properties (e.g.
stiff yet tough, strong yet extensible). This project will synthesize 100%
fossil-free biomaterials that feature diverse classes of biomacromolecules.
Research efforts will focus on developing strategies for enhancing the
properties of a cellulosic (bast fiber) or chitinaceous (mycelium) base
material, which are strong and stiff but lack sufficient toughness and
durability, with recombinantly engineered silk fibroin, which will contribute to
material robustness. This project will also manufacture chromoprotein dyes as a
biobased alternative to conventional textile dyes. By developing new
biocomposite materials and manufacturing processes, this project will help fill
a knowledge gap in the rational design and fabrication of multi-component
biomaterials with emergent properties. This project will also contribute
technoeconomic, lifecycle, and disruptive potential analyses that will guide
future biomaterials development, with particular focus on encouraging product
adoption in underserved customer bases. Phase 1 deliverables will include
prototyped Silk-Enhanced Mycelium Leather, Hemp-Silk yarn, waste-derived
chromoprotein dyes, associated manufacturing processes, and cost and disruptive
technological change models. To support commercially relevant innovation, this
project will involve cross-sector participation by various non-profit and
industry partners. Additionally, in collaboration with the RPI Engineering
Ambassadors program, outreach experiences for K-12 students in the New York
Capital Region will be developed to teach basic concepts in sustainable
fashion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.