* 2236784
* CAREER: End-to-End Encryption for Managed Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Paul Grubbs, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Squicciarini
* 02/29/2028
* USD 136,721.00

Every day, billions of people use encryption to ensure the traffic they send
across the public internet remains secure and private. Encryption is rarely used
within managed networks administered by a single organization, like a business,
a hospital, or a school. This is because current approaches to network
management don't work if traffic is encrypted. The project’s novelties are
applications of cryptography that enable network management directly on
encrypted traffic. The project’s broader significance is that it will allow
creating more secure and privacy-respecting managed
networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on three critical
areas of incompatibility between encryption and network management: policy
enforcement, analytics, and network services. In the policy enforcement thrust,
the project team uses zero-knowledge proofs to build network middleware that can
enforce network policies, such as content filtering, without directly seeing
traffic. In the analytics thrust, the project team is designing network
analytics systems that do not rely on databases of plaintext traffic logs but
verifiably outsource log storage and queries to endpoints. Finally, in the
network services thrust, the project team uses cryptography to limit the
metadata network services can learn about network
traffic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project’s broader impact will be
improving the security of managed networks. Since management infrastructure will
no longer need to see plaintext traffic, compromising this infrastructure will
give an attacker less information about activity on the network. At the same
time, user privacy in the network will also be improved since by using
encryption, users can limit what is disclosed to
administrators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.