* 2236855
* CAREER: Scalable Assurance via Verifiable Hardware-Software Contracts
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Caroline Trippel, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 01/31/2028
* USD 110,004.00

Hardware-software (HW-SW) contracts are critical for high-assurance computer
systems design and an enabler for software design/analysis tools that find and
repair hardware-related bugs in programs. For example, memory consistency models
(MCMs) define what values shared memory loads can return in a parallel program.
Emerging security contracts define what program data is susceptible to leakage
via hardware side-channels. Unfortunately, these contracts and the analyses they
support are useless if we cannot guarantee microarchitectural compliance, which
is a “grand challenge.” The project's key novelty is a bottom-up approach to the
contract verification challenge that synthesizes HW-SW contracts, specifically
MCMs and security contracts, from advanced (i.e., industry-scale/complexity)
processor implementations. This project's core impacts are as follows. First, a
significant fraction of modern design effort is devoted to verification. An
automated methodology for synthesizing HW-SW contracts directly from
implementations, even with modest designer input, would be a huge step forward.
Second, hardware side-channel attacks are arguably the security threat in
computer architecture. An approach for precisely computing how a
microarchitecture can leak the data it processes through side-channels has
direct applications to secure software design and hardware verification today
(e.g., verification of Arm’s Data-Independent Timing extensions or Intel’s
Operand Independent Timing specification) and HW-SW-security co-design
tomorrow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will explore three research thrusts to
enable synthesizing HW-SW contracts from advanced processor designs. Thrust 1
will investigate what design information is required to support automated
contract synthesis procedures and how to acquire it from the target
microarchitecture with minimal designer input. Thrust 2 will study how to use
the design information acquired in Thrust 1 to develop HW-SW contract synthesis
procedures. Thrust 3 will use the contracts produced by Thrust 2 to support
hardware verification and program analysis flows rooted in hardware reality.
This work's bottom-up approach to verifying contract compliance by synthesizing
HW-SW contracts from implementations offers efficiency and scalability
advantages over traditional top-down techniques since abstract contracts can be
incrementally constructed by evaluating a design’s adherence to simple low-level
properties. Moreover, it is robust to HW-SW contracts that emerge post-
deployment or evolve over time. HW-SW contracts that are synthesized from
implementations enable advances in high-assurance software design and hardware
verification. For example, this project will enable the design of software which
is provably robust to hardware side-channel leakage as well as comprehensive MCM
verification of advanced processor Register Transfer Level (RTL) for the first
time. This cross-disciplinary research project cuts across three areas: computer
architecture, formal methods, security. The team consists of one PI and a
graduate student researcher at Stanford University, who will work with ARM and
Intel as partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.