* 2236829
* CAREER: Demystifying Deep Machine Learning Models using Convex Optimization for Reliable AI
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Mert Pilanci, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 01/31/2028
* USD 200,000.00

This project develops a theoretical framework for deep neural networks, a type
of machine learning model that has had tremendous success in a range of
applications including image and speech recognition, robotics, and automation.
Although these models have been successful, there remain significant open
questions in the understanding of how they make decisions or how they can be
made more efficient, robust and reliable. Additionally, there is a lack of
transparency in the inner workings of deep neural networks, which can make it
difficult to trust their output and interpret their results. By developing a
theoretical framework to study and train these models based on convexity, which
is a well-studied mathematical concept in optimization theory, this project aims
to improve their reliability and interpretability, ultimately leading to more
efficient and trustworthy artificial intelligence systems. This project likewise
seeks to educate the next generation of researchers, and benefit society by
enabling safe and effective applications of artificial
intelligence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical approach is based on a novel
convex analytic framework to study, train, and validate non-convex models,
including deep neural networks. By leveraging the hidden convex optimization
landscape in non-convex training losses, this project develops a theoretical
foundation that should demystify the optimization and generalization properties
of these models. By applying techniques from signal processing, compressed
sensing and convex optimization, the project seeks to unify ideas and methods
from diverse fields in order to advance the state of the art in non-convex
models. This will advance our understanding of the fundamental behavior of deep
neural networks and mitigate challenges associated with their use. In addition,
this project will investigate the interpretability, verifiability and robustness
of these models through the lens of convex optimization in practical
applications. The diverse applications of neural networks can attract graduate
students with diverse backgrounds and contribute to the integration of modern
deep learning topics in signal processing courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.