* 2236926
* CAREER: CAS-Climate: Forecast-informed Flexible Reservoir System Modeling Enabled by Artificial Intelligence Algorithms Using Subseasonal-to-Seasonal Hydroclimatological Forecasts
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Tiantian Yang, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 08/31/2028
* USD 406,062.00

Abrupt weather extremes, changing climate, and frequent natural hazards, such as
floods and droughts, have created new challenges for the effective, sustainable,
and flexible operation of our nation’s reservoir systems. To avoid reservoir
failures due to insufficient operational flexibility and unpredictable water
fluxes during extreme events, dam operators need two essential items: (1)
accurate and reliable hydrological forecasts at extended lead times (ranging
from days to months in the near future); and (2) powerful and adaptive decision
support tools, which not only could assist real-time decision making about how
much water to release at a certain time, but also allow reservoir operators to
nimbly incorporate engineering constraints and hydroclimatological forecast
scenarios into flexible release planning. Over the past four decades,
significant scientific advancements have been made in deterministic forecasts,
linear programming, optimization algorithms, and rule-based simulation models to
guide reservoir operations. However, these approaches are unable to address
future operational challenges due to current limitations in understanding the
variabilities of Subseasonal-to-Seasonal (S2S) hydroclimatological forecasts and
a lack of modeling capabilities that utilize ensemble forecasts for more
effective water release decision-making. Therefore, the goals of this CAREER
project are twofold: 1) to develop an integrated solution that can account for
the spatial and temporal variability of precipitation and its uncertainty; and
2) to develop a novel Artificial Intelligence &amp; Data Mining (AI&amp;DM)
decision support tool that allows reservoir operators to use improved ensemble
forecasts to develop adaptive release strategies. This research targets enabling
better response to, and mitigation of the impacts of, extreme weather events and
climate uncertainty in reservoir operation and
planning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will (1) leverage the advantages of
state-of-the-art deep learning models to discover and correct the spatial and
temporal errors associated with S2S precipitation forecasts from multiple
forecasting models in the North American Multi-Model Ensemble dataset; and (2)
develop an adaptive Ensemble Boosting Tree-based Predictive Control Model, which
can effectively incorporate improved ensemble forecasts into scenario-based
reservoir release simulations for planning purposes. Hydrological modeling and
uncertainty analysis will be performed to help understand how meteorological
uncertainty propagates from atmospheric conditions into water resources planning
and infrastructure management. Large-scale hydrological validation experiments
(over 671 watersheds) and reservoir simulations (over 316 dams) across the U.S.
will be conducted. The results will be used to validate the improved forecasts,
quantify the ensemble hydrological forecast uncertainty, and evaluate the
forecast-informed reservoir decision support tool. The AI&amp;DM models will be
comprehensively tested in collaboration with the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation
(USBR) and the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (USACE), which are two major
reservoir agencies in the USA. The expected outcomes are aimed to allow
reservoir operators to develop suitable reservoir storage and release strategies
that address sudden fluxes of incoming water or a lack of water supply, while
simultaneously meeting various demands and constraints. Educational tasks are
tightly coupled with research. Active learning activities will help graduate
students develop the ability to tackle complex research problems. Undergraduate
students will obtain skills in programming. Outreach includes hosting an annual
“Water Festival” exhibit at the National Weather Museum and Science Center
(NWMSC) in Norman, Oklahoma. During and beyond this CAREER project, museum
visitors and children will witness the importance of hydrology, meteorology,
water resources management, and the impacts of extreme weather and climate. The
NSF-funded CUAHSI organization will also collaborate with the project to
maximize the broader impacts of developed data, models, and algorithms via
various educational and outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.