* 2236622
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track J: Rapid detection technologies and decision-support systems to mitigate food supply chain threats
* TIP,ITE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Amit Morey, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Michael Reksulak
* 11/30/2023
* USD 750,000.00

Salmonella is one of the leading causes of foodborne illness in the U.S. and
around the world, placing a higher burden on populations of lower socioeconomic
status and underrepresented racial/ethnic groups. The total cost of illnesses
due to Salmonella contamination in the U.S. alone was estimated to be greater
than $10.69 billion in 2018. The goal of this project is to investigate multiple
transformative sensing technologies for detecting Salmonella contamination along
the poultry supply chain, leading to the development of a data-driven decision-
support system to improve food safety, security, equity, efficiency, and
resilience. By developing multi-sectoral partnerships with the poultry industry,
retail markets, food banks, and local health departments, this project brings
together a multidisciplinary group of researchers across five institutions to
investigate and implement an integrated sensor-enabled food supply chain
decision-support system for risk assessment and Salmonella mitigation to achieve
system-wide equitable food safety and better health outcomes. This technology
has the potential to be adapted for the detection of other foodborne pathogens
in beef, pork, dairy, and green leaf products. It may also be applied to
diagnose bacterial and viral infectious diseases in clinical
settings.&lt;br/&gt;The application of the proposed technology will ensure
equitable food security for local and global consumers and reduce the economic
burden of foodborne diseases, especially for vulnerable and underprivileged
populations who are facing higher food security risks. The research team will
work alongside multisectoral partners to address the unique needs of
disadvantaged populations in food nutrition, accessibility, and equity. This
project will create research and training opportunities for students to learn
about the convergence science approaches at the intersection of food science,
public health, animal sciences, data science, and sensing technology. The team
will expand engagement with under-represented populations by providing
opportunities for student research experiences, engaging researchers, partnering
with the industry workforce (e.g., including immigrant workers) and multi-
sectoral stakeholders, and incorporating data about underrepresented groups into
the proposed system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed sensing technologies are
unique in terms of multiplex/simultaneous, quantitative, and selective
detection, and surveillance of Salmonella serovars at low concentrations within
30 minutes assay time. This can be accomplished by developing a Surface Enhanced
Raman Spectroscopy (SERS) sensor on a side polished multimode optical fiber
core, which is integrated into a 3-dimensional printed microstructure at a
15-degree angle to maximize the interaction of the excitation laser with the
analytes, while the nanoantenna arrays will be created using low-cost
microsphere photolithography. Salmonella antigens will be detected and
quantified by measuring their vibrational fingerprint SERS spectra. The project
will also integrate multiple innovative features of an impedance-based biosensor
on the same chip to concentrate the viral antigen sample to a detectable
threshold, capture, and detect the pathogens using arrays of electrodes coated
with specific antibodies to enable simultaneous and selective detection of
Salmonella serovars. Instead of timely and costly whole-genome sequencing, the
nanopore-facilitated, multi-locus checkpoint sequencing sensor differentiates
Salmonella serovars by rapid screening a panel of single-nucleotide-variation
serotyping markers distributed in one or multi-locus. By combining results from
samples throughout the end-to-end food supply chain and integrating the national
population-level data, the system will populate a centralized data environment
to develop visualization, prediction, and optimization capabilities for
microbial risk assessment and mitigation with effective and timely data-driven
decision support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.