* 2236832
* Conference: Annual Rural STEM Learning Summit
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Kalman Mannis, Arizona Technology Council Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Robert Russell
* 06/30/2024
* USD 74,940.00

Rural communities often lack access to informal learning opportunities. The
Rural STEM Learning Summit will promote collaboration and support for rural STEM
educators and administrators, professionals, and organizations. Research
demonstrates the strengths of rural social enterprises, regional networks, and
extended proximity in catalyzing innovation and providing opportunities to
overcome these unique challenges. However, rural STEM initiatives face common
barriers, such as physical distance, lack of infrastructure, limited individual
capacity and stretched resources in developing and maintaining STEM ecosystems.
The conference will provide a critical opportunity for enhancing knowledge
around innovation in these areas and sharing lessons learned with and advancing
collaboration. The focus will be on collective impact, rural empowerment, and
successful rural STEM programs. Topics will include research and evaluation,
arts integration, partnerships, working with under-resourced populations, and
building rural STEM identity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will use a
variety of formats, including keynotes, brief ("flash") talks presenting quick
overviews of programs and ideas, hosted workshops providing ready-made
activities and resources, facilitated workshops led by experts, project
directors and researchers, and informal opportunities to meet those with common
interests. The conference will be structured as a hybrid format with in-person
and digital options to support participation. The conference will engage
registrants in facilitated discussions aimed at grouping participants around
common interests. These cohorts will navigate the conference as a team and
collaborate on developing a shared practice/product that can be tested locally
and shared more broadly. By engaging a wide variety of rural stakeholders,
federal and state governmental institutions, perspectives, viewpoints, and
regions, the conference will offer a distinct opportunity for promoting
diversity, equity, and inclusion. The conference will host follow-up sessions
that will foster continuing collaboration and build momentum for an annual rural
STEM education conference. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference is funded by
the Advancing Informal STEM Learning (AISL) program, which supports projects
that: (a) contribute to research and practice that considers informal STEM
learning's role in equity and belonging in STEM; (b) promote personal and
educational success in STEM; (c) advance public engagement in scientific
discovery; (d) foster interest in STEM careers; (e) create and enhance the
theoretical and empirical foundations for effective informal STEM learning; (f)
improve community vibrancy; and/or (g) enhance science communication and the
public's engagement in and understanding of STEM and STEM
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.