* 2236459
* CAREER: Neuro-navigation guided non-invasive brain stimulation for individualized precision rehabilitation in stroke
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Yuan Yang, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 03/31/2028
* USD 175,176.00

The goal of this project is to advance the scientific study of brain functional
changes after a stroke and pioneer a tailored rehabilitation strategy that fits
each individual’s needs. Movement impairments following a stroke are a major
cause of adult disability in this country. The routine treatment is not yet
optimal for every individual due to a lack of sufficient understanding of brain
functional changes to inform clinical practice. This project seeks to combine
different imaging methods to guide electrical stimulation to the brain that
improves the recovery of movement. The outcomes of this project have the
potential to advance stroke or brain injury research broadly to help over half a
million people who undergo rehabilitation each year. This will reduce the
healthcare and nursing costs for long-term disability caused by stroke and other
similar brain injuries. Through education activities in this project, a multi-
disciplinary research-education “eco-system” will be built to connect
engineering students, clinician trainees, and STEM educators to promote the
education of next-generation rehabilitation pioneers.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Despite numerous efforts to develop new technologies for movement
rehabilitation post-brain injuries, from brain imaging to neuromodulation
approaches, optimal recovery is still limited due to a lack of imaging guidance
and real-time neurofeedback to tailor rehabilitation strategies for each
individual. This project will address this limitation and establish a unique
rehabilitation engineering research paradigm based on a novel multi-modal brain
imaging approach and a closed-loop high-definition transcranial direct current
stimulation (HD-tDCS) platform. This new approach will precisely assess the
changes to motor control in an injured brain and identify the key network to
target for more precise HD-tDCS stimulation. The investigator will take
integrated experimental and computational approaches to: 1) Identify and
characterize individualized brain networks for movement control in injured
brains; 2) Model and evaluate the dynamic effect of HD-tDCS on a “live” brain to
enable targeted, precision stimulation of brain networks; and 3) Develop closed-
loop imaging and neurofeedback guided HD-tDCS to improve brain function and
behavior outcomes. This interdisciplinary project will be integrated with
education and outreach activities to promote awareness of interdependencies
between engineering and rehabilitation sciences and promote interdisciplinary
education and training for next-generation rehabilitation engineers, with three
educational objectives: 1) Promote the engagement of engineering and physical
therapy students via summer research training, 2) Translate rehabilitation
engineering knowledge to grade-appropriate STEM education via training high
school teachers, and 3) Increase public awareness of engineering’s contributions
to rehabilitation via museum events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the Disability and Rehabilitation Engineering Program and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.