* 2236146
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track J: Optimizing sustainable delivery of local fresh produce in Puerto Rico to mitigate nutrition insecurity
* TIP,ITE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Uriyoan Colon-Ramos, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Reksulak
* 11/30/2023
* USD 749,994.00

The impact of climate change on nutrition insecurity, disease and death
continues to intensify, with more devastating and long-lasting consequences
among the world’s most vulnerable peoples. To date, the central challenge to
accelerate solutions to nutrition insecurity lies in joining citizen engagement
with policy action to reform existing systems. The first step to achieve this,
and the objective of this Convergence Accelerator Phase 1 work is to develop a
shared understanding across citizens from diverse sectors and disciplines about
how food and climate systems have converged in the archipelago of Puerto Rico
(PR), allowing for the identification and testing of strategies to increase
demand for nutritious and climate-friendly foods among food insecure
individuals. &lt;br/&gt;This work builds on existing commercially successful
digital models in PR, a highly food insecure and climate-vulnerable region, to
identify how to increase demand for nutritious and climate-friendly foods among
food insecure individuals and to generate real-time user-level data that can be
integrated into data systems dynamic computational model to inform citizen
engagement and policy action. This is the first collaboration of its kind to use
data generated from food insecure digital app users in real time to: 1) model
how the food and climate systems have converged and affect nutrition security
and, 2) promote nutritious, climate-friendly products in a highly food insecure
region of the US. The proposed work broadens participation from under-
represented groups in scientific research, will contribute to better alignment
between food producers and low-income consumers, and brings together locally
generated innovations across sectors to stimulate new solutions to the
convergence problem. This work will set the foundation and needed data to
eventually develop a user-friendly dashboard to test (via mathematical
simulation) how various food security and climate health initiatives and
policies could impact nutrition security in PR and
elsewhere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phase 1 has two specific aims. Aim 1: To develop
a shared understanding across multiple sectors about the system dynamics that
drive nutrition insecurity and climate health in PR, this work will employ
Community-Based System Dynamics participatory methods (e.g., group model
building). The deliverable for Aim 1 is a qualitative Causal Loop Diagram and
levers that can inform context-appropriate viable solutions to achieve
nutritional security and climate health in PR. Aim 2: Building on an existing
and commercially-viable digital application in PR and from the Causal Loop
Diagram (aim 1), aim 2 will use human-centered design approaches to identify how
the digital application can expand its reach to address nutrition and climate
health among food insecure citizens. Then a randomized design will be used to
test various digital strategies to ‘nudge’ the selection of climate and
nutrition-friendly products among 600 food insecure app users throughout PR
(recruited specifically for this study). The primary outcome is a score for
nutrition and climate-friendly products in users’ shopping carts. The digital
app captures real-time data about consumers’ food shopping decisions and will be
expanded to include food security, food literacy (i.e., climate and nutrition
security public awareness), and aggregated to local food producer data (i.e.,
agricultural measures, productivity, sales). &lt;br/&gt;Phase 1 deliverables
include: 1) a Causal Loop Diagram with feedback loops and potentially viable
solutions that can be disseminated. It will be used to structure a quantitative
model that can be calibrated with Phase1 (Aim 1) data, and with new data to be
collected in Phase 2; and 2) ranking and refinement of context-appropriate user-
inspired strategies that hold promise for further testing in a potentially
commercially viable prototype in Phase 2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.