* 2236260
* Investigating Video-based Graduate Teaching Assistant Professional Development to Support Universal Design for Learning in Undergraduate Chemistry Courses
* EDU,DUE
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2026
* Erin Scanlon, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Dawn Rickey
* 01/31/2026
* USD 100,572.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving accessibility and
inclusion for students with a wide range of abilities in undergraduate chemistry
courses via professional development for graduate teaching assistants.
Undergraduate students with disabilities enroll in Science, Technology,
Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) degree programs at rates similar to students
without disabilities; yet many students with disabilities leave before earning a
degree. One possible reason for the low graduation rates of students with
disabilities may be that classroom instruction, which is designed to promote
student learning, is not automatically inclusive and does not inherently support
the needs of these students. In addition, STEM instructors often lack knowledge
and expertise to support students with disabilities. This project will support
chemistry graduate teaching assistants in conceptualizing inclusive practices in
their teaching by creating and testing video-based lessons designed to be
incorporated into professional development for graduate teaching assistants.
Findings from this project will support increased participation of people with
disabilities and others who are underrepresented in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaboration between researchers at the
University of Central Florida and the University of Connecticut Avery Point will
employ the Universal Design for Learning (UDL) framework to articulate, model,
and assess research-based instructional principles to support the preparation of
graduate teaching assistants (GTAs) for chemistry courses. Materials will be
created to support GTAs to enhance accessibility in the courses they teach and
to promote meaningful learning for students with a wide range of abilities in
undergraduate chemistry courses. Three specific objectives guide the execution
of the project. First is to examine chemistry GTAs’ current awareness,
conceptualizations, values, and reported use of the UDL-aligned instructional
strategies. Second is to develop a suite of video-based lessons and facilitator
materials to illustrate best practices for implementing UDL instructional
strategies in chemistry courses. The final objective is to investigate how the
materials are incorporated into professional development programs at a variety
of institutions to shift GTAs’ views about accessibility, inclusivity, and UDL.
This investigation includes examining how those who prepare and support GTAs
integrate the materials developed into their department’s professional
development programs and how they prefer to access the materials. To accomplish
these three objectives, the project team will curate video of GTAs integrating
inclusive practices that research has shown to be difficult for chemistry
instructors to conceptualize or implement. To explore the efficacy of the video-
based professional development, the project team will compare outcomes for both
GTAs and students across three different UDL professional development conditions
(none, standard UDL, and the video-based UDL developed by the project). The
research team will collect and analyze responses to several key measures
including pre- and post- Modified Inclusive Teaching Strategies Inventory,
scenario assessments, and interviews to assess the impact that the video-based
training lessons have on GTAs’ understanding, recognition, and application of
inclusive practices in chemistry teaching and learning environments. Materials
generated from this project will be shared with GTA training programs nationwide
as well as with other stakeholders who are committed to facilitating inclusive
STEM teaching and learning. Ultimately, this project will contribute to our
understanding of how to connect theory and practice to better understand UDL
strategies and facilitate wider implementation in undergraduate chemistry
courses. Further, the findings are likely to have implications for UDL-aligned
instructor professional development in other STEM disciplines. Finally, since
graduate teaching assistants are the future workforce of academia, the focus on
GTA professional development enhances the potential for long-term impacts of the
project. The NSF IUSE: EDU program supports research and development projects to
improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through its
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.