* 2236768
* CAREER: Documentation, description, and analysis of multiword tone and harmony systems in four languages
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Hannah Sande, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Paster
* 05/31/2028
* USD 104,376.00

This CAREER project investigates the linguistic system of four understudied
languages. Each year of the project, the PI trains a team of undergraduate and
graduate students in language documentation methods, and the team travels to
work with communities of each of the target languages. The team records natural
speech in each language and elicits specific words and sentences in order to
document aspects of the grammar. The recorded materials are archived in the
California Language Archive, preserving language data into the future so that
they are available to linguists, other academics, and speaker communities. This
work fills an empirical gap, documenting the grammar of understudied languages,
which is an important first step for developing language resources for the
target languages, as well as for linguistic theory and typology. It also has
important implications for our understanding of how languages work. The project
strengthens existing international relationships between academics and builds
relationships with rural communities, fostering cultural exchange and
understanding. It also provides training to both local and international
students, contributing to the development and diversification of the next
generation of language researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The four languages
studied in this project all display morpheme-specific phonological processes
that cross word boundaries. In one language, the imperfective aspect is marked
by a shift in tone that affects the verb as well as the subject of the sentence.
Morpheme-specific cross-word phonology is not well documented across languages,
so this study begins to fill a gap in typological knowledge. Additionally, most
formal theories of the interaction between morphology and phonology predict that
morpheme-specific phonology should be limited to word or sub-word domains. The
data from harmony and tone in these four languages shows this is an incorrect
prediction. A deeper understanding of the boundaries of cross-word morpheme-
specific phonology, and whether they align with morphosyntactic or prosodic
boundaries, informs debates on what formal mechanisms are needed to account for
interactions between morphology and phonology across
languages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.