* 2236100
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track I: Sustainable Materials for Global Challenges: Recycled Textile and Apparel Manufacturing Ecosystems (RETAME)
* TIP,ITE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Huantian Cao, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 11/30/2023
* USD 745,310.00

Clothing is a basic human need, yet the way we clothe ourselves today is
fundamentally unsustainable. The fashion industry is one of the largest
contributors to global carbon emissions and water contamination, and the
industry yields more than 100 million tons of textile waste each year. The
Recycled Textile and Apparel Manufacturing Ecosystems (RETAME) project brings
together academic researchers from engineering, design, and the social sciences,
industry partners, and the non-profit organization, Goodwill Industries, to
build a sustainable recycled materials model for the textile and apparel
industry. By converting post-consumer fashion waste into new products, RETAME
keeps clothing out of landfills, generates revenue from existing waste streams,
and reduces the need for virgin materials. The project focuses on the
development of 1) novel mechanical recycling technologies, 2) product prototypes
made from recycled fibers and textile pieces, and 3) educational and skills
training programs for job seekers and students, especially those from
underrepresented and disadvantaged groups. The project will yield a model
recycling ecosystem to grow the Delaware Valley regional economy and improve the
environmental sustainability of our clothing. Team members will document and
evaluate the project at every stage to develop best practices for implementing
the model in other regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of RETAME
is to gather proof of concept for a sustainable recycled materials model for the
textile and apparel industry that can be replicated in regions across the United
States and around the world. RETAME accomplishes this goal by leveraging
regional expertise and locally available waste materials. Team members are
experts in sustainable textile design; engineering design; textile science;
cultural anthropology; textile manufacturing and recycling; educational
curriculum development and implementation; diversity, equity, and inclusion; and
non-profit management of used clothing collection and retail.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves the following methods and approaches:
1) the recruitment of collaborators in areas of waste and recycling policy,
waste management, consumer science and behavioral economics, supply chain and
logistics management, regional economic development, and environmental justice;
2) the design and testing of an aggregation, sorting, and mechanical textile
recycling supply and production chain in the Delaware Valley region in
partnership with Goodwill Industries; 3) the advancement and piloting of
mechanical recycling technology and equipment for converting post-consumer
clothing waste into reusable fibers; 4) the development of next-generation
recycled textile composite prototypes; 5) analysis of the materials properties
of recycled textile samples and the collection of initial data on the life cycle
impact of relevant processes and products; and 6) ethnographic research and
analysis of team-building, knowledge sharing, and convergence research
strategies to yield results that will support the ecosystem modelâ€™s transfer and
application to other regions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broad-based convergence
research is necessary to build robust partnerships that can generate circular,
sustainable ways of clothing ourselves. RETAME leads this effort by modeling the
development of post-consumer fashion waste recycling and manufacturing systems
that also support sustainable, regional economic
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.