* 2236318
* Exploring the Impact of Observation Protocol Data in Changing Instructor Motivation and Practice
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Melinda Owens, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 05/31/2028
* USD 990,856.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by establishing how instructors
use classroom observation data to change their teaching practices.
Traditionally, teaching and learning centers (TLCs) have used unstructured or
informal classroom observation protocols to assess university teaching. However,
many evidence-based structured observation protocols have been developed to
understand and measure components of teaching and classroom activities. This
project intends to advance understanding of how university instructors use data
from structured and unstructured protocols to inform their teaching. To this
end, the project will provide 48 instructors with classroom observations focused
on evidence-based teaching practices, including active learning; a comparable
group of 12 instructors will receive the results of traditional unstructured
observations. The instructors span two institutions, the University of
California San Diego and University of California Riverside, and will represent
various STEM disciplines. As a result, the project plans to investigate multiple
contexts for the impact of examining classroom observation data on instructor
motivation and change in teaching practices. The project hopes to generate new
knowledge about how instructors interpret observation data, which could result
in more efficient and effective faculty professional development and benefit
student learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project are to 1)
identify how college STEM instructors make sense of classroom observation data,
2) measure the extent to which interacting with their own classroom observation
data affects instructor motivation to change their teaching practices, and 3)
establish the extent to which instructors use observation data to change their
teaching. Data from four structured observation protocols and one informal
protocol will be collected and shared from each instructor’s course. The project
will study the efficacy of this approach through data collected from surveys,
interviews, and classroom observations to explore changes in teaching practices
and conceptions of teaching. These data will allow the project team to identify
best practices for sharing observation data with instructors. A mixed methods
approach with quantitative and qualitative data will allow for comparisons
across instructional contexts and capture nuanced changes in teaching and
motivation. The NSF IUSE: EHR program supports research and development projects
to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through its
Institutional and Community Transformation track, the program supports efforts
to transform and improve STEM education across institutions of higher education
and disciplinary communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.