* 2236305
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track J: Artificial-Intelligence-Based Decision Support for Equitable Food and Nutrition Security in the Houston Area
* TIP,ITE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Ioannis Kakadiaris, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Michael Reksulak
* 11/30/2023
* USD 749,995.00

Disadvantaged communities continue to be afflicted with health issues due to
limited access to nutritious food and inadequate knowledge about healthy food
choices. The COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated these issues. One of the most
critical steps in addressing food insecurity is to improve understanding of the
resources required and the challenges faced in procurement, distribution,
access, and utilization of food resources in underserved communities. On the
demand side, stakeholders must identify the nutritional needs, cultural
preferences, and food preparation equipment and supplies of food-insecure
households. If an individual does not know what a particular food is nor how to
prepare it, it will go to waste, and the efforts of the food charity ecosystem
will fail. On the supply side, stakeholders must streamline logistics and
improve communication and coordination to optimize the supply chain (upstream
procurement and downstream distribution) to minimize inefficiencies and
coordinate the efforts of various food charities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Through
a community-driven approach, this project brings together civic collaborators
with university researchers to develop and build a locally-oriented food charity
ecosystem based on data-driven smart technologies in the Greater Houston region.
Our socio-technical approach addresses four overall research questions: (1) How
can we redefine, model, and predict food deserts? (2) How can we minimize food
waste? (3) How can we impact nutrition literacy? (4) How can we measure the
health effects of having access to culturally appropriate nutritious
food?&lt;br/&gt;These questions drive the following objectives: (i) Assess,
model, and predict geographic areas with limited access to affordable and
nutritious food; (ii) Analyze communities to find untapped strengths in
preparing culturally appropriate recipes and transfer this knowledge to like-
minded community members, (iii) Build infrastructure for food pantries to
provide culturally appropriate food they have in stock and recipes/food
preparation instructions, (iv) Create a blockchain-based marketplace for food
donations, (v) Develop educational material in multiple languages and partner
with Community Health Workers to disseminate it, and (vi) Measure the health
effects of having access to culturally appropriate nutritious
food.&lt;br/&gt;Our multidisciplinary team brings together researchers in
computer science, urban planning, community engagement, nutrition
education/community healthy lifestyle program development, supply chain,
measurement and evaluation, and a diverse set of “on the ground” practitioner
partners. Our team is focused on turning research into action. The decision-
making tools will be disseminated to other food ecosystem members to address all
aspects of culturally aware food distribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.