* 2236940
* CAREER: Development of Optically Transparent Bacterial-Derived Hybrid-Cellulose Biomaterials with Antimicrobial Properties for Wound Treatment
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Jeannine Coburn, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 01/31/2028
* USD 114,317.00

Non-technical Description: &lt;br/&gt;Naturally derived biomaterials hold
tremendous promise for addressing human health concerns, including wound care.
However, the promise of many naturally derived biomaterials has not been fully
realized, due in part to the field’s lack of understanding regarding how the
materials are produced and the ability to tailor the biomaterial properties.
This CAREER award supports fundamental research to address this challenge for
one such naturally derived material known as insoluble exopolysaccharides (EPSs)
produced by the same bacteria used to make vinegar and kombucha. This project
will establish new materials produced by these bacteria and the scientific
connection between the properties of the new material and the bacterial
machinery used to produce these materials. These new materials will be modified
with antibacterial agents for wound care and infection prevention. In addition
to scientific research, this project includes integrated educational activities
to excite elementary school students and undergraduate students about careers in
science and engineering. Hands-on laboratory modules and outreach activities, in
partnership with the institution’s STEM Education Center, will be created to
inspire interest in material science and biomedical engineering. Integrated
research, mentoring and career development opportunities will be provided to
undergraduate and graduate level students from underrepresented groups,
including students from disadvantaged backgrounds, minorities, and women, to
improve retention and increase diversity in the STEM workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: &lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award
focuses on developing designer insoluble exopolysaccharides (EPSs) from
Komagataeibacter species for wound care. These materials have been proposed to
possess several important properties for wound dressing including immediate pain
relief, high water holding capacity, improve development of granulation tissue,
and accelerate re-epithelialization. The Principal Investigator’s team studies
bacterial-derived EPSs to improve functionality and uncover the relationship
between genotype and phenotype to improve its utility for biomedical
applications. In this project, two key properties for wound treatment will be
addressed, namely wound visualization and incorporation of antimicrobials. To
achieve this, the research team will generate a fundamental understanding of
optically transparent bacterial-derived EPSs from the molecular through bulk
scale connecting genome to phenome and characterize non-covalent antimicrobial
peptide binding, release, and functionality. The long-term educational goal of
this CAREER project is to promote and train the next generation of researchers
and students developing innovative biomaterials to improve human health. The
educational objectives of this project are: 1) inspire elementary school
students to become excited about the fields of science, technology, engineering,
and math, 2) integrate project-based laboratory modules on bacterial production
of biopolymers into an undergraduate course, and 3) provide research training,
mentorship, and professional development to first-generation college
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.