* 2236574
* SBIR Phase I:  A Wearable, Independent, Braille-Assistive Learning Device
* TIP,TI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Kushagra Jain, BRAILLEWEAR
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 03/31/2024
* USD 274,999.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase I project is in creating an independent. assistive Braille learning device
for blind people. The ability to read Braille is highly correlated with improved
independence and quality of life. An estimated 70% of the blind are unemployed
yet, of that subpopulation that is Braille literate, only 10% are unemployed.
There is a Braille literacy crisis - only 8.5% of the blind population in the US
can read Braille today, compared to 50% in the 1960s. There are several factors
theorized to contribute to increasing Braille illiteracy including: 1) a
shortage of teachers qualified to teach Braille, 2) negative outlooks on the
difficulty and cost of Braille learning, and 3) and difficulties integrating
blind students into mainstream schools that donâ€™t have the specialized resources
for this population. The results of this project will assist students of all
ages in learning how to read Braille, including secondary Braille learners who
become blind later in life. Aiming at inhibiting the Braille literacy crisis,
the technology enables the blind to be given the same opportunities as their
sighted peers, including better chances at graduating from high school and
college, obtaining employment, and having high independence
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this project
is in development of a wearable, computer vision-based, real-time Braille-to-
speech learning device. While the primary mission of the project is to unlock
the full potential of blind individuals through Braille literacy, the overall
goal for the technology is to unlock the full potential of human touch with
computer-assisted augmentation cues in response to intricate textural patterns.
The proposed technology will detect such patterns in a contactless approach,
preserving the integrity of the material, and provide auditory feedback in real-
time to allow for mechanosensory-augmented feedback. This project focuses on
establishing the technical feasibility of such an approach by: 1) determining if
the device and interpreting algorithms can be made robust to environmental and
user postural variations, 2) developing capabilities to perform well on textured
and/or patterned surfaces, and 3) conducting usability testing to identify areas
of the user experience that must be enhanced in the future to be viable in the
market with two vital stakeholders - Braille tutors and Braille students. These
goals, if completed successfully, will not only impact Braille learners but also
open up other market applications for this technology such as manufacturing and
medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.