* 2236476
* Do seamounts on fossil oceanic spreading centers record triple-junction migration or mantle-plume activity? Guadalupe Island, Mexico as an archetype
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Emily Chin, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 03/31/2026
* USD 409,115.00

Volcanism on Earth is usually focused near boundaries between tectonic plates.
This occurs at mid-ocean spreading centers or at subduction zones where plates
sink. In some cases, though, volcanism occurs within a tectonic plate. While
some intraplate volcanism can be explained by upwelling of a mantle plume, most
of Earth's intraplate volcanoes are probably not related to a plume despite such
volcanoes being widespread. One possible origin may involve transitions
occurring between different types of plates. This project investigates
intraplate volcanism offshore of the California Borderlands. This region has a
complex plate margin history and unusual types of volcanism. The research team
will conduct and video-blog fieldwork on Guadalupe Island offshore Baja
California. This island is located along a system of failed mid-ocean spreading
centers. It is an ideal location to test ideas related to the formation of non-
plume, intraplate volcanism. This project will support a postdoctoral scholar
and a PhD student. Together with Mexican collaborators, this project will
provide educational opportunities, mentoring, and career development for USA and
Mexican students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the
development of seamounts along failed oceanic spreading centers as a symptom of
their interaction with convergent margins. When oceanic spreading centers
approach subduction zones, the subducting oceanic plate stalls and subdivides
into smaller microplates while the convergent margin evolves into a transform
margin bounded by migrating triple junctions. The microplates are eventually
captured when their convergent margins become transform margins. This terminates
decompression partial melting of depleted mantle along their former divergent
margins and initiates the development of alkaline, low-degree partial melting of
enriched mantle that produces seamounts along their fossil spreading-center
margins. Mantle plumes can produce seamounts with similar chemistry and must
also be considered as a potential origin for seamount trails such as the
Fieberling–Guadalupe seamount chain that intersect fossil spreading centers. The
project intends to determine the origin of oceanic Guadalupe Island, which is an
alkaline seamount that emerged above sea level ~270 km offshore of Baja
California (Mexico) and is situated along a system of failed oceanic rifts that
developed offshore of the California borderlands during the late Cenozoic. The
project will test four hypotheses that predict different temporal and
geochemical patterns for the transition from tholeiitic, mid-ocean-ridge-basalt
(MORB) magmatism to alkaline, fossil-spreading-center-seamount magmatism due to
triple-junction instability or mantle-plume magmatism. The approach is to
integrate field geology, 40Ar/39Ar geochronology, major–trace-element and
isotope geochemistry, and petrological modelling. Investigation of seamount
petrology and timing within a regional-tectonic framework may therefore reveal
geodynamic relationships among mantle flow, mantle melting, triple-junction
migration, microplate capture, and/or mantle-plume activity, in addition to
improving our understanding of the evolution of western North America during the
late Cenozoic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.