* 2236625
* CAREER: From Quantum to Classical and Back: Bringing 2D Spectroscopy Insights into Focus
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Michael Reppert, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 01/31/2028
* USD 650,000.00

Mike Reppert of Purdue University is supported by an award from the Chemical
Theory, Models and Computational Methods program in the Division of Chemistry to
explore the interplay between quantum and classical coherence in two-dimensional
(2D) spectroscopy. Two-dimensional infrared (2DIR) spectroscopy and two-
dimensional electronic spectroscopy (2DES) use ultrafast laser pulses to monitor
the motion of atoms and electrons on timescales faster than one trillionth of a
second. Such experiments have the potential to provide unprecedented insight
into fundamental biological processes such as protein folding and
photosynthesis. However, the data they produce is often difficult to interpret,
limiting their usefulness in real-world applications. Dr. Reppert and his
research group are developing new theoretical tools to better understand the
physical origins of 2DIR and 2DES signals (especially the distinct roles played
by quantum and classical effects), paving the way for more transparent and
efficient interpretation of 2D data. Newly developed 2DIR simulation methods
will be made available to other researchers by incorporating them into an online
application for protein 2DIR simulations. In addition, the Reppert group will
work with K-12 educators to develop 2D acoustic experiments that demonstrate the
working principles of 2DES and 2DIR measurements using audible signals.
Together, these efforts are expand expand both accessibility to these
spectroscopic tools and the application of these 2D methods to a broad class of
problems in the chemical sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the impressive
array of quantum and semiclassical dynamics methods available for simulating
two-dimensional (2D) optical spectra, a surprising gap remains in the 2D theory
arsenal: no classical theory for 2D spectroscopy or systematic framework for
classifying quantum eﬀects has been thoroughly developed. On the one hand, this
limitation leaves largely unexplored the potential numerical advantages of fully
classical simulations; on the other hand, the inability to systematically
classify quantum and classical eﬀects obscures the physical origins of coherence
in coupled molecular systems. To explore these issues, the Reppert group is
working to develop a systematic, diagrammatic framework for disentangling
quantum and classical contributions to coherent vibrational dynamics, beginning
with the relatively simple case of 2D infrared (2DIR) spectroscopy and working
toward more complex vibronic dynamics and the quantitative interpretation of
Amide I (protein C=O stretch) 2DIR experiments. To test the limits of classical
models for coherent nonlinear processes, a new class of 2D measurements
investigating acoustic nonlinear response will be designed and implemented
experimentally. The broader impact of this work will be maximized by developing
educational materials (K-12 through graduate level) that illustrate nonlinear
processes through conceptually approachable “ball and spring” models. In
addition, the Reppert group will incorporate newly developed Amide I simulation
methods into the AmideSpec app, offering a research-grade online tool for
interpreting protein 2DIR data to researchers around the
globe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.