* 2236674
* CAREER: Emotion Artificial Intelligence in the Future of Work: A Privacy and Relational Ethics Lens
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Nazanin Andalibi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 06/30/2028
* USD 158,350.00

Emotion artificial intelligence (AI) aims to infer people's emotions and mood in
mundane and high-stakes contexts. Despite validity, bias, and privacy concerns,
emotion AI continues to be developed and used in consequential ways, such as in
employment interviews, without informed public input. We lack empirical
knowledge about the benefits and harms it can inflict on people's privacy and
lives. This project investigates emotion AI’s ethical and privacy implications
in two high-stakes contexts--the workplace and hiring interviews. The project
will describe how emotion AI is used and how people may be affected by it. The
project has policy implications addressing this technology’s impact on workers
and job seekers, and therefore the future of work. Additionally, this research
leads to guidelines to be used by emotion AI creators and decision-makers, and
improves public knowledge of emotion AI’s use and
implications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates how emotion AI is
perceived and experienced by job seekers and employees and how it is used by
decision-makers who apply the inferences it generates. First, the project uses a
mixed-methods approach including interviews using the story completion method
and factorial vignette surveys. Participants in these studies include
marginalized employees and job seekers at more risk of emotion AI harm. Second,
the project includes interviews and an experiment with decision-makers to
examine how emotion AI may be used by them. This research will contribute to
emotion AI/AI ethics, privacy, future of work, and affective computing
scholarship.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.