* 2236057
* Conference: Identifying Strategies for Building Capacity among MSIs and HBCUs for Advancing Research and Research Impacts on Society
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2023
* Aditi Pai, Spelman College
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 07/31/2023
* USD 99,994.00

To promote the progress of science, systemic inequities must be addressed. For
example, the disparate research-support infrastructures of minority-serving
institutions (MSIs) and Research I (R1) institutions create an imbalanced
playing field for winning grants. Through additional funding and infrastructure
building, MSIs can build research capacity, which will increase the
representation of MSIs in STEM funding. This project seeks to broaden the
participation of investigators from minority-serving institutions (MSIs) who are
underrepresented in extramural funding. To achieve these goals, a conference
will be held at Spelman College to promote synergistic and strategic
collaborations between experts in research development (RD) and broader impacts
(BI) work with leadership at Hispanic-serving institutions (HSIs), historically
Black colleges and universities (HBCUs), and Tribal colleges and universities
(TCUs). Conference discussion and activities will identify needs of MSIs in RD
support, build collaborative teams, and establish priorities for future research
on RD infrastructure at MSIs. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In 2022, out of 101 HBCUs,
no HBCU was ranked with an R1 classification; further, only 11 HBCUs were R2
classified. MSIs need stronger research support infrastructure to develop
research ideas and relationships with sponsors, which can be critical to staying
up to date on federal funding priorities. Improving this infrastructure would
help advance STEM talent at MSIs and lead to numerous impactful scientific
advances. The conference will (a) organize and facilitate a workshop to examine
current RD infrastructure at MSIs and develop tangible plans to synergize
growth, (b) establish relationships both among MSIs and between MSIs and
research organizations (Center for Advancing Research Impact in Society,
National Organization of Research Development Professionals), and leaders at
research intensive universities for the purpose of strengthening RD
infrastructure, and (c) create a network of institutions and individuals who
will actively work to address the greatest need(s) identified in the report.
Spelman College, the National Organization of Research Development Professionals
and the Center for Advancing Research Impact in Society will host this
conference. This convening is well positioned to produce thoughtful insight on
the current best practices and future needs for strengthening the research
enterprise at MSIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.