* 2236770
* CAREER: Understanding the Interdependence of Cation and Anion Adsorption for Electrocatalytic Nitrate Reduction
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Nirala Singh, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 08/31/2028
* USD 536,698.00

Providing fuels and chemicals without negative environmental impacts requires
new catalysts and processes that can be driven by renewable electricity instead
of fossil fuels. Electrocatalysis is a method to use renewable electricity to
drive low temperature and pressure reactions for distributed sustainable fuel
generation, waste treatment, and energy storage. Understanding electrocatalytic
reaction rates will increase the energy efficiency and economic viability of new
electrocatalytic processes. This CAREER project will study electrocatalysis to
convert waste nitrate species to valuable products such as ammonia as a case
study for sustainable chemical processes. Nitrate is a harmful pollutant that
results from industrial effluents and agricultural runoff, while ammonia is a
useful fuel and fertilizer. For electrocatalytic nitrate conversion to be
viable, the negatively charged nitrate anion must interact with an electrified
electrocatalyst surface in the presence of positively charged cations to reduce
nitrate at the desired rates. This project will step-by-step add in the
complexity of these factors to develop an understanding of what impacts
electrocatalytic reaction rates. In addition to studying this model
electrocatalytic reaction, the next generation of scientists and engineers will
be trained for the new challenges for a switch to a more sustainable,
environmentally friendly chemical economy through coursework and hands on
training.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The complex interaction of reactants, ions, and
the electrocatalyst is incompletely understood for electrocatalysis. This
project will study the interplay of the reacting molecule (i.e., nitrate),
cations, the electrocatalyst surface, and potential in controlling
electrocatalytic rates and selectivities of nitrate reduction. Structure-
activity relations will be derived by measuring reaction rates on controlled
metal and alloy surfaces and comparing to the measured adsorption energy of
nitrate and other intermediates on those surfaces. By studying the interaction
of the cations with the nitrate anion through UV-Vis, Raman, and X-ray
absorption spectroscopy and comparing to kinetics, how these cation-anion
interactions impact the adsorption energies and rates will be identified. The
understanding of nitrate electrocatalytic reduction in electrolytes of interest
to wastewater treatment will be improved by combining knowledge gained of these
interactions. The new insights will be used to evaluate reaction rates for
nitrate reduction in continuous electrocatalytic reactor systems. This project
will develop methods to apply chemical reactor engineering principles to
electrochemical reactors necessary for future advances in sustainable chemical
and fuel generation. Specific broader impacts include updating undergraduate
core curriculum for modern technologies, an electrochemistry applications and
engineering course, Chem-E Car mentorship and outreach, and leveraging NSF
I-CORPS to identify practical applications of electrocatalytic nitrate
reduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.