* 2236447
* CAREER: Adversarial Robustness through the Lens of Mathematical Analysis and Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Nicolas Garcia Trillos, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2028
* USD 184,772.00

The past few years have witnessed an expansion of artificial intelligence and
machine learning in several domains of applications at lightning speed. This
unprecedented technological development has motivated new paradigms, essential
in safety critical applications, for judging the success of data analysis
methodologies, displacing high predictive power as the sole criterion for
training models and giving more relevance to a more nuanced learning that can
factor in reliability, privacy, and fairness criteria. This project will explore
foundational questions, theoretical and algorithmic, in line with this expansion
of paradigms, and provide research opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is distinctive in its analytical and
geometric character and aims at providing an overarching perspective on timely
problems in machine learning that will trigger a variety of connections between
adversarial robustness and privacy and fields like optimal transportation,
inverse problems, interacting particle systems and mean field PDEs, analysis of
PDEs of geometric type, and geometric variational problems, among others. Some
concrete goals that will be pursued in this project include to: analyze the
geometric structure of adversarial attacks in a variety of learning settings,
understand the regularization capabilities of adversarial training, study the
connections between adversarial training and different forms of explicit
regularization methods, develop algorithmic strategies, by exploiting different
geometric structures in spaces of measures, to enforce robustness and privacy,
and design and study of new geometric frameworks for adversarial
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.