* 2236879
* EAGER: Magnetoelectric Thin Films for High Frequency Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Gopalan Srinivasan, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 09/30/2024
* USD 299,337.00

Tunable radio-frequency/microwave signal-processing devices, such as filters,
resonators, phase-shifters, are widely used in modern communication systems.
With the advent of novel applications related to 5G, new technologies are being
developed so that devices can be tuned broadly across multiple frequency
channels. Conventionally, magnetic fields are used for tuning such devices.
However, they are bulky, slow, and consume lot of power. Thus, there is a
critical need for performance improvement of such frequency tunable devices.
This NSF project is aimed to develop and test electrically tunable film based
high frequency devices that can be rapidly tuned in limited power budget.
Objectives of this project are to develop magnetoelectrics multiferroics (ME
MFs) composite films based electrically tunable high-frequency devices with
large figure of merit (=tunability/insertion-losses) and power-efficiency. Such
composite films consists of magnetic and ferroelectric materials and can be
tuned electrically and magnetically due to ME coupling. The intellectual merit
of the project primarily includes: (i) gaining comprehensive understanding on
role of distribution and ratio of magnetic and ferroelectric phases in the
composite films to achieve large ME coupling as well as (ii) fabricating and
testing ME film based resonators and filters at higher frequencies. The project
will bring transformative change as electric voltages are readily available on
circuits and the proposed devices are expected to exhibit large figure of merit
and allow easy integration with the existing semiconductor technology.
Anticipated impacts of this project include training of diverse groups of
students in the field of engineering and testing of voltage tunable devices in
collaboration with the Oakland University. Minority graduate students will be
recruited for this research project. Underrepresented undergraduate students
will gain research experience in PI’s lab through McNair Scholar Program. Summer
opportunities will be provided to local high-school teachers to learn and
develop educational demo kits for high school students based on tunable devices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching objective of this project is to engineer
magnetoelectric multiferroic nanocomposite and heterostructured films for
developing electrically tunable high-frequency coplanar waveguide resonators and
filters with high figure of merit. This project work includes: (i) fabrication
of ferroelectric and magnetostrictive composite and heterostructured films with
various distribution and ratio of the two phases, (ii) measurement and analysis
of the ferroelectric properties and leakage currents, (iii) ME coupling
measurements, and (iv) fabrication as well as testing of resonators and filters
based on optimized films with high figure of merit. This work will contribute
significantly by providing great opportunities for developing power-efficient,
compact, high-frequency multi-band voltage tunable devices over 2-12 GHz with
large figure of merit that can be integrated with the existing semiconductor
technology. The fundamental understanding gained through this project can be
expanded to other high-frequency devices, such as phase shifters, oscillators,
memory devices, magnetic sensors, and antennas. The educational goal of the
project is to train and prepare future generation of engineers in modern
multifunctional device technology. The outreach activities will provide
training, knowledge, and research exposure to a diverse group of students and
high school teachers in this interdisciplinary research
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.