* 2236596
* CAREER: Broadening Participation in Resilience Education, Research, and Practice by Leveraging Organizational Resources to Address Racial Identity Threats
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Danielle King, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 04/30/2028
* USD 116,116.00

As racial identity threats are inextricably linked to individuals’ sense of
self, understanding how leaders and organizations can help to address these
experiences will benefit many. When resources (e.g., time, energy, money,
esteem) are threatened or lost, individuals experience stress, and when
employees’ struggle with managing identity-related threats, team productivity
and organizational effectiveness suffer. This project examines the connection
between organizational resources and individual resilience. The investigator
uncovers the role that organizations play in the employee resilience process and
identifies specific organizational resources that are effective at bolstering
employee safety and health despite the presence of racial identity threats.
Knowledge generated from this award offers insights for organizational science
and for workforce diversity and performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experiences
that threaten one’s resources contribute to negative organizational outcomes.
When threats are tied to an identity (e.g., race), they can lead to inequality
and further group disparities. Racial identity threats occur in multiple forms,
ranging from environmental (e.g., mega-threats: negative, large-scale,
diversity-related episodes that receive significant media attention) to
interpersonal (e.g., microaggressions: daily verbal or behavioral indignities
that denigrate individuals from racial minority groups). The role that
organizations play in supporting employee resilience—continued behavioral and
psychological goal pursuit despite adversity—to racial identity threats is
unknown. Thus, this project identifies the organizational proactive resources
(continually available resources present before a threat, e.g., race-based
employee resource groups) and protective resources (resources made available
after a threat that are meant to diminish strain responses, e.g., paid therapy)
that shape key psychological mechanisms that predict employee resilience:
identity safety (i.e., feeling like one’s identity will not evoke harm) and
emotional exhaustion (i.e., feelings of being emotionally drained). The
investigator qualitatively (Study 1: in-depth, structured interviews) and
quantitatively (Study 2: longitudinal, weekly surveys) assesses the role of
organizational resources in fostering employee resilience among employees who
belong to stigmatized racial groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.