* 2236666
* CAREER: GLOW: Sequencing rivers with machine learning and bioinformatics
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Ajay Limaye, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 07/31/2028
* USD 315,641.00

Rivers are the arteries of landscapes and are deeply embedded in economies and
ecosystems worldwide. They are reliable sources of fresh water and energy; vital
habitats for fish and other wildlife; conduits for transportation; and hotspots
for hazards from pollution and flooding. A fundamental aspect of rivers is that
they rarely flow in straight lines, and instead meander through river bends of
different shapes. For example, some bends are symmetric like bell curves, while
other bends skew to one side like bananas. These shapes are widely used in both
theory and practice but are based on subjective interpretation, which
complicates efforts to predict how rivers will respond to a changing
environment. This work will adapt computing methods, like those used in speech
recognition and in DNA sequencing, to test whether river shapes are divisible
into a geometric “alphabet,” and if so, how these shapes are ordered in
sequences from upstream to downstream. Through partnerships with experts in
music composition and science education at the University of Virginia, the
project will also translate the geometry of rivers to music to illuminate the
role of creativity in research. This fusion of art and science will be shared
with the local community in Charlottesville, VA, and nationally through teaching
materials for geoscience educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dozens of theoretical
models describe the shapes of rivers, yet major knowledge gaps persist in
comparing complex river shapes between models and observations. The research
will address this need by blending approaches from geoscience, machine learning,
and bioinformatics to derive a new language of rivers. The work will analyze
over 100,000 meander bends using unsupervised machine learning; apply methods
inspired by DNA sequencing to river channels; and test whether bend geometries
are sensitive to bank materials such as sediment, bedrock and vegetation. This
Division of Earth Sciences – Geoscience Lessons for and from Other Worlds (GLOW)
award will also examine roughly 1,000 channel bends on the Moon, Venus and Mars
in comparison to the overall meander bend classification. The educational
activities will create a new and accessible entry point to science through
music. The work will also support the PI’s deepened participation in two
organizations – the National Association of Black Geoscientists and National
Association of Geoscience Teachers – that are at the forefront of building an
inclusive future for the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded
by the Directorate for Geosciences to support AI/ML advancement in the
geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.