* 2236320
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track H: Determining Community Needs for Accessibility Tools that Facilitate Programming Education and Workforce Readiness for Persons with Disabilities
* TIP,ITE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Sook-Lei Liew, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 11/30/2023
* USD 698,161.00

One billion people, 15% of the world’s population, have experienced a
disability. Disabilities present major barriers to entering the labor force;
approximately 80% of persons with disabilities (PWDs) were excluded from the
2021 labor force. Meanwhile, programming jobs continue to grow explosively but
are largely inaccessible to PWDs. Standard programming interfaces–-screens,
keyboards, mice–-are difficult to operate for many PWDs with physical
challenges. This project supports individuals with physical disabilities that
result in barriers to learning and engaging in programming, blocking access to
the widely available, lucrative, and upwardly mobile technology workforce. The
work will develop a means of ameliorating negative labor outcomes faced by PWDs
by developing and evaluating prototypes of multimodal interfaces (e.g., speech,
eye tracking, pedals) that enable PWDs to learn, practice, and utilize
programming skills. The project will also develop a path for PWDs to train
for—and enter—the programming workforce, thereby bridging the career gap that
blocks most PWDs from such career opportunities. Impacts of this project
include: 1) increased representation of PWDs in STEM jobs, 2) increased economic
and personal well-being for PWDs, 3) improved economic competitiveness of the
U.S., and 4) enhanced infrastructure for research and education. Enabling PWDs
access to programming skills and employment will produce an influx of PWDs in
the technology sector, increase diversity in STEM, and lead to sustained
employment and economic well-being for PWDs. Since programming jobs can often be
done remotely, this work will remove transportation barriers for PWDs,
especially those who use wheelchairs. As job stability is a primary concern for
many PWDs, this will lead to sustained improvements in quality of life.
Furthermore, increasing the workforce of people who can program will improve US
economic competitiveness while increasing the diversity of the workforce.
Finally, developing effective, user-friendly, and sustainable ways of
interfacing with computers will also be useful in K-12 and in research
nationwide. It will allow for early programming education and computer use in
K-12 settings for children with physical disabilities, and for aging seniors who
experience loss of dexterity and fine motor control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will produce multiple technical advances and contributions, including:
1) a large corpus of insights about the relevant PWD subpopulation needs for
engaging in learning and practicing workforce-ready programming; 2) co-designed
personalizable prototype interfaces specifically designed to be affordable,
accessible, and work across platforms; 3) machine learning models that will
enable personalization of the developed tools to meet individual user needs; and
4) an inclusive evaluation framework informed by the advisory board and
community partners during the co-design sessions. This work combines input
devices beyond keyboards and mice to create an off-the-shelf, personalizable,
multimodal input interface for teaching and enabling workforce-ready programming
for at least one identified subpopulation of users with similar physical
abilities. The prototypes explore combinations of input modalities processed by
multimodal, personalized machine learning models to translate inputs to output
keystrokes and cursor activity. Prototypes will leverage large-scale pretrained
language models to guide the translation of user input to code output and will
use a single input modality with a focused output space (i.e., writing Python
functions, operators, and program-specific variables); multiple prototypes will
be created and tested with the relevant PWD populations. The corpus of data from
each modality will be used to identify user sets with similar abilities through
clustering techniques, while a centralized learning backbone can be fine-tuned
per user population using low-parameter fine-tuning approaches such as
Transformer-based Adapters. These technical advances have the potential to
significantly expand access to the technology labor force for the PWD community,
thereby profoundly impacting the technological workforce opportunities of
individuals with physical sensorimotor disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.