* 2236061
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Gut microbiome and response to environmental change
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Andrew Marshall, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Robin Bernstein
* 03/31/2025
* USD 25,200.00

The gastrointestinal (gut) microbiome is extremely responsive to the host’s
environment and helps regulate host physiology. This doctoral dissertation
research examines how the gut microbiome is likely an important component of
physiological adaption in wild, non-human primates. Because the gut microbiome
is tied to many different aspects of health throughout the life course, results
from this study can provide valuable insights into how gut microbes facilitate
host stress and immune response to help wild primates cope with changes in their
environment. In addition, this project explores the impact of the gut microbiome
on primate fitness and evolution. While conducting the dissertation project, the
doctoral student participates in scientific outreach for K-12 students and gives
talks about the importance of gut microbes for human and animal health. The
doctoral student also mentors undergraduate students in fieldwork, laboratory,
and data analysis methods including competitive binding assays and
bioinformatics pipelines. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates how
gut microbes help regulate the stress and immune response in wild, white-faced
capuchins (Cebus imitator). The gut microbiome is extremely responsive to the
host’s environment; this flexibility likely helps the host regulate their
physiology to cope with changes in the environment. Evidence suggests stress and
immune physiology are affected by gut microbiome composition, therefore, gut
microbiome flexibility to the host’s environment is likely crucial for primate
health and fitness. White-faced capuchins cope with drastic seasonal differences
in resource levels (i.e. food, water, shade) which offers an opportunity to
monitor concurrent changes in the gut microbiome, immune system, and stress
physiology in response to environmental change. By combining gut microbiome
sampling with non-invasive measures of stress (i.e. fecal glucocorticoids) and
immune health (i.e. urinary neopterin), the doctoral student specifically
evaluates 1) how the social and ecological environment affect capuchin gut
microbiome composition, 2) how gut microbiome composition relates to the stress
and immune response, and 3) whether gut microbiome composition and immune and
stress physiology respond sequentially to environmental change. This research
should provide insight into whether gut microbiome regulation of the stress and
immune response is an evolved mechanism that helps primates respond to
environmental change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.