* 2236609
* CAREER: Probing Quantum Coherence in Biomolecular Microenvironments via Electron Spin Molecular Quantum Sensors
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2027
* Ryan Hadt, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 11/30/2027
* USD 267,513.00

The National Science Foundationâ€™s Quantum Leap initiative seeks to promote
understanding and application of quantum mechanics towards areas such as
computation, modeling, communication, and sensing. Innovation in these areas
will meet societal needs for technologies that include sensors with exquisite
sensitivity and resolution. Towards these challenges, molecular Quantum
Information Science (QIS) makes use of the fine tunability of synthetic
chemistry to understand, design, and utilize new molecules and materials with
measurable and controllable quantum properties. This research project aims to
develop new molecular systems, models, and protocols for quantum sensing in
biology towards the goal of enabling atomically-precise magnetic imaging. The
molecular and biological sensors constructed through this project will be used
to study chemical micro-environments in biological systems with high sensitivity
and to understand quantum effects in biological systems and processes. In turn,
this research utilizes a reciprocal relationship that will not only develop
quantum sensors for biological applications but will also improve understanding
of quantum processes needed for future applications of molecular QIS in
technological devices. Through an educational component to this project, open
educational resources will be developed to amplify the impact of this work by
expanding and simplifying access to chemical education and research. These
resources will alleviate cost barriers that limit understanding of the quantum
paradigm and success in STEM. Additionally, a new research training program will
be&lt;br/&gt;developed to provide chemistry techniques to students in a
neighboring community college, enabling historically underrepresented students
with little to no research experience to continue in STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current research in molecular Quantum Information
Science (QIS) seeks to develop quantum-enabled technologies for computation,
communication, and sensing through chemical synthesis and spectroscopic
characterization. This project combines QIS and biophysics to fundamentally
understand intramolecular and intermolecular effects on decoherence dynamics and
to quantify changes in decoherence times for probing biochemical micro-
environments. The goal of this research is the development of molecular quantum
sensors for biology towards atomically-precise magnetic resonance imaging using
electron spin decoherence. This project contains four objectives: 1) the
development of theoretical/experimental descriptions of decoherence-based
quantum sensing mechanisms, 2) the investigation of decoherence properties of
molecular quantum sensor (qusor)-labeled membranes, 3) the elucidation of
secondary sphere contributions to decoherence in paramagnetic metalloprotein
active sites, and 4) the selective targeting of protein-specific qusor binding.
First, theoretical models for spin-lattice and spin-spin relaxation times will
be developed for organic molecules and low-symmetry transition metal complexes,
then expanded to computations for macromolecular systems. Second, paramagnetic
organic molecules will be introduced into lipid assemblies for studying micellar
morphologies and interfaces with ultrafast spectroscopy at room temperature.
Third, the decoherence dynamics of paramagnetic metalloproteins and their
mutants will be probed to quantify the maximum distance for secondary sphere
effects and to improve the accuracy of computational methods. Fourth, molecular
qusor-protein complexes will be synthesized and assembled to demonstrate
decoherence effects for sensing site-specific binding events. Techniques to be
employed for this project include chemical synthesis, protein expression and
purification, X-ray crystallography, optical and magnetic spectroscopies, and
theoretical and computational methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.