* 2236852
* CAREER: Coral calcification during the industrial era
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Thomas DeCarlo, Hawaii Pacific University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 04/30/2028
* USD 222,800.00

Corals are animals found throughout the tropical oceans that construct hard
skeletons throughout their lifetime. Eventually these skeletons are cemented
together to form coral reefs. Coral reefs are important ecosystems that are
threatened by climate change. Lab experiments have shown that the coral
skeleton-building process is negatively impacted by ocean warming and
acidification. Ocean warming and acidification are caused by carbon dioxide
(CO2) released to the atmosphere by humans since the mid-19th century. Lab
experiments often test these impacts over weeks to months, but climate change
affects wild corals in the ocean over decades to centuries. One of the only ways
to study how wild corals have been affected by these changes is to measure past
growth rates in their skeletons. Corals develop annual bands much like tree
rings creating a record of their growth over time. This award will support a
combined research and educational program focused on student training, improving
coral data access, and public engagement. Specifically, the program will improve
methods for coral skeletal analysis and build a virtual coral core repository.
The project will also create an interactive app in which students or the public
can interact with coral data and contribute to crowdsourced data
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research conducted under this CAREER award will
address the drivers of long-term changes in coral calcification rates during the
industrial era. The first stages of the project will focus on developing new
tools for growth-rate analysis from coral cores and building the virtual core
repository to make all existing coral core CT scans publicly accessible. This
will enable a big-data approach in which several hundred cores from across the
tropics can be processed for past growth rates with optimal analysis and
statistical methods, providing the most comprehensive test of whether coral
growth rates in the wild have changed under the past century or more of ocean
warming and acidification. The measurement of growth rates in these cores will
be transparent, with the traceable analysis files saved in the virtual
repository alongside each core, enabling multi-observer analysis by researchers
across the globe. Subsequent analysis of interannual variability of coral
growth, or reconstruction of past climate variability from growth rates, will be
enabled by the virtual repository, including continued addition of new cores
collected during this project. This award also includes educational activities
including the development of K-12 lesson plans that integrate novel
3-dimensional hologram projections of coral skeletons, and college-level STEM
lesson plans based on an app that will be developed to visualize coral cores.
This project is jointly funded by the Marine Geology and Geophysics Program, the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), the Biological
Oceanography Program, and the Ocean Education Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.