* 2236814
* Clarifying the Role of Inflammation in Social Prejudice
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Anastasia Makhanova, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Steven Breckler
* 08/31/2025
* USD 199,974.00

A fact of social life is that people consider some individuals in their social
environments to be members of their own group (the “ingroup”) and others to be
members of other groups (the “outgroups”). Often, this categorization results in
social biases, including prejudice and discrimination toward outgroups. People
categorize others as outgroup members along such dimensions of human variability
as gender, disability, race, ethnicity, or ancestry. Biases stemming from these
categorizations may ultimately contribute to hate crimes and other negative
forms of social interaction. Decades of theory development and research in the
social and behavioral sciences have produced a good understanding of the
individual differences and situational factors associated with heightened
biases. Much less is known about neurobiological processes that may underlie
such biases. This project investigates the role of immune system activity in how
people process and respond to social information. An increase in immune system
activity is common when people are ill or responding to threat. It is the body’s
way of fighting infection. Yet, its consequences may extend far beyond the
physiological, impacting the way people think and feel about others. One
practical implication relates to the practice of “presenteeism” – the practice
of working while sick. This is common in corporate and medical settings, and may
adversely affect high-stakes decision making and evaluations of
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines social psychology with
psychoneuroimmunology to examine how immune system activation may change the way
people perceive others in their social environments. It focuses on social
cognitive processes that may contribute to more negative evaluations of people
from other cultural groups. An experimental approach is used to manipulate
immune system activity as a result of a vaccine injection. Vaccines help develop
immunity in the long-run. But within the first twenty-four hours people’s bodies
respond to the vaccine with a general inflammatory response. It is hypothesized
that this general inflammatory response will be associated with more social bias
against people from cultural backgrounds other than one’s own. The research also
tests specific social cognitive processes that may underpin this effect, such as
greater ingroup favoritism and/or outgroup derogation, altered perception of who
belongs to one’s ingroup versus the outgroup, greater likelihood of stereotype
application, and increased heuristic processing. The project clarifies how an
important biological process can lead to social prejudice, and helps to inform
broader societal policies associated with sick leave.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.