* 2236959
* CAREER: Photochemistry with Resonating Mean-Field
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Shane Parker, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Ryan Jorn
* 05/31/2028
* USD 650,000.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models, and Computational Methods (CTMC)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Shane Parker of Case Western Reserve
University will advance simulations of chemical reactions triggered by light.
Chemical reactions that use or produce light are called photochemical reactions
and are at the heart of many technologically and biologically important
processes including photocatalysis, electricity generation in solar cells, and
DNA damage caused by ultraviolet light. To reliably design new photocatalysts or
photosensitizers, researchers need to understand the microscopic mechanism of
photochemical reactions. Simulations based on quantum mechanics are a powerful
tool for unraveling the mechanism of complicated photochemical reactions.
However, the applicability of photochemistry simulations is limited by the
quality of the available methods. Dr. Parker and his research group are
developing the Resonating Mean-Field method for use in photochemistry
simulations, thus enabling simulations with improved accuracy for classes of
reactions that are inaccessible to current state-of-the-art methods. This
project involves training and mentoring undergraduate and graduate students in
theoretical chemistry and engagement with the Americal Chemical Society Project
SEED to recruit high school students from Cleveland-area schools for summer
research. In addition, Dr. Parker will build a suite of education-focused
programs that run in web browsers so that K-12 students and university students
can use numerical simulations to interrogate chemical models in the
classroom.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;First-principles simulations have emerged as a
powerful tool to discover the microscopic mechanism of complex photochemical
reactivities at the heart of many important grand challenges for society, such
as solar-fuel production on titanium dioxide nanoparticles. However, the use of
such simulations for broad classes of problems is currently thwarted by the lack
of affordable quantum chemistry methods that can balance the descriptions of
electronic states with different charge and spin characteristics. To address
this need, Dr. Parker and his research group are developing the Resonating Mean-
Field (ResMF) method for photochemistry simulations. ResMF is a promising method
for photochemistry simulations because it has a mean-field cost, explicitly
balances states with different characters and reproduces the correct topology of
conical intersections. The research objectives of this proposal are i) to
establish a nonorthogonal spin-adapted wavefunction expansion that eliminates
spin-contamination and reduces computational cost, ii) to produce a numerically
robust and efficient implementation of ResMF, and iii) to implement all
molecular forces and properties necessary to simulate photochemistry. The
educational objectives of this proposal are i) to develop web-based numerical
simulation tools for use in classrooms of all levels, ii) to train K-12
educators to teach model-based thinking skills, and iii) to introduce high
school students from Cleveland-area schools to scientific
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.