* 2236904
* CAREER: Embedded Data Assimilation for Complex Turbulent Reacting Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Jonathan MacArt, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 06/30/2028
* USD 445,930.00

Addressing the challenges of climate change requires advanced, efficient, low-
emission combustion technologies as well as an educated workforce to understand
and solve these challenges. A key limiting factor is the inability of current
simulation techniques to accurately predict turbulent combustion in the regimes
needed for the design of low-emission combustors and sustainable fuels. Due to
practical limits on computing resources, the computational simulations used for
engineering design rely on simplified mathematical expressions for some aspects
of turbulence and chemical physics; these models are almost always disconnected
from each other and so do not capture key physical interactions. Recently,
efficient numerical methods to calibrate complex models during flow simulations
have been developed using techniques from machine learning and constrained
optimization. While successful for simple nonreacting turbulent flows, these
models have not been applied to highly nonlinear turbulent reacting flows. The
principal objective of this project is to develop efficient methods to calibrate
models for the missing physics in simulations of complex turbulent reacting
flows, including flows in engineering geometries, which will enhance the
predictive accuracy of practical calculations. The resulting methods will be
useful across many areas of science and engineering and will be made publicly
available in an open-source software package. The project will facilitate
interdisciplinary partnerships and student education across traditional borders
by developing an annual summer symposium on data and modeling for turbulent
combustion. The project will also support the development of an education and
research program for an underresourced high school, which will encourage broad
understanding of energy science and participation in solutions to national and
global energy challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address the
need for accurate, efficient turbulent combustion models by developing
turbulence closures and optimization methods for both canonical and complex
simulations of turbulent reacting flows. An adjoint-based optimization method
will enable efficient optimization of closure models over the Navier–Stokes
equations for canonical flows such as turbulent jet flames and wedge-shaped
flameholders. The primary challenge in applying adjoint-based optimization is
the need for intrusive access to a code’s data structures, which is practically
impossible to achieve for general-purpose computational fluid dynamics (CFD)
solvers. To address this, a novel co-optimization framework will be developed to
leverage both adjoint-based optimization over canonical flows and ensemble
Kalman-based (adjoint-free) optimization over geometrically complex flows and
experimental data. This combined approach will train models for both the
canonical and complex physics while alleviating the current limitations of
embedded optimization for general-purpose CFD codes. More broadly, the
scientific community is interested in developing methods to leverage large
datasets; therefore, this project’s methods have potential to be adopted widely
across disciplines. The resulting data, optimization framework, and trained
models will be distributed as open-source software to facilitate replication,
reuse, and extension by researchers in academia and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.