* 2236749
* 2022 Collaborative Research in Computational Neuroscience (CRCNS) Principal Investigators Meeting
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Christopher Rozell, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 08/31/2023
* USD 49,517.00

The Collaborative Research in Computational Neuroscience (CRCNS) program
supports a broad spectrum of investigators advancing computational understanding
of nervous system structure and function, mechanisms underlying nervous system
disorders, and computational strategies used by the nervous system. The goal of
this meeting of CRCNS Principal Investigators is to foster interaction and
collaboration across this vibrant community, highlighting the intellectual
advances and broader impacts of CRCNS awardees. The meeting, scheduled for Oct.
27-28, 2022 in Atlanta, GA, is co-hosted by Emory University and the Georgia
Institute of Technology and includes poster presentations, talks, and plenary
lectures, covering all areas of computational neuroscience represented by funded
projects in the program. This international meeting will include projects
involving researchers from the United States, France, Germany, Israel, Japan,
and Spain, sponsored by NSF and eight other partner
agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This international meeting should have a
significant impact on the participants and the future of the CRCNS program. The
meeting results are likely to include new research directions that will be
publicized to the research community through publications and the meeting
website. The results dissemination should inform and the CRCNS research
community in their transdisciplinary collaboration, educational activities, and
spur other innovative research directions. The broader impacts of the meeting
are to facilitate progress in the field and stimulate conversations,
connections, and collaborations that will lead toward better informed and
effective CRCNS research and resulting technologies for the broadest possible
user populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.