* 2236700
* EAGER: Developing design principles for network-scale applications derived from Internet thinking and the behavioral sciences.
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* David Clark, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 09/30/2023
* USD 300,000.00

The Internet is a platform that moves information between endpoints. But
transport service alone is meaningless to users. It is Internet applications
that control the character of user experience: without them the Internet would
be of scant value to most. While applications create the user experience, their
design is an under-studied topic. The objective of this EAGER is to gain deeper
understanding of how to bridge the gap between data transport and user goals—and
how alternative design decisions might better serve users. To better support
applications there must be a more methodical consideration of application
requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some requirements are fully technical:
improving performance and resilience or ensuring greater security of data
transport. However, the most important and least well-understood are those that
derive from their role in shaping the quality of Internet experience. One line
of inquiry must begin “top down”, seeking to understand the ways in which design
choices impact behavior. Current Internet applications bring great benefit to
society, but they also enable great harms (e.g., erosion of privacy, the fast
and wide spread of disinformation, identity theft, the balkanization of society
into disconnected, mutually hostile camps, etc.) This EAGER proposes to focus on
this question: can we identify design approaches that reduce the potential for
harm and create a more benign Internet experience? What would these alternate
design principles imply for application support, and even for core features of
the network?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is timely, because the Internet
and society sit at a critical juncture. Governments are moving to impose a range
of regulations on Internet Service Providers or application providers (aka "The
Big Tech players"). Historical regulatory strategies (e.g., antitrust
enforcement) may not be effective in this context. They may have only a limited
or indirect impact on application design. If regulation is to mitigate the harms
listed above, it must be based on a grasp of how decisions made during
application design shape user behavior. Regulators need a toolbox containing
insights and practical strategies to be effective in this environment. This
project seeks to inspire the creation of such a
toolbox.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The challenge is only partially shaped by
technical considerations. Online behavior is, above all, a manifestation of
innately human motives and behavior patterns. Thus, the strategy to address the
human aspects of the requirements includes a careful scan of research results
from the behavioral and social sciences and the computer sciences. The output
will be a framework that explores the ways in which human behavior emerges under
different design conditions. The results from these inquiries will offer fresh
insights and options for action that will, in turn, lead to a more benign online
experience for all. Tasks included in the EAGER include: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;o
Summarizing a body of relevant knowledge:&lt;br/&gt;o As an initial case study
of societal harms, focusing on disinformation; based on insights from that
topic, generating to other examples where the insights are
applicable;&lt;br/&gt;o Developing a series of proposed design principles to
foster prosocial behavior online. These will specify the application support
services associated with select requirements, and - if possible - proposals for
changes to the Internet itself; and finally;&lt;br/&gt;o Translating the summary
into a form more accessible (e.g., comprehensible) to the technical community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the emergence of a new generation of interactive
applications (e.g., enhanced and /or virtual reality), there will be unforeseen
challenges in the arenas of authenticity, quality, and dynamics of online
experience. By interweaving computer, behavioral and social sciences, work under
this EAGER grant will go beyond the study of disinformation to identify
practical steps applicable to a wide range of applications and their uses to
support the continued growth of an open, civil
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.