* 2236921
* CAREER: Rules for Polaritonic Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Aaron Rury, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2028
* USD 520,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Aaron Rury of Wayne State University will
use pump-probe spectroscopy to understand how quantum particles of light
confined in small cavities carry chemical information between molecules and
materials under strong light-matter coupling conditions. Because light
traditionally couples to its surrounding medium weakly, Dr. Rury and his
research group will fabricate small photon traps to form hybrid light matter-
states called cavity polaritons that can be reliably studied using steady-state
and time-resolved electromagnetic spectroscopies. By measuring where the samples
absorb and emit, it should be possible to put forward rules governing
polaritonic properties that advance chemical and materials design principles.
Both graduate and undergraduate students from diverse backgrounds will be
involved in these quantum science research activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ultrafast pump-probe, coherent vibrational, and steady-
state spectroscopic techniques will be employed to determine how the delocalized
nature of cavity multipolaritons mediates spin orbit coupling between materials
and organic chromophores, controls the nuclear structures of hybrid light-matter
states, and enables researchers to control polariton state lifetimes toward the
end of achieving quantum photonic materials design. Thin films of molecular
chromophores or semiconductors that are strongly coupled to optical cavity modes
will be used to create bonding-like interactions between molecules across
hundreds of nanometers. Once rules that govern polaritonic chemistry are better
understood, these rules should help to establish structure-property
relationships in hybrid mutlipolaritonic systems. The ability to induce new
chemistry in these cavities could provide for a new approach to molecular and
materials design for photochemistry and quantum information
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.