* 2236477
* CAREER: Structural Estimation and Optimization for Partially Observable Markov Decision Processes and Markov Games
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Yanling Chang, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 01/31/2028
* USD 525,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) grant will contribute to
the Nation's economic prosperity by developing analytical methods to enhance
security and risk management of supply chains. As a particular use case, the
project will focus on sustainable seafood supply chain operations. The US is the
second largest consumer of seafood in the world, and fisheries agencies are
seeking substantial reforms in management practices to better manage fishery
population dynamics. The effectiveness of management strategies hinges upon fish
stock assessment which is subject to many sources of uncertainties and noisy
information, and is further compounded by illegal, unreported and unregulated
(IUU) fishing, which steals natural resources, threatens ocean ecosystems and
seafood supply, and undermines port and maritime security. This award supports
development of a new framework, analytics, and algorithms that can learn
preferences and behavior of fishermen and fishing adversaries from imperfect
data, identify ways to modulate their behavior, and search for effective
strategies to promote sustainable operations and to combat IUU fishing. The
educational plan will utilize similar methods to elicit students' needs and
preferences from observable data and to design effective education strategies
that promote inclusion, equity, diversity, and accessibility. The research will
be informed through collaboration with the US Coast Guard Academy and the North
Carolina Division of Marine Fisheries. In addition, tutorials and workshops on
data analytics involving both students and supply chain practitioners will
provide important recruitment and outreach
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will investigate a
methodological framework comprising structural estimation, optimization, and
integrated analysis for dynamic decision making under imperfect information. The
current literature on learning and optimizing dynamic decisions mainly assumes
that the system is perfectly observable. While there is an extensive literature
on the analysis and optimization for partially observable Markov decision
processes (POMDPs), this project will focus on the inverse estimation of the
primitives of a POMDP model based upon observable histories, an understudied
area. Both optimization and inverse estimation for multi-party decision
processes are also considered through partially observable Markov games (POMGs).
This research address a knowledge gap by developing (i) new estimation methods
to learn model parameters of POMDPs and POMGs from their corresponding data
trajectories; (ii) efficient solution procedures for leader-follower POMGs with
imprecise reward; and (iii) an integrated methodology of Estimation-
Optimization-Analysis based on POMDPs and POMGs to improve an agent's
performance by learning, targeted modulating, and adapting to other agents'
decision behaviors. The methodologies will be applied to improve fish stock
rebuilding efforts, support defense agencies in combating IUU fishing, and
identify best practices of course delivery strategies in
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.