* 2236080
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track I: A Tale of Two Cities Optimizing Circularity from Molecules to the Built Environment
* TIP,ITE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Eric Beckman, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 11/30/2023
* USD 749,997.00

The current linear consumption model of raw material extraction, production,
use, and disposal has led to serious consequences, from resource depletion to
global waste, spanning all industrial sectors from plastics to the built
environment. In its place, a new circular model can be created by transforming
how the end-of-life and/or re-use of materials are envisioned, using systems
tools to guide the design. This project will advance the national health,
prosperity, and welfare by using the team’s Circularity Assessment Protocol
(CAP) to develop interconnected circular models for waste avoidance and material
reuse across four different categories: molecules, plastics, organic materials,
and the built environment. By creating a path to circularity across multiple
materials and scales in two large metropolitan areas in geographically disparate
regions (Pittsburgh, PA, and Atlanta, GA), their knowledge and improved
practices can translate to other locations throughout the US, eventually scaling
to other cities. This work crosses the boundaries of pollution, social
intersectional issues, community engagement, financial systems, and education
and curriculum development. Project data will be made freely and publicly
available on the internet using the open access, open data tool Debris Tracker,
adding to the over 6 million other data points for leakage of materials and
materials management in nearly 100 countries around the world. Circularity city
data will be compared not only between Pittsburgh and Atlanta but with other CAP
cities worldwide like Manila, Philippines; Semarang, Indonesia; and Can Tho,
Vietnam. This project will profoundly enhance and amplify the waste reduction
and management programs of the team’s local NGO, government, and industry
partners. Partner and stakeholder meetings will seek ways to ameliorate systemic
and intersectional issues including pollution burdens, lack of infrastructure,
and access to services. &lt;br/&gt;In contrast to linear models, circular
economy (CE) decouples economic growth from resource consumption -- for example,
meeting people’s needs without producing waste in the first place. CE principles
are based on the efficient use of resources and eliminating waste from product
life cycles; a truly circular economy keeps material in continuous use by
design. By deeply integrating diverse disciplines through the process of the
team’s previously developed, proven holistic systems framework, the Circularity
Assessment Protocol (CAP), the project can tackle the complex challenges that
currently inhibit the growth of the circular economy. This work will utilize the
CAP framework to converge circularity across multiple scales for the first time:
from molecules (e.g., function-property and ecotoxicity), to materials (e.g.,
polymers, electronics, paper products), and the built environment (e.g., design
for value and reversible building design). Working with well-positioned
collaborators from NGOs, government, and industry, the project team will
converge and connect these siloed research topics to create a path to optimizing
circularity in two major metropolitan areas, Atlanta, GA, and Pittsburgh, PA.
The two cities will be involved throughout the project and will have access to
data facilitating the use of science and technology to inform public policy and
support decision-making. This project will increase participation of women and
underrepresented minorities in STEM, as these groups will be prioritized in
recruiting graduate students for the project; increase public scientific
literacy and public engagement with science and technology through the use of
open data and free mobile citizen science apps; improve the well-being of
individuals in society by reducing waste and improving the built environment;
develop a diverse, globally competitive STEM workforce through the current
education center at UPitt and students working on this project at each
university; and deepen partnerships between academia and
others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.