* 2236021
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track J: Predicting the effect of climate extremes on the food system to improve resilience of global and local food security
* TIP,ITE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Michael Hayes, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Michael Reksulak
* 11/30/2023
* USD 748,674.00

As we enter a third year of record extreme weather driven by a La Ni√±a event, a
staggering number of people are facing hunger in the United States and globally.
A deadly combination of climate shocks, price increases and conflict have pushed
50+ million people to the edge of famine, highlighting the vulnerability of our
global food system. Shocks to the food system are not isolated and can cascade.
For example, climate shocks are often correlated, hitting multiple production
areas around the world at the same time, resulting in food price hikes that can
lead some countries to impose export bans, driving global prices even higher.
Fortunately, correlated climate shocks are increasingly predictable. Our ability
to forecast extreme heat, drought and heavy rains, driven by sea surface
temperatures, has increased dramatically over the past two decades. This project
leverages that predictive ability to collaborate with stakeholders along the
food system to develop actionable models tailored to their needs and decision-
points. Understanding, and anticipating, the vulnerability of the global food
system to predictable climate shocks is critical. It will allow government
agencies and aid groups to mitigate food crises and help communities build
resiliency both in the United States and abroad. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
convergence research has two primary objectives. First, it will create
predictive models that account for interlinkages across food security drivers.
While models for crop production, meteorological forecasts, price, trade, and
household food security exist, their current lack of interoperability means that
the models do not readily allow for feedbacks, interactions or measures of
uncertainty to be perpetuated throughout the system. Developing an integrated
model requires a multidisciplinary convergence science approach, bringing
together climatologists, hydrologists, sociologists, agricultural economists,
statisticians and policy experts to appropriately model correlated shocks and
their connections through the food system.&lt;br/&gt;Second, to produce
actionable output, these models need to be co-developed with stakeholders from
the beginning. Stakeholders will guide model inputs, objectives, scenarios and
help design their output. The researchers will work with decision-makers to co-
produce models that quantify the effects of climate shocks on local and global
food production, trade and prices, and enumerate the vulnerability of the
households and regions to these shocks. This project will enhance our
understanding of the drivers within each component of the integrated model, such
as bolstering our theoretical understanding of the linkages between sea surface
temperatures and climate, key nodes in the global food trade system, and the
effect of combinations of specific food security drivers. Along with improving
each separate model component, this project will facilitate their interaction,
improving our ability to identify the correlation of weather to international
trade and prices while more carefully accounting for uncertainty. To support the
adoption of this approach to model development in other fields, the project will
develop protocols for decision-maker coproduction of models. By bringing
together academics with consequential real-world decision-makers working on both
international and domestic food security, this project will help identify
drivers of hunger that are relevant in different settings within developing and
developed countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.