* 2236724
* BMES 2022 Annual Meeting “Embracing Inclusion to Advance Innovation in Healthcare and Education”; San Antonio, Texas; 12-15 October 2022.
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* John White, Biomedical Engineering Society
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 09/30/2023
* USD 32,925.00

This award supports the Biomedical Engineering Society (BMES) Annual meeting in
San Antonio, Texas, 12-15 October 2022. The BMES Annual Meeting serves as the
premier event for scientific sharing and dissemination amongst biomedical
engineers in the academic, industry and educational sectors. Beyond research and
educational presentations, the mission of the 2022 BMES annual meeting is to
provide opportunities for building strategic networks, promoting career
development and advancement, sharing ideas, recognizing and promoting talent,
developing and promoting professional excellence, and broadening the
participation of underserved and underrepresented groups. This award will
provide critical support to enhance diversity of participants at the BMES Annual
Meeting and advance inclusion and promote success in continuing in the
Biomedical engineering (BME) educational pathway and profession.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2022 BMES meeting will focus on the future to showcase
innovative developments in research and education. The theme of this meeting is
equity issues in healthcare and education stemming from racial and socioeconomic
diversity, gender and sexual orientation, and disabilities. The meeting will
connect research and education communities to stimulate new strategies to
advance healthcare. The meeting will be highlighted by exciting plenary
speakers, research sessions, workshops, and outreach programs that will provide
valuable information and opportunities to engage with the biomedical engineering
community. There will be activities at the 2022 Annual Meeting to increase
participation from underrepresented minority engineering groups across multiple
stages, including high school students, community college students,
undergraduate, and graduate students, postdoctoral trainees and early career
faculty and professionals. This award will support two merit-based awards
(Student Chapter Awards), a High School Expo, and online streaming fee waivers
for underserved individuals. These activities will help ensure value to a
broader representation of BME Annual Meeting attendees and encourage diverse
perspectives and innovative thinking in planning and evaluation of meeting
activities. This broader representation at the BMES Annual Meeting will help
expand participation of underrepresented groups in both BME and in engineering,
and will contribute to engaging the future generation of biomedical
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.