* 2236629
* CAREER: Elucidating the Mechanism of Ionic Liquid-Coated Nanoparticle Interactions with Blood Components
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2028
* Eden Tanner, University of Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 01/31/2028
* USD 149,827.00

Understanding how nanomaterials interact with the human body is a critical step
to their safe and effective use in medicine. When nanoparticles are injected
into the bloodstream, they encounter a rich environment, replete with diverse
kinds of cells and proteins. Dr. Eden Tanner and her team at the University of
Mississippi have developed an ionic liquid nanoparticle coating technology which
enables selective in situ “hitchhiking” of nanoparticles onto different kinds of
blood cells. This CAREER project will investigate this phenomenon to understand
why and how this hitchhiking occurs, what impact it has on the cell membranes,
and measure the strength of the forces between the nanoparticle and the cell
membrane. This research project will provide critical fundamental knowledge on
the interaction of charged materials with components of the bloodstream.
Supported by Dr. Tanner and her lab, the student participants will be recruited
from the Increasing Minority Access to Graduate Education Rising Science Star
Program. These cohorts of Mississippi-based African American undergraduate
scholars will be intensively mentored and supported from their first day of
college until graduation and beyond, preparing them to enter graduate school and
for careers as scientific leaders. Participants will work with the PI to return
to their high schools to deliver outreach activities, thereby creating a robust,
supportive pipeline of scientists and ultimately diversifying the scientific
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this CAREER program is
to interrogate the interactions between ionic liquid-coated nanoparticles and
blood components. The Tanner lab at the University of Mississippi has
demonstrated that successful surface modification of poly(lactic-co-glycolic)
acid nanoparticles with a choline carboxylic acid-based ionic liquid results in
preferential adhesion of the ionic liquid-nanoparticles to different blood
components in whole blood. A key innovation will be determining the dynamics and
mechanisms of adhesion of the ionic liquid-polymeric nanoparticle composites
onto blood cell surfaces. The project will consist of the following three
objectives: advance knowledge on the mechanism of attachment between the ionic
liquid-nanoparticles and the cell membrane (Objective 1), assess the impact of
the hitchhiking on the cell membrane (Objective 2), and measure the strength of
the attractive forces and the effect of hitchhiking on adhesion to the blood
vessel wall (Objective 3). The PI will use a host of analytical techniques to
accomplish these objectives, including molecular dynamics simulations, optical
tweezers, liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry, and small angle X-ray
scattering. The educational objective of this CAREER program is the
establishment of the Increasing Minority Access to Graduate Education Rising
Science Star Program, an intensive mentoring program that immerses cohorts of
Mississippi’s African American Science Technology Engineering and Mathematics
students in research from their first day of college until their last (3
participants a year, 15 total). Partnering with the existing National Science
Foundation-funded Increasing Minority Access to Graduate Education program, the
project’s educational approach will provide the Rising Science Star Scholars
with a high degree of social, financial and academic support, paving their path
to graduate school and a scientific career. The PI will work in partnership with
the participants to travel back to their high schools to conduct outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.