* 2236580
* CAREER: Fungal pathogen induced dysbiosis alters microbiome assembly along host resource gradients: implications for biodiversity conservation
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Donald Walker, Middle Tennessee State University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 07/31/2028
* USD 835,678.00

Reptiles are among the most threatened species on Earth with approximately 20%
of taxa at risk of extinction. This threat is likely a cumulative effect of
environmental, climatic, and biotic factors, such as emerging pathogens.
Recently, a fungal pathogen of snakes (Ophidiomyces ophidiicola) has been linked
with population declines in the USA. This snake skin pathogen causes changes to
the skin microbiome by affecting the structure and function of bacterial
assemblages. The microbiome is an important component of host health and can
provide disease resistance to wildlife pathogens. This research will study
interactions between O. ophidiicola and skin microbiomes, with tangible
conservation implications. The proposed model system will advance understanding
of mechanisms that contribute to variation in microbiome communities across
gradients. The researchers propose to fill a knowledge gap by testing for the
effects of fungal pathogens on mechanisms of microbiome community assembly, and
more generally, advance fundamental knowledge of disease ecology. Outreach
activities with zoos and the Great Smoky Mountains National Park will help
inform the general public about wildlife disease and the importance of skin
microbiomes in biodiversity conservation. An undergraduate microbiome scientist
program at Middle Tennessee State University will contribute to the training of
the next generation of microbial ecologists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dysbiosis is
defined as disruption to the typical function or composition of a microbiome,
potentially resulting in adverse effects to host health. The proposed work will
use the snake fungal disease system to improve understanding of disease ecology,
bacterial-fungal interactions and dysbiosis to skin microbiomes. This will be
accomplished by studies spanning multiple scales (field, live animal, lab-based)
in ecology to allow for explicit hypothesis tests, cross validation of observed
ecological trends and establishment of fundamental rules governing pathogen
induced dysbiosis. The researchers will test the following hypotheses, H1:
Bacterial assemblages of reptile skin microbiomes are structured by interactions
with fungi across space, time and host ecology. H2: Variation in microbiome α-
and β-diversity are predictably altered by pathogen induced dysbiosis. H3:
Taxonomic and functional variability are attributed to metabolic niche effects
across a gradient of host resources and/or fungal metabolites. This research
will produce a comprehensive census of bacterial and fungal microbiome diversity
on reptile species with important contributions to inform experimental systems
focused on microbial interactions and disease ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.