* 2236789
* CAREER: Temporal Network Analysis: Models, Algorithms, and Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Ahmet Erdem Sariyuce, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 06/30/2028
* USD 180,865.00

Temporal networks are a powerful representation structure that support
understanding and characterizing various complex systems. Face-to-face human
contacts, financial transactions, and computer communications can all be viewed
as temporal networks where interactions are active only at certain points in
time. Analyzing such networks is important for various applications such as
maintaining cyber-secure environments in the context of national security.
Another example, in the context of a client-server network of interactions, is
determining whether there is a set of servers that interact with clients in an
unusually coordinated way. In the context of money laundering, the lifeblood of
criminal activities and a source of damages to economic competitiveness in the
U.S., can we detect the accounts involved in coordinated cryptocurrency
laundering while also performing licit transactions? This project devises a new
paradigm for analyzing temporal networks effectively and efficiently and trains
next-generation of computer scientists from diverse backgrounds by increasing
public scientific engagement, performing outreach to marginalized communities,
and course development. In particular, the investigator organizes workshops to
reach high-school students from Hispanic, Burmese, and Somalis communities in
the Buffalo area to inform and educate them about the basics of computer science
and network science. Outputs, such as an open-source software framework for
temporal network analysis and know-how on critical applications such as
intrusion detection and anti-money laundering, are designed to advance and
contribute to scientific understanding in various disciplines such as
cybersecurity, economics, finance, and social network
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project designs and develops motif-based
models and algorithms to analyze and process temporal networks. It will devise
generic formalizations in a bottom-up approach by first building primitives in
the microscale, then analyzing the subgraphs and periodicity in the mesoscale,
and lastly extending the techniques for graphs encountered in real-world
applications. This project broadens the knowledge with new models and algorithms
that can work on temporal networks with fine resolution and a large timespan. To
this end, there are two main research thrusts: (1) a framework for temporal
motif analysis; and (2) mesoscale structures and graphs in the wild. The
investigator performs theoretical and empirical evaluations for all the proposed
models and algorithms. In particular, this project considers two real-world
applications in collaboration with industry and government research labs; (1)
intrusion detection in bipartite cyber logs; and (2) anti-money laundering in
financial and cryptocurrency transactions. This project will make contributions
to the fields of graph mining and network science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.