* 2236014
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track H: Appropriate Rehabilitation Technology via Passive Tactile Stimulation
* TIP,ITE
* 12/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Asad Asad, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 12/31/2023
* USD 750,000.00

Stroke is a leading cause of serious long-term disability in the United States,
resulting in millions of Americans with motor impairments. Recent studies have
found that 55-74% of stroke survivors are not able to return to work after their
stroke. Stroke survivors from traditionally medically underserved communities
have even worse stroke recovery outcomes. Current rehabilitation technologies
that aim to help persons with disability recover after stroke are expensive,
clinic-based, time-consuming, and generally inaccessible to medically
underserved communities. In recent clinical trials, we demonstrated the
effectiveness of a low-cost, portable, take-home wearable technology for
recovery of movement: passive tactile stimulation. Our goal is to perform use-
inspired convergence research that brings this transformative technology to
commercial, social, and economic success in order to enhance quality of life as
well as employment opportunities for persons with movement disability after
stroke. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will accomplish this by participating in a
curriculum that strengthens team convergence and accelerates the development of
equitable, appropriate stroke recovery technology. In the first phase of the
project, we will finalize our interdisciplinary and cross institutional team
(including universities, hospitals, community organizations, and a new company;
generate use cases for government, industry, and society; and develop a
comprehensive research plan bolstered by initial prototype development,
qualitative research, and participatory design studies. In the second phase of
the project, we wi¬ll create a commercially viable, effective low-cost stroke
rehabilitation technology and dissemination model for long-term sustainable
societal impact after the end of the project. We will implement a participatory
design process for stroke technology to iteratively develop, test, and
disseminate the technology, focusing on access, usability, adherence, and
economics (effectiveness has already been shown through clinical trials). The
rehabilitative effects of this technology would be used nationwide and
eventually worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.