* 2236157
* NSF Convergence Accelerator: Track H: Restoring Arm Function with Connected Assistance and Rehabilitation Systems
* TIP,ITE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Conor Walsh, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 11/30/2023
* USD 750,000.00

This project, Convergence Accelerator Track H: Restoring Arm Function After
Stroke (RAFAS) will develop and translate a cloud-connected, soft, wearable
rehabilitation and assistance platform to restore arm function and independence
for stroke survivors, veterans, and others with upper limb disability. At the
heart of the development process are stroke survivors, caregivers, occupational
therapists, physical therapists, neurologists, and clinicians. The vision of
restoring arm function after stroke through new wearable technology is well
beyond the scope of a single-investigator proposal. These communities are
engaged via focus groups, development testing, formal protocols, and clinical
feasibility testing to maximize the translation potential of this technology.
RAFAS will enable a paradigm shift from the current ‘in clinic’ model of
rehabilitation to one of remote physical rehabilitation for persons with upper
limb disability. RAFAS’ broadening participation goal is to attract, train and
mentor the next generation of rehabilitation and assistive technology innovators
focused on use-inspired research while accelerating knowledge integration and
communication across traditional boundaries. Primary attention will be placed on
students and faculty who identify as racial/ethnic minorities, or are female,
veterans or persons with disabilities. RAFAS engages PWDs via a Patient Advisory
Board, a research webinar series, and workshops and panels that bring together
engineering students with persons with disabilities to discuss challenges and
opportunities for technology development. RAFAS supports hackathons, with
industry panels focused on bringing assistive technology to market and
undergraduate and graduate students via research experiences and mentoring.
Finally, outreach events targeted to female high school students and focused on
occupational therapy will encourage broader participation in the fields of
assistive and rehabilitation technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary Phase
I deliverables are: a minimal viable prototype of a wearable, adaptive
antigravity support to the upper limb that can be used in the home; estimation
and control algorithms using wearable sensors for remote assessment and
individualized assistance; a software app enabling independent use by patients
and therapists and a gap analysis to determine research and development goals in
Phase II to enable eventual translation. Phase II work will entail optimizing
the technology based on feedback from stakeholders and at-home pilots in Phase I
and running a larger remote telerehabilitation study to generate evidence of
improved outcomes and enable integration of remote rehabilitation into the new
insurance landscape. RAFAS brings to this effort a combination of skills and
expertise spanning: (1) the ability to create lightweight and flexible soft
wearable robots that can apply significant assistance without adding
restrictions; (2) the understanding of how to extract important clinic metrics
from noisy, raw wearable sensor data; (3) the foundational knowledge of
rehabilitation science and the most effective arm movements to encourage and
support occupational therapy/physical therapy; and (4) the capability to
establish an integrated experimental framework with human subjects to guide
ongoing technical development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.