* 2236920
* CAREER: Sedimentary signatures of large riverine floods to constrain risk and build resiliency
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Samuel Munoz, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 08/31/2028
* USD 460,399.00

Rivers represent critical economic corridors and refuges for biodiversity, but
infrastructure and ecosystems in floodplains remain vulnerable to flooding and
erosion. This project will improve flood hazard assessments for lowland rivers
by understanding and harnessing fluvial dynamics, thus improving the safety and
sustainability of river management science. A research plan focusing on
observing and simulating floodplain sedimentation to improve flood hazard
assessments is coupled with an education and outreach plan that broadens
participation in geomorphology and redefines rivers as dynamic features that
provide beneficial services to people and ecosystems. The research tests
hypotheses describing controls on fluvial sedimentation that are critical for
predicting and managing the accumulation of pollutants and sediments for
floodplain management and restoration. A diverse geoscience workforce and public
engagement are critical for the long-term move towards equitable and sustainable
river management, and this project is expressly designed to broaden
participation in Earth sciences through immersive research experiences for
community college students and to elevate public awareness of fluvial dynamics
through K-12 initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The traditional paradigm in
lowland river and floodplain management relies almost exclusively on systematic
stream gage data as the key dataset informing flood hazard assessments, while
largely neglecting the geomorphic dynamics and resulting sedimentary records
preserved in floodplains. This project builds on the PIâ€™s prior work in the
development and application of alluvial stratigraphic records by harnessing
recent advances in hydraulic modeling to constrain flood hazard assessments via
robust paleoflood estimates. The research objectives are to (1) establish a
long-term observatory to monitor floodplain sedimentation, (2) develop hydraulic
model simulations on modern and theoretical floodplain geometries, and (3)
integrate models and observations of sedimentation to link streamflow to
sedimentation patterns in a dynamic alluvial setting. The research plan
leverages state-of-the-art hydraulic modeling with an observational network of
environmental sensors and sediment cores to test a series of hypotheses
describing the landscape controls on alluvial sedimentation patterns, and then
it applies the findings to constrain flood hazard assessments through high
precision paleoflood estimates. This research is integrated with an education
and outreach plan designed to (1) attract, motivate, and train community college
students in geoscience research through an established internship program, and
(2) develop a platform for raising public awareness of dynamic fluvial processes
through K-12 initiatives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the
Geomorphology &amp; Land-use Dynamics and Hydrologic Sciences
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.