* 2236745
* CAREER: Power Management Solutions for Systems-on-Chip
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Mohammad Alhawari, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mahesh Krishnamurthy
* 08/31/2028
* USD 432,138.00

Advancements in semiconductor technologies and systems-on-chip have enabled
efficient and intelligent systems in automotive, edge computing, and internet-
of-things. A power management unit is a mainstream circuit that manages the
power flow in systems-on-chip using various power converters, including
switched-capacitor circuits. With the increasing demands for higher performance
and multifunctional systems-on-chip, designing efficient, compact, and
integrated power management unit faces many challenges. First, an accurate and
fast behavioral model for switched-capacitor circuits is required to assist
designers in optimizing various parameters at the early design stages. Second,
there is a critical need for better switched-capacitor circuits that can achieve
both high power and area efficiency. Third, efficient control circuits are
required to support switched-capacitor circuits and other power converters to
enhance power efficiency. The broad goal of this CAREER proposal is to pursue
innovative research directions in mixed-signal design at modeling, converter
architecture, and circuit levels to address these challenges and pave the way
for ground-breaking innovations in modeling and circuit implementations. This
CAREER proposal will significantly impact the research front by advancing the
knowledge in power management design and providing the research community with
new models and circuits that can be applied to various applications. The
educational aspects include filling the gap in the electrical and computer
engineering curriculum related to mixed-signal circuit design. The outreach
activities include developing a summer course for K-12 students through
collaboration with the K-12 Educational Outreach Office at Wayne State
University. Also, the activities will include collaborating with industry to
train students on chip design tools and provide them with timely and relevant
skill sets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER explores new design directions at
the modeling, converter architecture, and control circuit levels toward
efficient power management units. At the modeling level, a new resistor-network
behavioral model is proposed to describe the electrical characteristics of
generic switched-capacitor circuits over the entire operating frequency range,
unlocking new possibilities to optimize switched-capacitor circuits quickly and
accurately. At the architecture level, a new stacked charge pump is proposed
that provides a high voltage conversion ratio and superior area efficiency by
reducing the number of pump capacitors while maintaining high power efficiency.
At the circuit level, a new circuit family is proposed that can be used to
design power and area-efficient control circuits for various power converters,
including multi-stable analog memory for maximum power transfer, a low-power
clock generator that enables frequency and pulse width modulation and zero
current switching circuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.