* 2236402
* Scaffolding High Impact Practices to Increase Community College Student Engagement with Undergraduate Research
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2023,11/30/2025
* Jason Curtis, Cuesta College
* Standard Grant
* Connie Della-Piana
* 11/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by offering opportunities for
faculty and students throughout Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (STEM) to engage in undergraduate research experiences (UREs) and
thereby increase the success of STEM and non-STEM students attending community
colleges. Building on prior and current awards, this project aims to enhance and
extend undergraduate research experiences (UREs) throughout STEM programs at
Cuesta College, a Hispanic Serving Institution that also serves rural
communities in California. Recognizing the importance of offering opportunities
for students and faculty at community colleges to participate in UREs, this
effort intends to enhance and/or expand different types of UREs. These include
embedding undergraduate research experiences in established STEM courses and
opportunities (course-based undergraduate research experiences, fieldwork/labs,
research specific courses, stand-alone experiences, and a research-oriented STEM
seminar). An essential element of this effort is the establishment of a
community of STEM experienced and new faculty committed to the development and
implementation of UREs in their disciplines and programs of study. Based on
lessons learned from prior and current efforts, the project team draws on and
implements aspects of the Diffusion of Innovation theory to spread and propagate
UREs, scaffold high impact practices (a guided progression), and sustain
different formats of UREs at the college. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the
project is to establish a scaffolding approach or guided progression of student
participation in undergraduate research at the college by pursuing three
objectives. First is building on a faculty innovation group to develop,
propagate, and sustain UREs. Second is offering a broad range of URE
opportunities to at least 300 STEM and non-STEM students to explore foundational
research skills and research experiences. Third, and finally, is offering and
institutionalizing a STEM seminar open to all students interested in research
opportunities and career paths in STEM. The project intends to contribute to the
advancement of understanding of the impact of undergraduate research experiences
on student success and faculty learning. Knowledge generation, project outcomes
and associated types of UREs, and propagation are based on a data-to-action
oriented evaluation and project approach. To assess and document outcomes and
implementation, the project intends to develop and execute a variety of
quantitative and qualitative data collection and data analysis methods to
investigate the impact of faculty learning on undergraduate STEM education, such
as the effect of faculty participation in professional development activities on
the breadth and depth of a variety of high impact UREs and student participation
and success. The NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through its Institutional and Community Transformation track, the program
supports efforts to transform and improve STEM education across institutions of
higher education and disciplinary communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.