* 2236020
* I-Corps Team: Sustainable Battery Electrode Manufacturing with High Active Material Loading
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2022,02/29/2024
* Sunghwan Lee, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/29/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a battery electrode modification method to enhance lithium
(Li)-ion battery performance. The most widely used cathode materials in the Li-
ion battery for electrical vehicles are nickel (Ni)-rich oxides. However, the
low chemical and electrochemical stability, the large inactive material
requirement (typically 10-15%), and the high cost needed for the storage of
these materials due to the water adsorption on the surface hinder the further
advancement and large-scale implementation of the Ni-rich material for the
battery cathode. Through the proposed technology, the assembled cathode achieves
higher chemical and electrochemical stability, ultra-low inactive material
content in the cathode (less than 1%), and a significant reduction in the
storage cost to repel water in the air due to the stability in ambient air. This
new electrode manufacturing method may enable longer driving mileage of electric
vehicles and a longer battery life span.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on the development of a new battery cathode manufacturing
process, leveraging a unique gas phase conducting polymer coating technique
using oxidative chemical vapor deposition (oCVD). A multi-functional conducting
polymer prepared through oCVD achieves ultra-high active materials concentration
(up to 99%) due to the high conductivity and adhesive function of the oCVD
polymers. The oCVD polymers protect the cathode surface by limiting unfavorable
reactions and phases such as detrimental cathode/electrolyte interfacial phases
and water adsorption on the cathode surface. The increased active material
concentration and the protection ability effectively contribute to the
enhancement of lithium-ion battery capacity (10% higher), rate performance (14%
higher), and cycle life (550% longer), compared to those without oCVD polymer
coating. The proposed battery manufacturing technique is expected to mitigate
the performance degradation issues for high nickel cathode materials where a
trade-off exists between high battery capacity and high performance-retention
due to the interfacial phases and water adsorption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.