* 2236705
* CAREER: Mapping class groups, diffeomorphism groups, and moduli spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Bena Tshishiku, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2028
* USD 83,409.00

Topology is the study of spaces and their fundamental properties. Related to
this project, there are two foundational principles. First, a given space can be
fruitfully probed by understanding its symmetries. Second, if one wants to study
some collection of spaces (for a simple example, think of polygons in the
plane), then it can be helpful to turn this collection of spaces into a single
space (often called a moduli space) whose properties are illuminating. For the
educational component, the PI will organize topology workshops with the aim of
introducing graduate students to active areas of research and giving them tools
to contribute to these areas. The PI will orchestrate summer directed reading
programs that will help prepare undergraduate students for research and broaden
participation. Finally, the PI will continue his outreach to high school
students through math circles. Support from this grant will help increase
teacher involvement through events hosted on campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is concerned with group actions on manifolds and moduli spaces.
Regarding group actions, the focus is on determining when a group of isotopy
classes of homeomorphisms can be realized as a group of homeomorphisms. This
problem, known as Nielsen realization, dates back to the work of Nielsen in the
early 1900s and has connections to dynamics, foliation theory, and the geometry
of manifolds and fiber bundles. The moduli spaces of interest in this proposal
relate to low-dimensional topology and nonpositive curvature. A central goal is
to compute new homological and homotopical invariants of the moduli spaces of
interest. The specific research project are as follows. (1) Solve Nielsen
realization problems for 3- and 4-dimensional manifolds. (2) Study finite groups
actions on aspherical manifolds with exotic smooth structures using rigidity
results related to the Borel conjecture. (3) Show non-triviality of twist tori
in the homology of finite covers of moduli space by reducing the problem to
tropical geometry and combinatorics. (4) Construct new characteristic classes of
surface bundles using the curve complex. (5) Compute homotopy groups of
embedding spaces for high dimensional hyperbolic manifolds, building on work of
Farrell-Jones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.