* 2236741
* The evolution of anticipatory maternal effects versus maternal condition transfer effects in Trinidadian killifish
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2026
* Matthew Walsh, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Matt Carling
* 02/28/2026
* USD 686,321.00

It has long been known that changes in the environment can influence the ability
of mothers to provision their offspring. Therefore, when should mom evolve to
anticipate a change in the environment to best provision her offspring? This
research will address this question by testing hypotheses regarding the
ecological conditions that drive maternal offspring provisioning strategies. The
work focuses on Trinidadian killifish, which exhibit maternal provisioning
strategies that are easy to quantify. Additionally, killifish experience a wide
range of ecological conditions. Finally, killifish are easy to manipulate,
allowing for experimental tests of how natural selection influences offspring
provisioning. Therefore, this research is well-positioned to provide new
insights into how and why maternal provisioning strategies evolve. The work has
broad implications for understanding the mechanisms by which organisms respond
to environmental change. Further, it will improve researchers’ ability to
forecast how species respond to environmental stressors. The research goals will
be combined with a plan for broader impacts that that uses killifish as a model
to improve teaching, engage undergraduates from underrepresented groups in
research at a Hispanic serving institution, and provide public
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Much research has explored whether mothers
respond to predictable shifts in environmental signals by modifying offspring
phenotypes to best match future conditions. Yet, there is little evidence for
the existence of such ‘anticipatory maternal effects’. This shows that our
understanding of the evolution of maternal effects is incomplete. 'Maternal
condition transfer effects' represents an alternative to anticipatory effects
that occur when the environment experienced by females during development
influences offspring fitness. These effects are not driven by external signals
but are instead a byproduct of past environmental quality. Condition transfer
effects have received far less attention that anticipatory effects but are
likely quite widespread. Interestingly, little work has considered the
conditions that favor the evolution condition transfer vs. anticipatory effects.
This project will use populations of killifish on the island of Trinidad to
pursue three central goals. The research will: (1) determine if predator-
mediated divergence in resource availability favors evolutionary shifts in
maternal effects (i.e., condition transfer vs. anticipatory effects). (2) Test
the connection between divergent natural selection, maternal condition, and
offspring fitness via ‘offspring outplant experiments’. (3) Experimentally
evaluate the influence of resource availability on the evolution of maternal
effects via long-term perturbations performed in natural
streams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.