* 2236036
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track I: Toward Water Circularity: Mining Green Hydrogen and Value-Added Materials from Hypersaline Brines
* TIP,ITE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Chih-hung Chang, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 11/30/2023
* USD 750,000.00

This track I NSF’s Convergence Accelerator aims to converge advances in
fundamental materials science with innovative design and manufacturing methods
to couple their end-use and full life-cycle considerations for environmentally-
and economically sustainable materials and products. Guided by this principle
and motivated by the global goal of Net-Zero Emissions by 2050, this project
focuses on demonstration of a sustainable production and manufacturing process
for large-scale hydrogen deployment and critical materials mining from earth’s
abundant hypersaline brines (e.g., seawater). Hydrogen is a green fuel that can
help accelerate decarbonization processes, and materials such as Lithium and
Rare Earth elements that are critical to U.S. supply chain independence. This
project emphasizes transformation from a linear to a circular economy; it
enables a convergent, innovative team of universities, industry partners,
government agencies, and students/trainees to ensure that the knowledge
developed transitions effectively into many aspects of practice. The proposed
circular use of water for fuel by renewable energy and extraction of critical
materials for renewable energy production has broad societal impacts for a
sustainable future. This project integrates multidisciplinary thinking into the
undergraduate and K-12 curriculum, producing future engineers and scientists
with skills and interests to work on multidisciplinary problems. This research
supports and benefits the local community, such as the Oregon Coast’s Blue
Sector Partnership Network consisting of partners from workforce development,
school districts (CTE), industry, government, research, maritime,
municipalities, and blue technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims to
demonstrate the sustainable mining of green hydrogen in parallel with value-
added critical elements from hypersaline brines (e.g., seawater) for clean
energy applications. Motivated by the global goal of Net-Zero Emissions by 2050,
circular economy principles guide our development of sustainable processes for
materials/fuels production, utilization, and recycling. Seawater represents the
most abundant resource on the earth, with immense surface accessibility and
large amounts of solubilized elements imperative for clean energy technologies.
Seawater can also be split using renewable energy (e.g., solar) to obtain
hydrogen fuel, with benign oxygen gas as a byproduct. Hydrogen presents a zero-
emission fuel (producing water in a fuel cell), part of a circular sustainable
process. Developing an integrated solution for extracting hydrogen and critical
elements from seawater requires a multidisciplinary team from universities,
industry partners, government agencies, and students/trainees. With our patented
technologies and research results in critical areas, we aim to integrate
multidisciplinary knowledge, tools, and modes of thinking under the guidance of
circular economy principles to accelerate and converge our research to two
integrated prototypes: a mineral-water separation reactor and downstream
electrolyzer (producing hydrogen from the reduced-saline effluent). In addition
to this prototyping, we will also identify in Phase 1 additional areas of
expertise through team activities to prepare our Phase 2 project. In parallel,
we will engage local stakeholders (focused on the Oregon Coast with our local
expertise) and create training programs to educate next-generation workforces
with innovative circular concepts in both Phases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.