* 2236807
* CAREER: Photonics in the Lowest Symmetry Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Thomas Folland, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 05/31/2028
* USD 381,717.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Controlling the properties of light is
critical for creating advanced technologies such as laser imaging, optical
biosensors, and quantum optics. These technologies all use carefully prepared
light waves to effectively measure or communicate with the world around us. An
important part of developing these technologies is developing compact and
efficient components which control both direction and orientation of the light.
The capabilities of each component are critically determined by the materials
used in their construction, and how light interacts with these materials.
Notably, by using unconventional materials, scientists can generate new types of
light propagation, and make optical components both smaller and more efficient.
In this project, the research team will determine how certain classes of
crystals can be used to control both direction and orientation of light waves.
By coupling light to a class of crystals having a parallelepiped structure, it
becomes possible to engineer a unique light-matter interactions not seen in
materials with simpler structures. By performing these studies, the principal
investigator and team will discover new design paradigms for creating optical
components exploiting this class of crystals. A key part of this is developing
educational tools which can be used to educate the future photonics workforce on
how these materials work and can be utilized. We will specifically work with two
different groups – middle school and junior undergraduate students, which
typically receive limited education on photonics and the impact on modern
technologies. In the former case, we will work closely with middle-school
teachers to develop a series of lesson plans to target curriculum relevant
skills, including concepts in photonics. Our work with junior undergraduates
will then build on this, introducing research-like projects into the curriculum
to build key analysis skills required for the future quantum and semiconductor
workforces. Those efforts will be distributed online, which will allow teachers
nationally to access resources developed as part of this
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;The research
focuses on understanding how light can propagate in crystals with low
crystalline symmetry. Coupling light to materials with inherently low symmetry
produces shear polaritons, a phenomenon that can enhance a specific range and
orientation of wave vectors; this is not possible in more conventional
materials. Similarly, shear polaritons can offer control over the polarization
state, including the potential to realize photons with high angular orbital
momentum. This wave vector selectivity offers insensitivity to scattering, which
would enable the development of high-efficiency devices. However, there is a
clear and critical need to better understand the materials in which these form,
to leverage their unique chiral properties for photonics with control over
directionality and polarization. This study is designed to provide a framework
for identifying materials that produce strong shear phenomena, as well as
determining how they can be applied in developing future photonic technologies.
The utilization of natural crystal systems reduces the requirements for complex
nanostructure designs, reducing the cost associated with the new phenomena. The
team envision the creation of light sources through long-wave infrared range
that emit with high directionality linear, circular, or vortex polarized beams,
in the absence of external optics. This will be achieved over three objectives.
(i) Create a framework for understanding polariton propagation and scattering in
the lowest symmetry crystals, (ii) Demonstrate polaritonic emission in low
symmetry excitonic materials for asymmetric photoemission, (iii) Enhance
photonic materials education toward the goal of developing a future quantum
workforce. By the end of these objectives, the team will have understood the key
material and optical properties, which will enable development of technologies
based on the unique properties of shear polaritons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly funded by the Electronic and Photonic Materials (EPM) program
and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.