* 2236151
* Collaborative Research: Ecologies of Participation in Island Karst Science and Conservation: A Comparative Multimethods Approach
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Maria Perez, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 04/30/2026
* USD 300,591.00

Coasts and islands are at the epicenter of two compounding challenges:
variability in climate and the impact of development. Assessing the full scope
of these challenges requires going beyond what is physically visible or on the
surface of these environments. This is especially the case in coastal and island
environments with karst, landscapes in which water forms a distinct topography
including caves, sinkholes, and groundwater aquifers. Past and ongoing
exploration, scientific study, and conservation work in the coastal karst
systems in the US territory of Puerto Rico (PR) illustrate what is at stake with
the study and conservation of karst. While 20% of the United States (US) is
karst, it is the source of 40% of the American public’s drinking water. In
Puerto Rico these values are much higher, given that 37% of the territory is
karst. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing from theories and methods in Science and
Technology Studies (STS), anthropology, and geography, this collaborative
project between West Virginia University and the American Geophysical Union
examines the past and current role of mostly non-traditional actors and their
volunteer-based organizations dedicated to the exploration, science, and
conservation of karst in its varied forms. This knowledge will make an original
contribution to the history, present challenges, and future of geology,
archaeology, and other kindred sciences focused on critical zones environments
in the US. Data will include archival information, interviews, focus groups, and
ethnographic field-based visits with participants. This data will be used to
generate the spatial and social networks undergirding coastal karst science and
conservation efforts mostly carried out by cave explorers, scientists,
conservation practitioners and volunteers. The STS-informed Ecologies of
Participation Framework will inform this network analysis which aims to
operationalize the who, what, and how of participation in ongoing socio-
technical and environmental change. Results will be disseminated in both Spanish
and English to a broader audience using ArcGIS StoryMaps, an effective web-based
and interactive platform. These results will not only be valuable for
communities living on or near karst systems everywhere, but they are also
important for the general public given karst’s national and cultural
value.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.