* 2236541
* CAREER: Molecular Evolution of Oxidant Specificity in Bacterial Flavoprotein Amine Oxidases
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Frederick Stull, Western Michigan University
* Continuing Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 06/30/2028
* USD 454,200.00

With this CAREER award, supported by the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in
the Division of Chemistry, Frederick Stull from Western Michigan University is
studying the evolution of oxidant specificity in bacterial flavoprotein amine
oxidases. Flavoprotein amine oxidases are enzymes that catalyze critical
reactions throughout cellular metabolism, and most are thought to transfer
electrons from their organic substrates to molecular oxygen. It was recently
discovered that certain bacterial flavoprotein amine oxidase enzymes break this
mold by transferring electrons from their substrates to cytochrome c proteins
instead of directly to molecular oxygen. This project is evaluating if this use
of cytochrome c is more widespread among bacterial flavoprotein amine oxidases
than previously realized and seeks to understand how these divergent functions
evolved in this widespread enzyme family. The basic science knowledge obtained
from this project could be used to achieve reactions that are useful for
biotechnology. The graduate and undergraduate students involved in this project
will gain hands-on experience in spectroscopy, transient kinetics and enzyme
engineering. Selected enzymes from this project are to be used to develop a
hypothesis-driven laboratory course for undergraduate students that directly
contributes to the scientific goals of this project. This project will also
include development of a platform for facilitating the engagement of
undergraduate work-study recipients in hands-on research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Frederick Stull and his team have recently discovered that
nicotine oxidoreductase and pseudooxynicotine amine oxidase, both members of the
flavoprotein amine oxidase (FAO) superfamily, are not actually oxidases. These
two enzymes transfer electrons from their substrates to a cytochrome c protein
instead of O2, meaning that they are dehydrogenases. This project will test the
hypothesis that many other bacterial flavoprotein amine oxidases also use
cytochrome c as an oxidant instead of O2, severely undermining the oxidase
paradigm ascribed to the FAO enzyme family. The oxidant specificity of select
bacterial FAOs that are predicted to be cytochrome c-utilizing dehydrogenases,
as well as closely related oxidases, will be characterized by transient
kinetics. Experimental evolution, phylogenetic analysis and ancestral
reconstruction will be used to identify the structural features that dictate
flavin-oxidant reactivity in bacterial FAOs. Information from this study will
likely provide new insight into how flavoenzymes control the reactivity of their
flavin cofactors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.