* 2236054
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track H: Making Virtual Reality Meetings Accessible to Knowledge Workers with Visual Impairments
* TIP,ITE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Shiri Azenkot, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 11/30/2023
* USD 750,000.00

Virtual reality (VR) promises to be a widespread technology in the coming years,
but it is&lt;br/&gt;completely inaccessible to people with visual impairments.
One of the main advantages of VR is&lt;br/&gt;that it emulates real-life
interactions where people walk around and talk to one another
using&lt;br/&gt;naturalistic nonverbal behavior. Meanwhile, remote work has
become commonplace due to the&lt;br/&gt;COVID-19 pandemic. Employers,
researchers, and workers alike are expressing the need for&lt;br/&gt;VR
workplaces, where they can more easily brainstorm and hold discussions with
others.&lt;br/&gt;However, while researchers and practitioners have proposed
some methods for improving VR&lt;br/&gt;accessibility, no one has explored how
interpersonal communication in VR can be made more&lt;br/&gt;accessible. While a
blind person can hear someone speak, she misses out on onverbal
cues&lt;br/&gt;like proximity, gestures (waves, nods), and gaze. This proposal
aims to investigate how such&lt;br/&gt;nonverbal cues can be made accessible to
improve the overall accessibility of VR to support&lt;br/&gt;knowledge workers
with visual impairments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the
project is to develop user-centered, evidence-based guidelines
that&lt;br/&gt;stipulate how VR can be made accessible to knowledge workers with
visual impairments. The&lt;br/&gt;investigators will focus on remote work use
cases, where interpersonal communication and&lt;br/&gt;accessible shared
materials play central roles. Following user-centered design, they will
conduct&lt;br/&gt;focus groups with knowledge workers with visual impairments to
identify key use cases and&lt;br/&gt;needs. Then they will design low-fidelity
prototypes to explore accessible features. They will&lt;br/&gt;evaluate these
prototypes with target users and develop a preliminary set of guidelines.
If&lt;br/&gt;funded for Phase 2, they will iterate on the initial prototypes and
rigorously evaluate them in&lt;br/&gt;controlled studies. In addition, they will
refine the guidelines and work to incorporate them into&lt;br/&gt;existing
accessibility standards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.