* 2236743
* CAREER: State-Specific Characterization of Intermolecular Vibronic Mixing Between Dipyrrolic Pigment Subunits
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Jacob Dean, Southern Utah University
* Continuing Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 07/31/2028
* USD 425,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Jacob Dean of Southern Utah University
will investigate how specific molecular vibrations, stimulated from visible and
UV light absorption, influence the transfer of electronic energy between
molecules such as those relevant in light harvesting in biological and
engineered systems. Currently, understanding how key vibrations in the light
absorbing components of these systems shuttle energy is limited by the
complexity of systems and fast time scales at which energy dissipates. Dr. Dean
and his group will use advanced laser and time-resolved spectroscopies to
measure these vibrational motions in molecules. Undergraduate students,
including those from traditionally underrepresented groups, will be trained in
this research and in advanced physical chemistry research
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Laser spectroscopy coupled with jet cooling will
be used to enable mode- and quantum state-resolved interrogation of
intermolecular vibronic coupling and vibrationally-mediated energy transfer in
dipyrrolic subunits derived from native photosynthetic pigments and small
dipyrrole aggregates in the gas phase. Femtosecond coherence spectroscopy of
dipyrrole aggregates in solution at room temperature will subsequently be used
to assess the robustness of the resulting vibronic mixing models developed.
Better understanding of electronic-vibrational (vibronic) coupling between
molecules has the potential to reveal how energy is transferred within molecular
aggregates. Through improved structure-vibration-function elucidation, Dr. Dean
and his group aim to extend this knowledge to energy transport in biological and
engineered light-harvesting molecules and materials. In so doing, the
experimental articulation of a rich parameter space involving both the rapid and
directional understanding of energy transfer that entangles quantized vibrations
with pigment electronic states to optimize the aggregateâ€™s energy landscape is
envisioned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.