* 2236998
* CAREER: 3D Printing High Lipid Content Cultivated Meat to Minimize Livestock Environmental Impacts
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2028
* Rosalyn Abbott-Beauregard, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 03/31/2028
* USD 469,285.00

The current agricultural supply chain will be unable to sustainably meet the
world’s increasing demand for animal proteins. Currently, the majority of
livestock are reared in concentrated animal feeding operations causing
environmental, public health, and food security concerns. An emerging option is
to replace conventionally produced meat with meat-like tissues grown in the lab
(i.e., cultured meat). Cultured meat can help to reduce the environmental,
public health, and food security issues posed by commercial farming. However,
major scientific, technological, and educational barriers related to consumer
acceptance must be overcome. Developing cultured meat products (i.e., ground
meat and/or steaks) that have the texture, flavor, and familiarity of
conventional meat products will be critical to consumer acceptance. Current
cultured meat technologies are expensive and have focused on ground meat
products that do not re-create the three-dimensional (3D) tissue structures of
animal steaks, especially with regards to the distribution of fat in these
tissues. Therefore, the goal of this CAREER project is to establish a
fundamental understanding of the biological dynamics of fat accumulation in
muscle and develop 3D bioprinting techniques and parameters to create cultured
meat products that match the properties and structures of conventional meats. 3D
bioprinting would add minimal production costs while significantly increasing
the price point of the final cultured product, improving the financial viability
of the industry. In parallel, this proposal seeks to engage in educational and
public outreach activities to increase consumer awareness of the current animal
protein supply chain’s critical weaknesses and the biomedical engineering
solutions to relieve these, drive consumer acceptance, and grow the cellular
agriculture research community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator’s long-
term research goals involve 3D printing of biological tissues, mechanistic
studies of disease processes, and regenerative medicine. Towards this goal, this
CAREER project seeks to enhance consumer acceptance and palatability of cultured
meats by accurately reproducing the texture, properties, and costs associated
with conventional meat products. The Research Plan is organized under two
objectives: (1) Obtain a fundamental understanding of intramuscular fat
accumulation and (2) Print viable, lipid-laden adipocytes alone and into the
intramuscular space. These objectives will provide an open-source foundation for
the cultured meat industry and future work in human disease modelling,
regenerative medicine, and reconstructive medicine. The proposed studies will
(1) develop conditions for co-culturing mature adipocytes and skeletal muscle
cells that have not been achieved or reported, (2) make significant
contributions to creating new models of biological mechanisms for intramuscular
fat accumulation, and (3) establish parameters for the 3D bioprinting of tissues
that contain both lipid-laden adipocytes and skeletal muscle cells. These 3D
printed tissues should be mechanically and compositionally similar to their
biological counterparts and will significantly improve the fundamental research
and application-driven capabilities of technical personnel in cellular
agriculture and biomedical engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.