* 2236843
* CAREER: Hierarchical Robust Stochastic Control for a Flexible and Sustainable Power Supply
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Maryam Khanbaghi, Santa Clara University
* Continuing Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 08/31/2028
* USD 439,078.00

This NSF CAREER project aims to address challenges associated with power system
flexibility which is a key requirement for transitioning to a carbon free and
resilient electric grid. A controllable reconfigurable power system can
potentially reduce the impact of natural disasters and inherent randomness of
widely used renewable energy sources such as solar and wind. This is important
because volatility of renewable energies and increase occurrence of extreme
weather makes the system significantly more sensitive to changes and therefore,
harder to manage. The project will bring transformative change by providing a
general framework to model a multi-layer power system that takes into account
intermittent renewable energy sources and a robust scheduling scheme that will
help system operators to take the appropriate action for delivering power to
customers. This will be achieved first by introducing a new coordinated approach
for transitioning from the existing grid to a more agile one, and second by
developing a model based supervisory algorithm. The intellectual merits of the
project include a fundamental framework for the energy management of a
modernized electric grid that is agile, reconfigurable, clean and resilient. The
broader impacts of the project include an integrated effort attracting the next
generation of engineers to the field of power and energy and increase awareness
to the local underserved communities on the impact and utilization of renewable
energies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the proposed research, a series of novel
control strategies will be developed that not only provide operational
flexibility to the grid but also allow management and stabilization of the power
supply. Microgrids are the building blocks of this framework. The multi-level
control algorithm is based on a multi-layer stochastic model that incorporates
network constraints. The proposed control strategies have the following key
attributes: i) it is hierarchical in a sense that microgrids will connect and
disconnect from a network of microgrids as needed; ii) it is robust since it
will prioritize stability over optimality and, iii) it is stochastic to address
the intermittent character of renewable energies. The network constraints will
be addressed by using linear matrix inequalities based design. The results will
be validated in real-time hardware in the loop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.