* 2236996
* CAREER: Structural and mechanistic studies of RNA-mediated enteroviral genome replication
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2028
* Deepak Koirala, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 01/31/2028
* USD 343,727.00

Enteroviruses have a single-strand (+)-sense RNA genome containing complex RNA
elements that direct genome replication by recruiting viral and host proteins to
form ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complexes required for viral replication. Knowledge
of the 3D structures of these RNA elements and corresponding RNPs is essential
for understanding fundamental virological processes. The project will
investigate the structural and mechanistic underpinnings of RNA-mediated
enteroviral genome replication and determine how RNA structures exploit viral
and host proteins to promote replication during viral infections. The findings
can inform future therapeutic or preventive strategies to combat pathogens that
cause human diseases and global pandemics. The project will also provide
opportunities for RNA-centric research to a diverse group of high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students, encouraging them to pursue higher studies
and careers in RNA biochemistry, structural biology, or related STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will utilize antigen-binding antibody
fragments (Fabs) as chaperones for determining the crystal structures of
enteroviral replication-linked RNAs and RNPs and use biochemistry and molecular
biology tools to elucidate RNA-RNA, RNA-protein, and protein-protein
interactions. The objectives are to 1) determine the crystal structures of 5′
cis-acting replication elements (CREs) from seven major enteroviral genotypes
(enterovirus A-C and rhinovirus A-D), 2) elucidate the interactions of these
5′CREs with viral 3C, 3CD fusion, and human PCBP proteins, and 3) investigate
the crystal structures of 3′CREs and their RNPs formed within the 3′-end of the
(-)-sense RNA replication intermediate. The outcomes are expected to reveal
structure-function relationships that will provide new insights into the
replication mechanism of this major class of viral
pathogens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Genetic
Mechanisms and Molecular Biophysics programs of the Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences Division in the Biological Sciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.