* 2236412
* CAREER: Macroeconomic Policies: from Optimal Government Transfers to Regulating New Technologies
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Martin Beraja, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 05/31/2028
* USD 293,490.00

Government policy plays a key role in modern economies. In the short-term,
governments help stabilize business cycles. Fiscal transfers, such as stimulus
checks, have recently become an important tool in alleviating US recessions. Two
projects funded by this award quantify how large stimulus transfers should be
and to what extent they stabilize regional business cycles in a fiscal union.
Over longer periods of time, governments are responsible for regulating new
technologies and managing their consequences. New challenges brought to the fore
by digital and automation technologies motivate the remaining three projects
funded by this award. The projects investigate the misuse of artifical
intelligence to support surveillance states, the optimal regulation of digital
industries where data can lead to concentration, and how governments should
manage episodes of labor reallocation where new technologies displace workers.
By informing policy, these projects will benefit disadvantaged populations in
the US who are disproportionately impacted by recessions and automation, foster
US national security interests and democratic stability, and help ensure the US
remains a leader in the digital industries of the future. The educational
component of this award will disseminate the research findings to policymakers
and journalists, as well to graduate students through a tutorial ran by the
National Bureau of Economic Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The projects funded
by the award advance our understanding of core issues in macroeconomics, but
also connect to broader questions in political economy, industrial organization,
and labor economics. The first project recognizes that households' marginal
propensity to consume out of a stimulus transfer varies with its size. A key
determinant of such size-dependence is the durability of goods. The project
develops a state-of-the art model of durables demand, calibrates it to match key
moments in US micro-data, and uses it to quantify the optimal size of stimulus
transfers. The second project applies a semi-structural methodology for policy
counterfactuals to state-level US data to construct a US economy without fiscal
integration. The third project collects global data on facial recognition AI
trade. It documents new facts about US and Chinese exports of this surveillance
technology to autocracies and democracies. The fourth project builds a model of
the life-cycle of oligopolistic industries, such as digital industries where
data is a key input. The equilibrium features an initial firm entry phase,
followed by a shakeout and later industry concentration. The model is calibrated
to match US data on digital industries and is used to study optimal industry
regulation. The last project begins from the observation that worker
displacement is a common feature of many episodes of labor reallocation, such as
those induced by automation or the transition to clean technologies. Displaced
workers face reallocation and borrowing frictions in such episodes. The project
develops a heterogeneous agents model which incorporates these frictions. It
uses it to study second best policies that slow down technological adoption or
help worker reallocation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.