* 2236698
* CAREER - Insulin Signaling in Lygus hesperus: New Model Needed
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Andrew Nuss, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 05/31/2028
* USD 172,810.00

This CAREER project focuses on insulin signaling in Lygus hesperus, the western
tarnished plant bug. The project builds on the investigator’s previous work on
signaling pathways involving insulin and other neuropeptides in insects, and
more generally contributes to a better understanding of insect physiology. The
research will expand knowledge of how insects use hormones and neurotransmitters
to determine how to store energy, when to devote resources to growth and
reproduction, and how to balance these needs with inevitable aging and death.
Because this bug is a pest of several crops, a better understanding of its
physiology may lead to improved strategies for protection of the food supply.
The educational plan for this project includes creation of an insect physiology
course, a much-needed addition to University of Nevada Reno’s current course
offering, particularly for the scattered disciplines housing students studying
insect science at the university. Results from the insulin signaling research
will feed directly into course content as students research methods to design
experiments to answer physiological questions emerging from the project. In
addition, outreach to farmers and the public will provide information about how
the research results can be applied to improve farming practices, and to
demonstrate basic principles of insect physiology. In addition to course
development and outreach activities, the project provides laboratory research
opportunities for undergraduates to be recruited from an existing university
program aimed at low-income, first-generation
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Insulin signaling is widely conserved among
metazoans and is a central nexus for several physiological processes, including
metabolism, lifespan, development, reproduction, and immunity. Insects are a
diverse, species-rich group, and explorations in non-model organisms suggest
that much remains to be understood about the roles of insulin signaling outside
of traditional models such as Drosophila melanogaster. Therefore, the overall
goal of this project is to gain greater insight into the functions of insulin
signaling in Heteroptera, the true bugs. With this goal, L. hesperus, a pest
insect capable of feeding on more than 100 species of host plants as well as
other insects, was selected as a representative heteropteran to study insulin
signaling. Multiple molecular approaches will be utilized to elucidate details
of insulin signaling dynamics and their impacts on organism-scale physiological
processes. The objectives of this project are to: (1) explore the role of
insulin-like-peptide (ILP) signaling in carbohydrate storage in the L. hesperus
fat body, (2) determine the roles of ILP signaling in reproduction, and (3)
elucidate the dynamics of ILPs in regulating diapause. Ultimately, nutritional
inputs and storage in L. hesperus must be finely balanced with the need to
reproduce against the need to conserve resources during periods of low
temperature and food scarcity. This project explores these dynamics and will
provide a foundation for the investigator's career goal of understanding
fundamental functions of neuropeptides and peptide hormones in insects and other
arthropods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.