* 2236026
* EAGER: Deep Causal Representation Learning for Generalizable Visual Understanding
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Qiang Ji, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Eleni Miltsakaki
* 08/31/2024
* USD 308,000.00

The recent developments in deep learning have led to remarkable progress in
computer vison and other fields. Current computer vision systems, however, do
not perform well in a new environment different from its training environment.
This problem, if left unaddressed, could lead to predictive errors and hence
significant consequences for life-critical and high-stakes applications such as
autonomous driving, robotics, and manufacturing. To address this challenge, this
project introduces a novel deep causal learning framework using latent features.
Unlike most features that are observable, latent features are hidden. For
example, in an object recognition task, latent factors can be vectors describing
the scale and poses of objects extracted from the imageâ€™s pixels and labels of
every training image. The framework leverages deep learning to learn latent
feature representation and causal learning to enforce the feature representation
to form the direct causes and effects of the target variable that are invariant
across domains. In addition to enable computer vision systems to be safely
deployable in open-world environments, this project can significantly advance
other fields of artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning, including
transfer learning, domain adaptation, and lifelong learning. The project will
integrate research with education and involve undergraduate students in this
research by leveraging the existing programs at Rensselaer Polytechnic
Institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research explores a novel idea of
integrating causality into deep neural networks to enhance generalization,
fairness, and explanation. The project employs the Causal Markov Blanket (CMB)
to capture the underlying causal mechanism in the data. It further demonstrates
the optimal properties of the CMB features in predicting the target variable.
Finally, it introduces an end-to-end deep learning framework to efficiently
learn the CMB features for a target variable without causal sufficiency
assumption. The project will evaluate the framework on some computer vision
tasks. Despite its significant potential, this project investigates a relatively
less explored area of study in computer vision and machine learning. The goal of
the project is to generate preliminary results to demonstrate its feasibility
and to identify areas of improvements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.