* 2236493
* CAREER: Harmonic Analysis, Ergodic Theory and Convex Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Mariusz Mirek, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Jan Cameron
* 08/31/2028
* USD 142,710.00

Ergodic theory originated in the study of the statistical behavior of dynamical
systems that evolve in time. It is now a vital and growing area of research in
mathematical analysis with connections to a broad range of subjects, including
geometry, number theory, and combinatorics. The main purpose of this project
will be to develop new tools in harmonic analysis and combinatorics to
investigate questions central to ergodic theory and convex geometry. In ergodic
theory, the PI will consider a variant of the widely studied Furstenberg-
Bergelson-Leibman conjecture, for dynamical systems with the underlying
structure of nilpotent groups. In harmonic analysis, maximal operators over
high-dimensional convex bodies will be investigated in connection with the
isotropic constant conjecture, a major open problem in convex geometry. The
educational component of this CAREER project will contribute to the training of
students and postdoctoral fellows while promoting mathematics to the broader
community and encouraging the participation of individuals from underrepresented
groups. The PI will continue to supervise undergraduate and graduate students
and run his widely subscribed Ergodic Theory and Analysis online seminar series.
The PI will also organize five online, one-week workshops, which will combine
research training with professional development for undergraduate and graduate
students interested in pursuing further education and academic careers in
mathematics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary project aims to
develop new methods in harmonic analysis, number theory, and probability to
understand central problems in ergodic theory and convex geometry. The primary
focus in ergodic theory will be to understand norm and pointwise convergence
phenomena for linear polynomial ergodic averages, toward the goal of proving a
linear variant of the Furstenberg-Bergelson-Leibman conjecture in the context of
all nilpotent groups. The project will also investigate the maximal functions
corresponding to the Hardy-Littlewood averaging operators associated with convex
symmetric bodies. The longstanding question of whether dimension-free estimates
may be obtained for these maximal functions is related to the isotropic constant
conjecture in high-dimensional convex geometry, which in turn has inspired deep
and unexpected connections to many challenging questions in convex geometry,
Banach space theory, and beyond. Describing the optimal constant in the Hardy-
Littlewood maximal inequality in this setting would establish a new link between
the dimension-free conjecture and the isotropic constant conjecture, and a new
point of view on the latter problem, which has not yet been explored using tools
from harmonic analysis. In addition, the project will develop tools in Fourier
analysis and additive number theory toward a study of Weyl-type inequalities in
the nilpotent setting and their applications to a nilpotent Waring problem as
well as to a dimension-free variant of the classical Waring problem for
squares.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.