* 2236997
* CAREER: Tunable Graphene Microdevices for Multiplexed Detection of Biomolecules Beyond Diffusion Limit
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Seyedehaida Ebrahimi, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 03/31/2028
* USD 399,365.00

Existing and emerging electrochemical biosensors can achieve high sensitivity,
specificity, and stability in detecting biochemical molecules. However, label-
free and tunable sensors for detecting multiple biomolecules (multiplexed
detection) with high sensitivity and short measurement time are still beyond
maturity. The goal of this program is to lay the foundations for engineering
novel graphene-based biosensors to address these needs with biogenic amine
neurotransmitters as testbed. The research component of this CAREER program will
significantly advance the field of electrochemical sensing by 1) enhancing our
understanding of fundamental questions involving convergence of material-device-
readout knobs in design of electrochemical sensors, revealing the effect of
interface engineering and electrical gating on tuning sensor response, and
elucidating the impact of multimodal sensing and data fusion on enhancing
accuracy, specificity, and reliability, and 2) utilizing this knowledge in
innovating a new class of reliable, multiplexed, and tunable devices. The
research outcomes will provide a foundation for educational activities focused
on training graduate and undergraduate students, including minorities and
underrepresented groups. Multiple initiatives are integrated to increase public
engagement in biosensing science and technology, including creating new
laboratory modules for a biosensor-themed course, a summer workshop for teachers
from districts underrepresented in STEM, and a summer camp for pre-college
female students.&lt;br/&gt;This program aims at creating tunable and multiplexed
electrochemical biosensors with high sensitivity, specificity and rapid response
by developing new data-fused hybrid droplet-graphene microdevices. This CAREER
program integrates both experimental and modeling investigations which include
1) elucidating the correlation between plasma-assisted functionalization of
graphene and analyte-device interface engineering to enhance sensitivity and
tune specificity of graphene microdevice array; 2) developing a learning-based
multimodal electrochemical system for reliable classification of bioanalytes and
multiplexing; 3) understanding the fundamental limits of sensitivity versus
response time in a time-evolving system; 4) elucidating the fundamental
mechanisms for electrical gating as an in-situ knob to tune the reaction
kinetics at the graphene-analyte interface and hence the sensor response; and 5)
demonstrating the application of this system with a well-studied drug screening
neurosecretion cell model. This project is anticipated to have a long-term
impact on biosensor engineering by elucidating how interface and device
engineering influence detection limit and response time in time-evolving
electrochemical systems and how convergence with multimodal readout can
significantly enhance accuracy, specificity, and reliability of label-free
diagnostics. In addition, the outcomes will advance utilization of the growing
field of 2D material functionalization and devices in diagnostics,
bioelectronics, and life science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.