* 2236565
* CCSS: Collaborative Research: Quickest Threat Detection in Adversarial Sensor Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Ruizhi Zhang, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 08/31/2024
* USD 142,140.00

With the recent rapid development of wireless communication and advanced sensing
technology, rich and complex sequential high-dimensional data are made available
for a wide range of threat detection applications, e.g., intrusion detection,
anomaly detection, fake news detection, and false data injection detection.
However, the reliance on wireless communication and the sparsely spatial
distribution of these networked sensors make them vulnerable to adversarial
attacks, such as measurement manipulation and false data injection. Moreover,
threats are oftentimes caused by human factors, and thus any attempt to improve
the performance of threat detection algorithms may result in a dual effort to
devise more powerful counter-threat-detection techniques that leave less
evidence. In this project, a game-theoretic framework will be developed to
investigate the ultimate limits of the dual efforts for quickest threat
detection in adversarial networked environments. The investigators will co-
organize special sessions at conferences, workshops, and symposia on quickest
change detection to disseminate the research outcomes of this project, formalize
far-reaching research directions, identify new challenges in this emerging area,
stimulate the development of original research ideas, and foster
interdisciplinary collaborations. The investigators are committed to broadening
the participation of under-represented minorities and women both among the
graduate and undergraduate students in STEM education. The investigators will
enrich their current courses and further develop new courses on topics related
to this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is expected to make new
contributions to quickest change detection, adversarial learning, sequential
analysis, and game theory. A systematic methodology of developing Nash
equilibrium strategies for quickest threat detection in networked adversarial
environments will be developed, and their fundamental performance limits at the
Nash equilibrium will be theoretically characterized. This project consists of
three thrusts. The first thrust focuses on one data stream under adversarial
attacks with temporal structure. The second thrust focuses on the case with
multiple independent data streams. The third thrust focuses on networks with
graphic correlation structure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.