* 2236390
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track J: Increased Take-Up of Food Benefits and Consumption of Locally-Sourced Nutrient Dense Food among Vulnerable Populations (LOI L02619530)
* TIP,ITE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Eugene Caruso, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Michael Reksulak
* 11/30/2023
* USD 750,000.00

Millions of college students do not have access to healthy and sustainable food,
undermining their ability to graduate in a nation already witnessing one-third
of college students drop out. Food and nutrition insecurity also
disproportionally impacts minority and low-income students, aggravating social
and economic disparities and depressing the nation’s health, education, and
innovation outcomes. Unfortunately, there has not yet been sufficient research
to reveal where changes to this problem could have the most impact. Different
federally-funded programs address various aspects of this multifaceted
problem—e.g., food access, nutrition education, and the purchase and consumption
of fresh whole agricultural products—but none are sufficiently engaging enough
of the eligible population to deliver the desired benefit.&lt;br/&gt;The current
project meets this challenge with an effort to understand, converge, and improve
participation in three national Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Programs
(SNAP): SNAP Outreach, SNAP-Ed, and SNAP Incentive. National program convergence
will include insights across academic research and program evaluation to: 1)
advance understanding of what impedes—and what can increase—engagement in food
assistance programs and food security; and 2) guide, test, and refine evidence-
based interventions for greater healthy food access and consumption among
underserved student populations. The knowledge gained and disseminated may not
only reveal social and behavioral determinants of participation in SNAP, but may
also inform other social welfare programs with comparable goals and target
populations. Ultimately, this work will accelerate the awareness, tandem use,
and impact of programs to advance health and higher education outcomes across
California, and the nation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present project will
establish convergent and actionable insights regarding the factors that drive
participation in programs that address food insecurity and healthy food
consumption. Led by a multi-disciplinary and multi-institutional research team,
the work unites methods and knowledge across psychology, economics,
organizational science, statistics, and food and nutrition science. The research
team also has multiple well-established SNAP contracts and the recognition from
California Department of Social Services, Food and Nutrition Services, and
United States Department of Agriculture. &lt;br/&gt;To gain a deep understanding
of the interrelated issues preventing the widespread adoption of such benefits,
the first prong of the project entails a series of semi-structured interviews,
statewide surveys, program evaluations, and conceptual analyses to map out how
different types of stigma and misperceptions affect SNAP participation rates and
food security.&lt;br/&gt;A second prong of the project involves laboratory and
field experiments to understand the operation of specific factors that promise
positive impact, including: stigma reduction, awareness of nutrient-dense foods
and SNAP benefits, and positive narratives around food security, food
consumption, and food literacy.&lt;br/&gt;The third prong of the project
comprises an empirical evaluation of network pathways to maximizing the impact
of promising interventions. This involves identifying the structure of social
networks among SNAP-eligible college students, then intervening through those
networks to correct misbeliefs about food assistance and to replace stigmatizing
narratives around food assistance programs with empowering
ones.&lt;br/&gt;Finally, the project will synthesize learnings from the above
activities into a handbook identifying key gaps and blindspots supporting the
persistence of college food insecurity, while recommending specific, scalable
strategies to overcome them.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work offers significant
practical and theoretical merit. Practically, it will produce actionable
recommendations for program design informed by convergent scientific
literatures, evaluations of extant practice, and empirical research using
multiple methods. Theoretically, it will establish new insights into the
operation and impact of stigma, awareness, narrative, and other as yet
undiscovered factors driving attitudes and behaviors toward food in social
contexts. Together, these advances can catalyze both understanding and
effectiveness of efforts to establish nationwide food
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.