* 2236283
* Building Cloud-Based Experiential Blockchain Learning Modules for Cybersecurity Education
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Kaiqi Xiong, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 02/28/2026
* USD 149,940.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing blockchain
learning modules to improve cybersecurity education for both computer science
and non-computer science students. The remarkable growth of cybersecurity
threats affirms the importance of engaging undergraduate students in adaptive
hands-on learning-based education. The current number of highly skilled
professionals in the cybersecurity market does not align with the increasing
growth of cybersecurity threats. In addition, blockchain technology, as a vital
component of cybersecurity markets, is expected to have a massive impact on both
the public and private sectors. Broadening curricula and providing hands-on
learning practices for undergraduate STEM students will help address the need
for well-prepared professionals in blockchain technology. The project intends to
implement innovative learning strategies and resources to enhance blockchain and
cybersecurity education by leveraging existing NSF cyberinfrastructure resources
and hands-on lab experiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is
to improve student learning outcomes associated with blockchain technology. The
proposed strategies will include several activities: 1) integrating open-ended
design along with evidence-based and knowledge-generating experiences into lab
experiments, 2) accomplishing teamwork in flexible and portable labs, 3)
creating online and in-person learning communities, and 4) overcoming the
isolation of single location experiments to make possible multi-domain
interactions. In addition to designing a new course for blockchain and
cybersecurity, the project team plans to develop and integrate experiential
online learning modules into several existing courses. The developed courses and
learning modules have the potential to generate new knowledge of how NSF-funded
cyberinfrastructure resources can be easily and efficiently used in
cybersecurity education through blockchain labs. The project team plans to
disseminate the developed modules to faculty development workshops and STEM
camps for high school students to broaden participation in computing. The NSF
IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through its Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.