* 2236497
* CAREER: Predicting Biofilm-Bound Sediment Dynamics Through Multiscale Experiments
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Judy Yang, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Justin Lawrence
* 08/31/2028
* USD 265,956.00

Sediment transport is a key process controlling coastal and riverine erosion,
which costs the U.S. billions of dollars per year. Most natural sediment, such
as mud and fine sand, inevitably harbors microbial biofilms. Biofilms have been
shown to alter the threshold and rate of sediment transport by up to 40-fold.
However, predictive sediment transport equations that account for the impacts of
biofilms are lacking. A key challenge in developing such predictive equations is
that the transport of sediment at macroscale (&gt; 1 m) is controlled by
biofilms at micro (10^-6 to 10^-3 m) to mesoscale (10^-3 to 10^-1 m). This study
aims to combine micro- to mesoscale flow-cell and imaging technology with
macroscale flume experiments to quantify the impacts of micro- to mesoscale
biofilms on macroscale sediment transport. Predictive equations for biofilm-
bound sediment transport will be developed. The results of this study will help
improve predictions of coastal and riverine erosion, which will guide future
coastal and riverine restoration projects, and support better predictions and
control of the spread of biofilm-bound particulate contaminants. In addition,
multiscale hands-on educational activities based on the proposed research will
be developed and integrated into teaching, mentoring, K12 education, and public
outreach. These activities will introduce the essence of the research to a
diverse range of young learners, including female and Native American students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed research is to (1) quantify the
impacts of sediment size and hydrodynamic conditions on the properties of micro-
to mesoscale biofilms on sediment surfaces; (2) predict the macroscale transport
of suspended microscale biofilm-sediment aggregates; (3) predict the onset of
bedload transport for sediment covered with mesoscale biofilm mats.
Systematically controlled experiments with submicron resolution confocal
microscopic imaging will be conducted in microfluidic flow cells to visualize
and quantify the development of micro- to mesoscale biofilms on sediment
surfaces and the formation of biofilm-sediment aggregates. Flume experiments
combined with digital imaging, tensile tests, rheometer measurements,
hydrodynamic measurements, and topographic measurements will be conducted to
quantify the impacts of biofilms with varying morphological and rheological
properties on macroscale sediment transport. The results from both microfluidic
and flume experiments will be used to develop predictive equations for the
transport of suspended biofilm-sediment aggregates and biofilm mat-covered
bedload.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.