* 2236374
* Increasing the Effectiveness of Justice, Equity, Diversity, and Inclusion-Focused Institutional Change Teams through a Community of Transformation
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Nadia Kellam, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 09/30/2026
* USD 590,387.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by increasing the effectiveness
of organizational change efforts, so that university science and engineering
programs are able to attract and retain students and faculty from diverse and
minoritized communities, contributing to a more innovative and representative
workforce. Change efforts in higher education are challenging, in part because
faculty have not received training in organizational change, and in part because
effective change needs involvement from diverse stakeholders beyond the
professoriate. As a consequence, institutions may continue to use policies and
practices that do not effectively address gaps in participation, such as for
students of color, women, and people with disabilities. Previous research on
organizational change in higher education highlights the importance of social
relationships for equipping faculty and other stakeholders to make significant
changes to their beliefs and practices. In that vein this project will create a
cross-institutional Community of Transformation (CoT) to support university
change agents who are working to make changes focused on justice, equity,
diversity, and inclusion (JEDI) in their own departments and institutions. This
approach is a particularly good match for JEDI-centered organizational change,
which requires not only individual adoption of new practices, but also
transformation of institutional structures and practices. Through an innovative
approach to community building and storycrafting, the project intends to help
CoT members make significant JEDI-centered institutional change efforts, learn
from one another’s experiences, and learn effective change strategies towards a
more just future. This work aims to advance understanding of how CoTs can help
JEDI-oriented institutional change efforts thrive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project plans to convene a cross-institutional CoT of JEDI change agents in
engineering. Through both virtual and in-person events, participants will
increase their resilience and skills in enacting change at their institutions,
build community and co-support for each other as change agents, and increase
their individual and collective agency to create organizational change. This
project hopes to provide key insights into improving faculty’s change agency by
integrating professional development into the CoT, fostering relationships
through which members will learn from each other, and evaluating how a cross-
institutional CoT can improve change agents’ capacity to improve their own
departmental and institutional systems to broaden participation in STEM and
advance JEDI outcomes. These key insights will be developed through research on
the CoT participants and their efforts to promote change. The research team will
use narrative and discourse methods to analyze CoT activities and surveys,
interviews, and focus groups with CoT members. The NSF IUSE: EDU Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through its Institutional and Community
Transformation track, the program supports efforts to transform and improve STEM
education across institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.