* 2236137
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track J: Building a digital twin for national-scale field-level crop monitoring, prediction, and decision support
* TIP,ITE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Fei Chen, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Mike Pozmantier
* 11/30/2023
* USD 749,972.00

Crop production in the U.S. feeds not only the U.S. but also the world. During
the 2020/2021 fiscal year, U.S. exports accounted for over 25% of total grain
traded globally. A healthy crop cropping systems (CCS) is vital for achieving
food and nutrient security of the U.S. and the world and enhancing the
competitiveness of U.S. agriculture in the world market. Yet, crop production
creates large environmental footprint. The USDA Agricultural Innovation Agenda
calls for increasing U.S. agricultural production by 40% while cutting its
environmental footprint in half by 2050. Sound crop management decision-making
is a key in reaching this ambitious goal. Traditionally, crop management
decisions are made by individuals based on their empirical judgment, which is
often subjective and far from optimal. On the other hand, the science-based,
data-driven approach for crop management decision-making relies on timely and
accurate information on current and predicted future conditions of crop, soil,
weather, and market to make optimal decisions. Studies demonstrated that the
data-driven approach can overcome the inherent deficiencies in the empirical
approach and bring significant economic and environmental benefits. However, it
remains a challenge for stakeholders to utilize the data-driven approach because
they don’t have full and effective access to the timely and accurate information
and lack facilities or knowledge to process the information. This project will
provide such timely information and decision support to stakeholders for
enabling the data-driven optimal decision-making nationwide at field scales by
developing the CropSmart Digital Twin (CSDT). CSDT will not only accurately
represents the current conditions, but also predict, with acceptable confidence
levels, future conditions of CCS with hypothetical “what if” scenarios,
resulting in actionable predictions. The project will provide significant help
in reaching the USDA Innovation goal and greatly enhance food and nutrition
security of the U.S. and the world.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Crop production is the
foundation for food and nutrition security in the U.S. and the world. However,
it also creates large environmental footprint. The USDA Agricultural Innovation
Agenda calls for increasing U.S. agricultural production by 40% while cutting
its environmental footprint in half by 2050. The data-driven approach for crop
management decision-making, which relies on timely and accurate information on
current and predicted future conditions of crop, soil, weather, and market to
make optimal management decisions, has demonstrated its great potential to help
USDA reach its ambitious goal. However, it remains a challenge for stakeholders
to adopt the approach because they don’t have effective access to the decision-
ready information (DRI) and lack facilities or knowledge to process the
information. This project proposes to build the CropSmart Digital Twin (CSDT)
with innovative Earth system DT technologies to facilitate the data-driven
approach. The overarching goal is to ensure food and nutrition security by
enhancing crop productivity and reducing environmental footprint in the U.S.
through wide adoption of the data-driven approach enabled by CSDT. The major
project activities include: (1) understanding stakeholders’ requirements on DRI
and decision support; (2) identifying existing data, technologies, and gaps for
CSDT; (3) quickly prototyping CSDT by integrating existing technologies and
developing gap-filling technologies; 4) broadening participation and impact by
training agricultural workforce through comprehensive extension; and (5)
establishing a community-based CSDT network for long-term sustainability. This
project explores the convergent approach for quickly constructing an operational
DT through integration of multi-disciplinary components and services with
interoperability technology. It demonstrates the advantage of multi-disciplinary
collaboration and feasibility, usability, and value of DT as a multi-
disciplinary integration platform for enabling the data-driven approach. The
project will help USDA reach its Innovation Agenda goal and enhance food and
nutrition security of the U.S. and the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.