* 2236219
* Development of Inclusive STEM Curriculum Using Data Science Innovations of W.E.B. Du Bois to Promote Diversity in Science
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Camila Alvarez, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 06/30/2026
* USD 799,964.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by developing, evaluating, and
disseminating novel curricular materials that aim to increase engaged student
learning and promote diversity and inclusion in undergraduate science courses.
The new materials will be of broad importance as they are intended to teach the
process of scientific reasoning and data visualization across a range of
science, technology, engineering, and math courses. Curriculum materials will
feature the early 20th century work of the foundational Black social scientist,
W.E.B. Du Bois who pioneered data visualization techniques that are still
considered state of the art across science disciplines. Additionally, centering
the scholarly work of Du Bois is of importance as he investigated the social
causes of racial inequality and promoted empowerment of Black scholars in ways
that were accessible for broad audiences. The project team plans to include
faculty and students from multiple institutions and science disciplines to
contribute to curriculum development and participate in testing its impact. The
project intends to measure how the curriculum influences undergraduate student
learning, sense of belonging in science, and persistence in science. Curricular
materials and study results will be widely shared in an open, online repository,
which could benefit large numbers of students and faculty in undergraduate
science courses across the country. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to
develop, implement, and assess the Du Bois curriculum module that could be
implemented in a variety of science courses during three, 50-minute class or
laboratory sessions, along with three homework assignments. Undergraduate
students will be engaged in exploring the scholarly work of Du Bois in data
science, using data analysis and visualization techniques employed by Du Bois
with domain-appropriate data for their particular disciplinary course, and
completing metacognitive written reflections on their learning. The curriculum
will be developed in collaboration with science faculty and students at each of
the three partner institutions – a Hispanic Serving Institution, a Historically
Black College and University where Du Bois earned a degree, and a top-ranked,
Ivy League and Primarily White Institution – each of which has unique student
populations. Developed curriculum will be piloted in 40 courses reaching over
1,600 students across the three collaborating institutions. The project will
test the hypothesis that implementation of this inclusive curriculum can promote
science learning and sense of belonging among undergraduate students, in
particular fostering positive science associations and reducing stigma
associated with scientists from marginalized backgrounds. Investigation of
curriculum impact will use a pre/post-assessment design and published assessment
tools that have evidence of validity for measuring constructs such as: 1)
belonging, 2) positive (stereotype boost) vs stigmatized (stereotype threat)
associations with racial and ethnic identity and scientist identity,
stereotypes, and relatability, and 3) self-efficacy. Further, the project will
collect assessment evidence in course offerings that use the module intervention
as well as in course offerings that do not, enabling direct analyses to test for
shifts in student assessments over time that are associated with the
intervention. The project has strong potential to advance understanding of how
development and implementation of curriculum highlighting the accomplishments of
scientists from marginalized groups might promote student success and retention,
while also integrating the teaching of science concepts and social justice. The
NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through its Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.