* 2236611
* CAREER: Leveraging soil viromics to unravel ecological patterns in complex communities
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2027
* Joanne Emerson, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 12/31/2027
* USD 820,312.00

Soil microbes cycle nutrients that sustain plants, and these microbes are
susceptible to viral infection. In the oceans, viruses kill up to 40% of
microbial cells daily, impacting food webs and releasing nutrients. A teaspoon
of soil can harbor thousands of viral species, but the role of viruses in soil
remains a mystery. Little is known about which viruses are where, when, or why.
This project will investigate how soil viral communities differ over space and
time. The researchers will study how water content affects viral dynamics and
how soil viral diversity is maintained. This work will require computational
analyses of large datasets. A new ‘Bioinformatics for Biologists’ course will
provide undergraduate students with hands-on training in these skills. The
course will reach transfer students and other underrepresented groups in STEM,
promoting the development of a diverse STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will elucidate the spatiotemporal dynamics of soil viruses at the UC
Davis Jepson Prairie Natural Reserve near Davis, CA. Using viromics
(metagenomics of the viral size fraction), soil viral community biogeography and
successional patterns will be compared within and across two grassland habitats
that experience different amounts of mixing. The mystery of viral survival in
seasonally dry soils will be explored to examine the roles of viral dormancy and
seed banks in maintaining soil viral diversity. First, the researchers will
establish local biogeographical patterns and evaluate the distance-decay
relationship for soil viral communities in two grassland habitats. Next, they
will compare intra- and inter-annual viral community successional patterns over
space in dispersal-limited and well-mixed soils. Finally, they will apply a
suite of DNA sequencing and experimental approaches to identify viruses in the
cellular and acellular fractions of dry soils. This project will also pilot an
undergraduate bioinformatics course, consisting of hands-on computational
analysis modules co-led by teams of postdoctoral researchers. In addition to
training and research opportunities for undergraduates, the course will
facilitate pedagogical training for the postdoctoral
instructors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.