* 2236693
* CAREER: Molecular Modeling of Ring Polymer Mechanics - Expanding Applicability of Ring Polymer
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Ting Ge, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvio May
* 05/31/2028
* USD 203,849.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports an
integrated research, education, and outreach project on the mechanics of ring
polymers. Common polymeric materials include plastics and elastomers, as used in
car bumpers and tires, respectively. Mechanical properties, such as
stretchability, softness, and fracture toughness, serve as one critical
foundation for the proper functions of polymeric materials. The design of
polymer mechanics starts with the synthesis of polymer molecules. While
conventional polymers are made by linking monomers to long linear chains with
open ends, recent substantial progress in polymer chemistry has enabled the
synthesis of ring polymers as closed loops. Ring polymers offer unprecedented
building blocks to transform polymer mechanics because various topological
structures can be introduced through the unique loopy conformations of ring
polymers. In this project, the PI will combine molecular simulations and theory
to identify transformative ring-topology-based pathways to tailor polymer
mechanics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team of the PI will address fundamental
questions that need to be answered for harnessing the synthetic capability of
controlling ring polymer topology to design novel polymeric materials with
tailored topological structures and mechanical properties. The combined
molecular simulations and theory will elucidate the dependencies of the ring-
polymer-based topological structures on experimentally controllable parameters
as well as the relations between the topological structures and mechanical
properties of ring polymers in the bulk, at polymer interfaces, and in
nanoparticle polymer composites. These efforts will be connected to experiments
that will guide the choice of the system parameters and test the predictive
capability of the computational and theoretical research to carried out.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI’s teaching and scientific outreach will leverage
the rich and novel research portfolio of ring polymer mechanics, especially
molecular simulations. Simulations derived from the PI’s research will act as
the major components of on-site workshops for high school students, research
projects for summer students, and tutorials for learners of molecular
simulations. With the vivid rendering of the microscopic world, molecular
simulations are well-positioned to disseminate molecular science to the public.
The PI’s team will design simulation-based demonstrations for visitors to local
museums as well as viewers of online media. The activities will benefit diverse
participants including members of economically disadvantaged families and
underrepresented minority groups in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports an integrated research,
education, and outreach project focusing on the role of ring polymers in
transforming polymer mechanics that serve as the foundation for the proper
functions of versatile polymeric materials. Novel ring-polymer-based topological
structures include the non-concatenation of rings, the threading of a ring by
linear polymer chains, and concatenated “Olympic” rings. These topological
structures differ qualitatively from the entanglements in conventional linear
polymers and their derivatives and are anticipated to enrich the topology-based
pathways to tailor the mechanical properties of polymers, such as
stretchability, softness, and fracture toughness, for customized applications.
In this project, by combining molecular simulations and theories, the PI’s team
will delineate the microscopic picture of ring polymers in the formation of
topological structures and the mechanical response of various systems in the
bulk, at polymer interfaces, and in nanoparticle polymer composites. The
quantitative relations necessary for integrating ring polymer chemistry and
physics into the molecular engineering of polymer mechanics will be identified.
The team of the PI will work closely with experimentalists who synthesize ring-
polymer-based systems and characterize their mechanical properties to test the
results of the computational and theoretical work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will validate the transformative ideas that expand the
capabilities of ring polymers in polymer mechanics and advance the frontier of
knowledge about ring polymers. Molecular simulations have precise control of
polymer topology and direct access to microscopic information. Coupled with a
topological analysis, the simulations will provide unparalleled insights into
the role of cyclic topology in mechanical deformation and fracture. Traditional
theories for the elastic, plastic, and fracture mechanics of polymers will be
extended by incorporating more recently established models for the unique
conformations and dynamics of ring polymers. The computational and theoretical
efforts will motivate the refinement of chemical synthesis techniques, spur
experimental studies of ring polymer mechanics, and thus set a new paradigm of
integrating molecular simulations and theory with chemistry and mechanical
engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI’s teaching and scientific outreach
will leverage the rich and novel research portfolio of ring polymer mechanics,
especially molecular simulations. Simulations derived from the PI’s research
will act as the major components of on-site workshops for high school students,
research projects for summer students, and tutorials for learners of molecular
simulations. With the vivid rendering of the microscopic world, molecular
simulations are well-positioned to disseminate molecular science to the public.
The PI’s team will design simulation-based demonstrations for visitors to local
museums as well as viewers of online media. The activities will benefit diverse
participants including members of economically disadvantaged families and
underrepresented minority groups in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.