* 2236689
* CAREER: Frailty Assessment for Older Adults with Walking Disabilities using Dynamical Modeling of Cardiac, Brain, and Motor Systems in Response to Provocative Testing
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2027
* Nima Toosizadeh, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 12/31/2027
* USD 461,610.00

Frailty syndrome in older adults results from deterioration of many
physiological systems. To diagnose frailty, clinicians consider weight loss,
muscle weakness/strength, cognitive ability, walking speed, and endurance as
well as level of physical activity using separate assessments that can be
difficult for patients. To make frailty diagnoses more accurate and testing
easier for patients and clinicians, the project will develop a new strategy that
tests and measures the combined interactions of the multiple systems that are
impacted by frailty, including the musculoskeletal, heart, and brain systems.
This new model will give researchers a better picture of the impairments due to
frailty in all aging patients, with a focus on walking disabilities and heart
disease. This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project will
integrate hands-on education activities within the research and provide
opportunities for students to work within hospital and research environments.
These efforts will support underrepresented students in the development of a
Science, Technology, Engineering, and Math plus Medicine (STEM+M)
identity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching research goal of this CAREER
project is to better understand and model aging-related physiological deficits
due to frailty in response to adverse events using a new platform that tests
upper-extremity function in older adults with walking disabilities. The model
will be tested among older adult patients with advanced heart disease. The
underlying mechanisms leading to frailty are factors related to inflammation and
hormonal dysregulation that shift homeostasis from an anabolic to a catabolic
state. The dominant symptom of frailty progression is muscle loss and weakness,
which in combination with cognitive impairments and deficits in cardiac
autonomic control can compromise the response to stress in frail individuals.
This research will implement a method based on nonlinear state space
reconstruction to characterize dynamic interactions between physiological
systems in response to provocative testing of upper-extremity function. Motor
performance, cardiac automimic control, and brain function during the
provocative test will be assessed using motion, electrocardiogram, and
functional near-infrared spectroscopy sensors, all of which are wearable and
feasible to implement broadly. Research outcomes are expected to address two
critical questions: 1) can a dynamic stress-response model of physiological
systems using a sub-maximal stress test replicate the results of real-life
stress?; and 2) to what extent considering the interactions between multiple
physiological systems explain frailty characteristics in the stress-response
model? To test these hypotheses, the research objectives are to: 1) develop a
multimodal frailty score using the stress-response model in comparison with
available frailty tools and biomarkers leveraging feature engineering for
machine learning; and 2) determine the association between the frailty score
with adverse outcomes after therapy for advanced heart disease patients. In the
education plan of this project, students will participate in research to design
and develop the frailty model and toolkit. Beyond student training, the project
will provide the opportunity to educate heart disease patients with walking
disabilities and their caregivers about the benefits of localized sub-maximal
exercises to enhance physical and mental health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.