* 2236354
* NSF Convergence Accelerator: Track H: Mobility Independence through Accelerated Wheelchair Intelligence
* TIP,ITE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2023
* John Rogers, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 11/30/2023
* USD 724,415.00

The most ubiquitous assistive machine is the power wheelchair. It endows
independent mobility to many with motor impairments that result from disease or
injury. Yet, there are millions for whom the independent operation of power
wheelchairs remains overly burdensome, or even entirely inaccessible. For people
with limited movement capabilities, current control interfaces struggle to
effectively capture commands from their bodies, and there is a lack of driver
assistance options that ensure safe and effective wheelchair driving. The result
is a deprivation—for persons with disabilities, and their caregivers—of
independence and engagement within the community and workforce. This project
proposes to accelerate the accessibility and utility of power wheelchairs by
radically changing how control inputs are captured from the human body and
transferred to the machine, and by leveraging practical machine intelligence to
enhance safety and facilitate independent wheelchair operation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Phase 1 acceleration will develop an assistive
wheelchair prototype, that greatly expands access to independent mobility by
those with severe motor impairments—which is significant for both quality of
life and participation in the workforce, and by both persons with disabilities
and their caregivers. The partners on this convergence accelerator include
stakeholders to provide hands-on use and clinical expertise that guides the
prototype design, and engineers to realize and later translate that design. The
partnership spans non-profits (Team Gleason, Shirley Ryan AbilityLab), academia
(Northwestern University), and industry (LUCI, Relay Robotics, Function
Engineering). The broadening participation plan engages wheelchair end-users who
have ALS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The year 2020 saw the first commercially-
available, FDA-registered driver assistance system for power wheelchairs enter
the market (LUCI). There exists a gap, however, between their (subtractive-only)
assistance and the automation achieved by autonomous robot companies within
dynamic human environments. From active steering around obstacles to semi-
autonomous navigation, the potential impact for active assistance is tremendous.
The assistive wheelchair market is ready for the integration of such
capabilities, and persons with degenerative diseases in particular need this
greatly expanded scope of assistance without delay. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Phase 1 work will accomplish the following research thrusts, each of which will
produce a hardware and software deliverable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;• Thrust 1:
Bridging the gap in accessible wheelchair control between drivers who can
operate a joystick and those who cannot, through the contribution of a novel
flexible control interface that conforms to the user and offers fully expressive
wheelchair control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;• Thrust 2: Modernizing and
democratizing the development of future wheelchair input mechanisms, through the
contribution of an open-source and digital API for bilateral communication
between wheelchair control systems and input devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;•
Thrust 3: Advancing safety and independence with wheelchair intelligence,
through expanded wheelchair assistance that incorporates commercial-grade robot
navigation capabilities into the only commercially-available, FDA-registered
driver assistance system for power wheelchairs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By the end
of Phase 1, two prototypes that integrate all deliverables will have been built,
that consist of: (1) a robotic navigation and safety system, built atop a LUCI
power wheelchair, that (2) shares control with the human driver, who provides
control commands through (3) the novel flexible interface that communicates with
the wheelchair control system via (4) the open-source drive
interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.