* 2236620
* Conference: 21st Annual Symposium of the NSF Astronomy and  Astrophysics Postdoctoral Fellows
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Stella Offner, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Prestwich
* 04/30/2024
* USD 44,473.00

This award will provide support for the attendees and invited speakers for the
twentieth Annual Symposium of the NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral
Fellows, to be held in conjunction with the winter meeting of the American
Astronomical Society in January 2023, in Seattle, WA. The purpose of the
Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral Fellowships (AAPF) Program is to support
integrated research and education activities at the postdoctoral level to better
prepare its fellows for positions of distinction and leadership in the
scientific community. The Annual Symposium provides a forum for the Fellows to
discuss their research and education projects while increasing their visibility
within the astronomy and astrophysics community. The Symposium represents a key
component of the AAPF Program and is a very effective mechanism to facilitate
the transfer of knowledge and experience that the Fellows have acquired through
their postdoctoral training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As with previous symposia in
this series, the 2023 AAPF Symposium will promote interactions among astronomers
with diverse research interests and backgrounds. By creating a forum in which
discussions can occur across traditional research boundaries, the Symposium will
provide Fellows the opportunity to gain new insights and pursue
interdisciplinary collaborations. The Symposium will also provide a venue for
discussing major issues that are important to early-career astronomers. In
addition, the Symposium will (1) provide a forum to discuss integrated research
and education activities, (2) facilitate collaborations between Fellows on both
research and education, and (3) provide greater exposure for the Fellows and the
AAPF Program within the astronomical community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.