* 2236931
* CAREER: Efficiency Considerations in List Decoding and Pseudorandomness Theory
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Mahdi Cheraghchi Bashi Astaneh, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 08/31/2028
* USD 266,772.00

Since the pioneering work of Claude Shannon to formulate a mathematical theory
of communication in 1948, the theory of error-correcting codes has enabled the
practical deployment of reliable and large-scale computer and communication
systems. Today, coding theory is used in virtually all aspects of computing
devices: for the data exchange between different chips inside a computer, data
transmission over a cable, data retention in storage devices, internet
communications, household smart devices, and wireless communications in cell
phones, to name a few. Modern demands for large-scale computation call for
pushing the state of the art in coding techniques much further than originally
envisioned by Shannon’s breakthrough, and this project aims to further that
goal. The educational plans cover a broad range of contributions ranging from
engagement with K-12 students, undergraduate and graduate level education, to
public outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To pursue the broader vision of this
project, the investigator focuses on the intricate connections between coding
theory, particularly list decoding of error-correcting codes, and the theory of
pseudorandomness at the core of computer science. Like codes, fundamental
pseudorandom objects such as pseudorandom generators and randomness extractors
have emerged from practical motivations, such as applications in cryptography
and randomized algorithms. Furthermore, deep connections are known between these
objects and error-correcting codes, particularly list decodable codes. As a
result, the state of the art in both pseudorandomness and list decoding is, to a
great extent, based on the same mathematical foundations. Even though the
current constructions achieve remarkable guarantees in theory, they are far from
the originally intended practical use. This project pursues the insight that the
disconnect from practice is not merely an engineering challenge, but is mainly
due to gaps in the theoretical understanding of the fundamental notions. The
investigator has identified the shortcomings in theory and aims to pave the way
toward optimal constructions of error-correcting codes and related pseudorandom
objects that are also amenable to practical
deployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.