* 2236640
* CAREER: Recrystallization in additive manufactured metallic materials
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Marie Agathe Charpagne, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 02/29/2028
* USD 124,850.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Near-net-shape, metal additive
manufacturing (AM) (also known as 3D printing) may allow for a major paradigm
shift in the automotive, aerospace and energy generation industries. The main
challenge that remains for broad adoption of metal AM is the obtaining of
comparable and consistent mechanical properties such as strength and ductility
in all orientations regardless of print direction. This project explores the
basic science of thermal treatments after printing to control the composition
and arrangement of metals, at the atomic scale, to obtain uniform mechanical
properties throughout a 3D printed part. Advanced high magnification imaging of
defects that occur at an atomic level, called dislocations, is revealing how
they organize themselves and what role they play in encouraging or discouraging
the formation of inner structures in metals known as “grains”. These inner
structures fundamentally dictate a metal’s performance and the process of
creating smaller defect free grains is a process known as recrystallization.
This research generates new perspectives on dislocations and recrystallization
in AM to increase mechanical performance and enable longer lifespans during
service. This research also intertwines with educational and outreach activities
aiming to increase awareness of and participation in additive manufacturing
among traditionally underrepresented communities. Activities include:
incorporation of AM within laboratory courses at the undergraduate and graduate
levels, creation of a research center focused on AM at the University of
Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, and continuous development of a free-to-
participants, materials-themed summer camp for middle-school girls targeting
underrepresented minorities of low income. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Additive manufacturing (AM) enables near-net-
shaping across a large variety of materials, thereby reducing the need for
machining while also reducing waste. Unfortunately, this process generally
induces strongly anisotropic properties which limit broad adoption as a
manufacturing technique. Post-build annealing treatments aiming to trigger
recrystallization are a simple and cost-efficient strategy to reduce property
anisotropy in any geometry. Yet, despite a high dislocation density, most AM
materials recrystallize surprisingly sparsely and with sluggish kinetics; an
observation that still remains to be understood. The project is elucidating the
fundamental mechanisms driving recrystallization in AM metallic materials
fabricated by laser powder-bed fusion and directed energy deposition. An
experimental-numerical correlative framework using electron microscopy combined
with in-situ synchrotron experiments is being implemented to accurately map,
digitize and analyze AM microstructures during recrystallization. Results are
allowing for quantitative measurement of driving forces with a view to enable
physics-based microstructure evolution laws tailored specifically to AM
materials. With this approach, transformative printing and alloy design
strategies for AM materials with isotropic properties are being produced.
Research efforts are accompanied by outreach initiatives exposing under-
represented populations in central Illinois at the middle school, undergraduate,
graduate and professional levels to the rapidly evolving field of AM. This
project also enables the incorporation of metal AM into the undergraduate and
graduate curriculum at the University of Illinois Urbana-
Champaign.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.