* 2236947
* CAREER: Design of Cellular Mechanical Metamaterials under Uncertainty with Physics-Informed and Data-Driven Machine Learning
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Pinar Acar, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 08/31/2028
* USD 549,365.00

The objective of this CAREER project is to engage and educate graduate and
undergraduate students in materials design, with a particular focus on designing
cellular mechanical metamaterials (CMMs) under the effects of fabrication-
related material uncertainty. The plan includes physics-based computations,
machine learning (ML), and design under uncertainty strategies, as well as the
development of outreach activities. The underlying hypothesis is that the CMMs
can be designed to achieve targeted mechanical properties and performance by
developing a multi-scale computational framework that investigates the
relationship between component-scale properties and underlying micro-scale
architectures. The societal impacts of the project will be on the economy, with
the promise of designing sustainable, lightweight, and high-performance
materials. The gained knowledge will be disseminated to academia and industry
through technical activities and open-access graphical software tools.
Additional deliverables of the project include curriculum development at
undergraduate and graduate levels, research experiences for students, and other
outreach activities involving students and educators, with a special focus on
individuals from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching
goal of this project is to improve the current knowledge of CMM design and
enhance the performance of 3-D printed products using a multi-scale framework
that will explore complex and non-linear relationships between the
microstructure and component by allowing non-periodically repeating
microstructure designs and accounting for the fabrication-related uncertainty.
This goal will be accomplished by developing a multi-scale design strategy
driven by physics-based material models, data-driven and physics-informed ML,
design optimization, and uncertainty quantification approaches. The ability to
model non-periodical microstructure arrangements of CMMs will be essential to
explore their true component-level mechanical performance, thereby substantially
increasing their potential for use in new-generation engineering systems for
hypersonics, structural applications, energy absorption, sensors, and soft
robots. The findings of the project will also identify designs that improve
mechanical performance and reliability by considering the effects of material
uncertainty. In addition, the design methodology for CMMs will be extended to
nature-inspired cellular materials, such as artificial bone structures, for
designing such systems to achieve target mechanical performance under
uncertainty. The activity will also promote teaching, training, and learning
through the development of outreach activities, such as camps, programs, and
workshops targeting both youths and teachers. The participation of
underrepresented groups is guaranteed by specifically addressing outreach
programs for female students, first-generation college students, students from
underserved communities in Southwest Virginia, and other minorities. The project
data and findings will be made publicly available at Virginia Tech’s open-access
repository, VTechData.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.