* 2236366
* Evaluating the impact of an open-data-based lessons and course-based research experiences on student knowledge, skills, and attitudes
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Carlos Goller, Allen Institute
* Standard Grant
* Ellen Carpenter
* 02/28/2026
* USD 599,472.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by studying learning outcomes
when students use open data and scientific tools in novel curriculum units that
teach mitosis, a foundational concept in biology. Prior studies have indicated
that course-based undergraduate research experiences (CUREs) and other forms of
active learning led to deeper understanding of scientific topics, improved
retention in science careers, and other positive outcomes for students. However,
active learning and CUREs are challenging to scale, and the latter usually
require access to lab facilities and materials which are often inequitably
distributed. To address these challenges, this project will develop active
learning-based and CURE curriculum units that use free, online open data and
tools from the Allen Institute. In addition, the project team will develop a
standardized concept inventory for measuring student understanding of mitosis,
investigate the impacts of those curricula on student learning outcomes using
the concept inventory, and ultimately release both the teaching tools as well as
the research results. The key innovations of this project will be a) to advance
understanding of the impacts of open data as a teaching tool on student
attitudes and knowledge, b) to create and release validated open-data-based
lessons, and c) to develop and release a validated concept inventory (CI) on
mitosis, a tool used to capture student understanding of core concepts on a
topic. If use of open data for active learning or a full virtual CURE generates
significant learning and attitude benefits for students, this indicates that
open data may be used in teaching settings to lower some of the social and
economic barriers to entry and retention in scientific research and increase
access to impactful experiences in the field. The findings from this study would
inform teaching across topics on the impact of open data on student scientific
thinking, engagement with learning, retention of knowledge, and persistence in
the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to systematically
evaluate the impact of using open data and research tools in a classroom setting
on student understanding, scientific thinking, confidence, and attitudes,
specifically in the context of learning the biological process of mitosis. The
open data and tools used in this project have been previously produced by the
Allen Institute for Cell Science, a division of the Allen Institute, and include
thousands of high-resolution, fluorescently-tagged 3D images of live human cells
with accompanying visualization and quantitative analysis tools. This study
would extend the validated use cases and impact of these open resources into the
world of education. This project will produce two primary products: a) two
curricula on mitosis using open data for active learning or for a CURE, which
will also be released as open educational resources (OERs) at the end of the
study, and b) a validated CI on mitosis. These products will be used to quantify
the impact of these variant curricula on studentsâ€™ scientific thinking skills,
knowledge of mitosis (measured with the CI), confidence in their own knowledge,
interest in continuing study, and other attitudinal outcomes. This study aims to
extend the benefits of CUREs to settings where a laboratory-based option is not
available, and to provide new tools and options to educators interested in
implementing CUREs. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development
projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students.
Through its Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation,
exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.