* 2236148
* Developing Critically-Conscious Aerospace Engineers through Macro-ethics Curricula
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Aaron Johnson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 07/31/2026
* USD 492,838.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by significantly sharpening
student critical consciousness and sensitivity to injustices within social
systems through integration of macro-ethics (ethics of large-scale issues as
opposed to individual ethics) into aerospace engineering science curricula. To
achieve this aim, a team of multi-institutional faculty is partnering with
practitioners in the aerospace industry to design and incorporate transformative
one-day macro-ethics curricular modules into traditionally highly technical
aerospace engineering courses. Through innovative assessment and continuous
revision, the project investigators are exploring how a macro-ethical aerospace
engineering curriculum can be effectively implemented to address challenging,
society-level ethical concerns that are directly relevant to students' future
engineering careers. As a result of the research efforts, students are expected
to be better equipped to recognize the potential for aerospace engineering
knowledge to contribute toward social good. Additionally, students are likely to
become more aware of the agency they possess as engineers to contribute to a
better world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using quantitative and qualitative survey
analyses, the research team aims first to establish the level of students'
awareness of macro-ethical issues. These findings will then be used to inform
the creation of one-day macro-ethics lessons that explore ways to better prepare
the students to address these issues in aerospace engineering science courses. A
social constructivist theoretical framework is to be employed given that macro-
ethical perspectives are largely dependent on social positioning and are
socially constructed within collaborative learning environments. Three research
questions are posited and a design-based research approach employed to implement
and evaluate the impact of the proposed intervention. The first question asks:
What are undergraduate students’ current awareness and perceptions of macro-
ethical issues in aerospace engineering? Question two seeks to understand the
ways students feel their education is or is not preparing them to address macro-
ethical issues? Finally, to assess the curriculum the project team asks: How
does the curriculum impact students’ perceptions and awareness of macro-ethical
issues and their desire to engage with the macro-ethical implications of their
future work? Macro-ethics lessons are to be implemented and assessed with
faculty partners who teach aerospace-related courses at four different
institutions. Through these lessons, students will learn not only the importance
of macro-ethics, but its inseparability from the technical content of the
aerospace engineering curricula. The project has the potential to impact not
only aerospace engineering students (particularly those who are marginalized
within the field), but also aerospace industry practitioners and society.
Dissemination of findings is intended to be through a website under a Creative
Commons license as well as an online seminar series. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program
supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM
education for all students. Through its Engaged Student Learning track, the
program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.