* 2236903
* CAREER: Tracing sulfur in subducting slabs with apatite oxybarometry
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2028
* Megan Holycross, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2028
* USD 425,098.00

Tectonic plate boundaries are important loci of mass transfer in the Earth
system. The transfer of volatile elements from Earth’s deep interior to its
surface and atmosphere at subduction zones enables a habitable planet. Magmas
erupted at arc volcanoes, located at subduction zones, are more oxidized than
magmas erupted at mid-ocean ridges. Arc volcanoes are the basis of the
continental crust and host economic ore deposits. Quantifying the processes that
lead to the oxidation of magmas in subduction zones is then critical for
understanding the formation of continents and ores. This project will
investigate the hypothesis that the transfer of sulfur throughout the subduction
system is responsible for the elevated oxidation state of arc magmas. High-
pressure experiments will be executed to measure the behavior of sulfur in rocks
at subduction zone conditions. Experimental results will be used to inform
observations of natural subduction-related rocks. This project includes research
and mentoring experiences for a postdoctoral associate, a PhD student and two
undergraduate students from underrepresented groups. Project results will be
assimilated into new open access Earth science educational content. A hybrid
capstone outreach event will be held to disseminate research outcomes to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will examine the hypothesis that the
oxidized signature of arc magmas is due to the transfer of sulfate from
metamorphosed oceanic crust on the down-going slab to the overlying arc mantle.
High-pressure experiments will be executed to calibrate a new proxy for the
oxidation state of subduction-related rocks based on the incorporation and
valence state of sulfur in the mineral apatite. Experimental apatite will be co-
crystallized with sulfide or sulfate phases such that the behavior of sulfur in
apatite can be used to provide indirect information on the relative stabilities
of sulfide vs. sulfates in subducted oceanic crust. Results from the experiments
will be applied to determine the oxidation states of suites of apatite-bearing
metabasites to determine if subducting slabs record an increase in oxidation
state concurrent with the increase in dissolved oxygen in the deep oceans and
rise in seawater sulfate in the Early Phanerozoic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.