* 2236771
* CAREER: Understanding the Impacts of Future Sea Ice Loss on Large-Scale Patterns of Atmospheric Variability and Cold Air Outbreaks
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Melissa Gervais, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 05/31/2028
* USD 874,040.00

Arctic sea ice plays a critical role in the climate system and its loss owing to
human-caused climate change can have a profound impact on the atmosphere. The
goal of this project is to further our understanding of how future Arctic sea
ice loss might impact daily weather patterns and extreme cold air outbreak
events. A machine learning method (self-organizing maps) will be used to
characterize daily weather patterns, and a feature-tracking algorithm
(TempestExtremesV2.1) will be used to identify and track cold air outbreaks.
These methods will be applied to a series of coordinated global climate model
experiments created as part of the Polar Amplification Intercomparison Project
(PAMIP) that were designed to study the causal impacts of sea ice loss.
Scientific understanding of future changes in weather and climate must be
accompanied by effective climate communication to the public to affect change.
The education component of this project will include the development of a series
of course modules designed to train broadcast meteorology and climate science
students in effective climate communication. Furthermore, the investigator will
conduct direct engagement with Pennsylvania residents through a quarterly
climate segment on Penn State’s own PBS program Weather
World.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extreme cold air outbreaks can have significant
socio-economic impacts. One such example is the 2021 ‘Valentine’s Week Winter
Outbreak’ that severely impacted the Texas power grid. Understanding how and why
these events may change in the future can provide governments and industry with
the information necessary to adapt to these changes. The proposed education plan
will increase societal understanding of climate change related impacts, both by
equipping the next generation of meteorologists and climate scientists with the
tools necessary to conduct effective science communication and through the
investigator’s appearances on Weather World. These activities will serve to
improve public understanding, engagement, and ultimately action on climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.