* 2236512
* NSF-BSF: Plasma Reformed Ammonia as a Carbon Free Fuel: Study of Nanosecond-Pulsed Discharge Kinetics and Combustion Enhancement
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2025
* Azer Yalin, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 11/30/2025
* USD 433,612.00

Renewable energy systems (e.g., wind, hydro, solar) are primed to play the
dominant role in supplying the world’s power, but before independence from
fossil fuels can be achieved there must be cost-effective ways to store the
renewable energy and utilize it in hard to decarbonize transportation sectors.
Ammonia (NH3), which can be synthesized using renewable energy and can easily be
stored/transported as a liquid, has garnered significant interest as a carbon-
free low-cost chemical energy storage medium and potential fuel for heavy duty
freight/marine applications. While the attention being paid to ammonia as an
energy storage solution and fuel is warranted, its low reactivity and propensity
to produce nitric oxide emissions during combustion represent critical
impediments to widescale adoption. Through the joint NSF-BSF program,
researchers at Colorado State University and Technion - Israel Institute of
Technology are partnering to progress the scientific understanding needed to
develop plasma assisted ammonia reforming strategies to enable the use of
ammonia in state-of-the-art combustion devices. Key outcomes from the proposed
effort include a validated ammonia-plasma chemistry model and a validated
combustion simulation strategy for the plasma-reformed ammonia mixtures at
engine relevant conditions. The research output will benefit both the energy and
transportation sectors – industries which together account for 73% of greenhouse
gas emissions worldwide – by supporting the development of high-fidelity models
required to shorten the design cycles of next generation carbon-free energy
conversion devices. This unique funding opportunity from NSF/BSF will help
foster international collaboration leveraging the unique expertise in plasma
reformation at Technion and combustion and laser diagnostics at Colorado State
University and will support high impact educational and diversity building
activities across borders. Findings will be shared in publications, at
conferences, and will be integrated into joint undergraduate and graduate
coursework at the collaborating institutions. The research will be regularly
highlighted in K-12 outreach events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary plasma-
and combustion-kinetic modeling by the proposal team has suggested that the
ignitability and flame speed of NRP plasma reformate blends could be comparable
to those of conventional fuels across a wide range of operating conditions.
Detailed kinetics within the plasma reactor have been examined, including
identifying the key role of the NH2 radical for reduction of NO combustion
emissions. This work aims to expound upon these modeling results via
experimental validation to build a foundation for future system-based
development and optimization efforts. The main elements of the work plan are:
(1) reformate species measurements within a newly constructed NRP plasma reactor
to validate and refine existing NH3 plasma kinetic models, (2) NH2 measurements
within the NRP by cavity ring-down spectroscopy (CRDS) to elucidate NH2’s role
in plasma kinetics and NOx reduction, and (3) ignition delay and flame speed
measurements of the resulting NH3 reformate blends at relevant conditions using
a laser-ignited rapid compression machine. These efforts will address gaps in
the current literature including: (1) the detailed study of the relative impact
of plasma pulse frequency, amplitude, and reactor pressure/temperature on NH3
and NH3/air reformation efficiency in an NRP reactor, constituting a validation
dataset for kinetic modeling efforts; (2) the first direct measurement of NH2
radical formation in ns-pulsed systems for quantitative comparison with kinetic
models; and (3) the expansion of ignition delay and flame speed measurements of
NH3/H2/O2/N2 reformate blends into temperature/pressure regimes that are sparse
in current literature, with trace NO/NO2, varying equivalence ratio, and induced
turbulence, providing an invaluable dataset to support NH3 combustion chemical
mechanism and multi-dimensional simulation development. The improved
understanding of NRP plasma reactors and the combustion characteristics of their
reformate gases will set the foundation for the development and optimization of
a variety of ammonia-to-power conversion systems including internal combustion
engines and gas turbines, which could otherwise only progress through cumbersome
empirical iteration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.