* 2236135
* CAREER: Ecological and Evolutionary Drivers in an Invasive Host-Parasite System
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Jennifer Koop, Northern Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Judy Stone
* 06/30/2028
* USD 192,044.00

Invasive species are responsible for large-scale economic and environmental
losses. Despite these costs, it is still unclear what ecological and
evolutionary processes drive invasions, especially for host species and their
parasites. This research will look at the importance of local adaptation and
dispersal ability in driving genetic differences among populations of invasive
hosts and parasites. When an invasive species establishes in a new location, it
rapidly begins to adapt to its local surroundings. As this adaptation proceeds,
genetic differences between invasive populations can emerge and change the way
in which hosts and parasites affect one another. The research will also consider
the role of dispersal ability, specifically the ability of hosts to move between
suitable habitats and of parasites to move between hosts. It will investigate
how dispersal ability together with variation among habitats affect patterns of
local adaptation for invasive hosts and parasites. The project will
significantly advance our understanding of the ways in which hosts and parasites
successfully invade new habitats, thereby helping to improve management efforts.
In addition, the project will train undergraduate and graduate students in
ecological and evolutionary research methods, teaching methods, science
communication, and mentorship. A service-learning partnership between university
and middle school students will improve representation and sense of belonging
for students pursuing biology through engagement in inquiry-based scientific
research. Program goals and successes will be broadly shared among a network of
educators interested in participating in similar
frameworks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Complex host-parasite systems, those in which a
parasite uses multiple species of hosts, present a unique challenge and
opportunity to better understand invasion dynamics. The system to be explored
here is the invasive faucet snail and its trematode parasites. The faucet snail
(Bithynia tentaculata) was introduced from Europe to North America in the early
1900s. Several species of trematodes are hosted by faucet snails and complete
their life cycle in waterfowl, causing high rates of mortality in species such
as Lesser Scaup (Aythya affinis). Research goals include: 1) using genomic
sequencing to reconstruct invasion histories of snail hosts and trematode
parasites and comparing evolutionary models of invasion scenarios, 2)
determining patterns of local adaptation among snail and trematode populations
across an active invasion landscape using an experimental, large-scale cross
infection design, and 3) determining the relative contributions of dispersal and
habitat heterogeneity to patterns of population structure and local adaptation
using a combination of field and lab-based approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.