* 2236819
* CAREER: Pushing the Practicality of Secure Multiparty Computation
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Xiao Wang, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Squicciarini
* 03/31/2028
* USD 108,745.00

Advances in data-driven technologies offer benefits through the centralized
collection of user data. However, data centralization and sharing also raise
critical security and privacy needs. Secure multi-party computation (MPC) allows
a set of parties to compute any function jointly and reveals nothing but the
output. It is a crucial tool to enable private data computation without sharing
it. This project focuses on further pushing the practicality of MPC protocols.
The project's novelties are identifying the hurdles of deploying MPC protocols
in real-world settings and designing efficient, robust, and scalable protocols
to overcome these issues. The project's broader significance and importance are
two-fold: 1) by pushing the use of MPC, the project enables new beneficial
applications without sacrificing privacy; 2) the project involves educational
and outreach activities to enhance MPC education for students at different
stages, improve social welfare, and promote diversity of participation.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on three aspects of bringing MPC to
practice. The first aspect is on secure two-party computation protocols in the
malicious setting as efficient and scalable as their semi-honest counterparts.
Second, the project investigates MPC efficiency when used for big data in
application-specific settings and improved RAM-based MPC protocols for real-
world workloads. Third, the project develops new classes of protocols that can
scale MPC to hundreds of parties and compute huge statements even when the
adversary can corrupt many participants. Finally, the research outcomes from
this award are applied and evaluated via academic collaboration and industry
deployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.