* 2236655
* CAREER: From Dust to Drought: Understanding the Multi-Scale Relationship between the Saharan Air Layer and Caribbean Water Stress
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Paul Miller, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 07/31/2028
* USD 253,581.00

The Saharan Air Layer (SAL) is a well-known meteorological phenomenon where dry
air and dust from the Saharan Desert is advected across the Atlantic Ocean. The
SAL has received significant scientific attention due to the role that it plays
in air quality and inhibiting tropical cyclone formation. Recent work has also
shown that the SAL can impact drought in the Caribbean. This project will
address the factors that lead to the development of drought in the Caribbean,
with a specific focus on Puerto Rico. The societal impact of this project is
significant because the Caribbean Islands rely heavily on regular precipitation
to meet agricultural, ecological, and municipal water needs. The lead researcher
is a founding member of the Caribbean drought resource group SECARIBE and will
share research findings with local water managers and operational weather
forecasters. There is also a significant education and outreach component to the
project with a two-week intensive summer course, aerosol workshop, participation
in the Ocean Commotion K-8 event, and development of an interest segment with a
local television station.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
address the question of how Saharan dust affects water stress in the insular
Caribbean region. This project will pioneer three major innovations: (1) Develop
a multi-decade dataset of SAL events and their morphological behavior; (2)
Assess the morphological behavior in (1) as a function of the embedded dust
load; and (3) Determine evaporative demand in the SAL destination region as a
function of the dust load. Whereas previous research expressly considers dust as
a rainfall suppressant, this is the first effort to extend the dust-warming
effect to surface drought dynamics via evaporative demand. This project will use
climatological analyses and numerical modeling using WRF-Chem to address three
main hypotheses: 1) SALs are more frequent and/or stronger during drought years
in the Caribbean, 2) Suspended dust within the SAL actively influences SAL
evolution across the Atlantic, and 3) Dust-driven warming increases near-SAL
evaporative demand, promoting flash drought.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is jointly funded by Physical and Dynamic Meteorology, the Established Program
to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and Climate and Large-scale
Dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.