* 2236277
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track H: Automating Transportation Affordances for People Living with Disabilities Using a Machine Learning Approach
* TIP,ITE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Xiaojun Qi, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 11/30/2023
* USD 749,996.00

Community participation and employment is vital to health, well-being, self-
determination, and quality of life. A major barrier to community participation
and employment for persons with disabilities is the lack of access to
transportation. Of the nearly 25% of the adult population in the United States
living with a disability, roughly 60% are of prime working age. Thus, these
barriers can significantly influence the economy and importantly limit upward
socioeconomic mobility. One of the reasons for the lack of access to
transportation is that persons with disabilities have different travel patterns
compared with the general population. For instance, they tend to make fewer
trips, are prone to utilizing slower means of transportation, travel shorter
distances and rely more upon public transit. Despite decades of civil rights
legislation for Americans with disabilities, access to safe and reliable routes
to places of employment are hampered by inaccessible and poor-quality sidewalks,
public rights-of-way, bus stops and general connectivity. Improving integration
of these systems across rural and urban communities requires reliable data – but
these data are expensive to create and often unavailable. The lack of data
inevitably hampers the ability for advocacy groups and local governments to
understand, transparently discuss, and make informed planning decisions that
improve transportation, and thus, employment access. This project will create a
technique to rapidly generate data essential to building a more integrated
transportation system for people living with disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;This
project builds on the convergence of two distinct and active projects sponsored
by the National Science Foundation (#2125087) and the National Institute on
Disability, Independent Living and Rehabilitation Research (#90DPCP0004). This
proposal aims to: 1) develop a prototype to automate the delineation and
affordance assessment of bus stops to integrate with existing efforts on
sidewalk quality automation, and 2) explore the role the built environment and
first/last mile play on community participation to and from places of employment
and households. This work is intended to make contributions to Human Computer
Interaction and Computer Vision, particularly at the intersection with urban
planning and disabilities studies. We also work to overcome challenges of
machine learning bias toward minorities by working directly with persons with
disabilities to improve empirical computational models. Technical team members
will interact with disability experts and designers on the team to bridge
disciplinary gaps that hamper efforts to translate experiential qualitative
information (activities of daily living) into computational models that make
interpretations and evaluations about the design of the built environment. This
project will result in open-source accessibility analysis and visualization
tools about first/last mile and the quality of sidewalks, bus stops and
roadways. The work from this project can aid in community and state-level
transportation master planning and spur additional partnerships with NGOs and
governmental organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.