* 2236002
* Improving Programming Skills of Engineering Students at Historically Black Colleges and Universities Using AI-enhanced Personalized Adaptive Learning Tools
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Zhigang Xiao, Alabama A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 08/31/2026
* USD 139,666.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by building online Artificial
Intelligence (AI) enhanced personalized adaptive learning (PAL) tools to improve
engineering students' programming skills at Historically Black Colleges and
Universities (HBCUs). Programming skills are imperative for various simulations
in engineering education. As the COVID-19 pandemic has fundamentally changed
course delivery methods, online teaching tools have become indispensable. The
project team plans to develop a series of online learning modules for
programming teaching and learning, recommend PAL paths via deep reinforcement
learning, and build a smart programming assistant (SPA) using AI techniques to
improve student learning. The proposed online AI enhanced PAL tools have the
potential to integrate a PAL pedagogy with AI techniques such as reinforcement
learning to explore how to recommend PAL learning paths and produce appropriate
reference source codes for engineering students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project team intends to work on three primary tasks. First is to develop basic
online tools with open application programming interfaces that are able to
connect with novel AI algorithms to improve student learning. Second is to
recommend PAL paths using deep reinforcement learning to maximize learners'
engagement in programming learning at proper difficulty levels. Third, and
finally, is to design an SPA via deep learning-based language models to generate
reference codes to help learners with programming activities. The proposed tools
have the potential to help to teach other engineering courses. The team intends
to disseminate their project results at various webinars, open-source
repositories, and education conferences. The proposed tools would be shared with
other HBCUs and institutions. The NSF IUSE: EDU Program supports research and
development projects to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all
students. Through its Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the
creation, exploration, and implementation of promising practices and
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.