* 2236058
* Convergence Accelerator Track J: Convergence Towards a Disaster Resilient Food System
* TIP,ITE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Ashlea Milburn, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Michael Reksulak
* 11/30/2023
* USD 624,029.00

This project supports improved food system resilience and food security in
communities at-risk for hurricanes. The broader impact and societal benefits of
this Convergence Accelerator Phase I project is to improve food system
resilience and reduce disaster-induced food insecurity, improving the health and
well-being of individuals in society. To achieve this goal, the convergence
research team will develop an annual measure of community food security and
subscales for individual systems that contribute to community food security.
This measure will help organizations and agencies identify communities at higher
risk for food insecurity following hurricane disasters and provide actionable
information for communities to build food system resilience to hazards and
environmental change. Between 11-15% of the U.S. population experienced food
insecurity annually between 2008 and 2018. Food and nutrition insecurity rates
can increase threefold following disasters. Households struggling before a
disaster are at greatest risk. Increased food and nutrition insecurity rates
persist for years while households and communities recover. Currently, the
United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) measures household and individual
level food and nutrition insecurity in the US annually and food deserts as a
single dimension of community level food and nutrition security every four
years. Food deserts are an indicator of accessibility of retail food in
communities but miss multiple additional systems that influence community-level
food and nutrition security. This project aims to create a Food Index for
Resilience, Security, &amp; Tangible Solutions (FIRST) that measures food system
functioning. The FIRST will combine information from experts in the fields of
disaster science, coastal engineering, food and nutrition security, nonprofit
management, and supply chain management with local community knowledge. The
FIRST will provide a tool for communities preparing for, responding to, and
recovering from disasters and environmental change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
food system is a complex adaptive system made up of a set of autonomous,
interdependent sub-systems. When a disaster occurs, multiple systems are
impacted. Currently, we rely on single-dimensional and infrequent measures of
food availability and accessibility. Further, current measures do not account
for disaster risk to multiple sub-systems. The proposed research will generate
specific and timely metrics of food system and sub-system functioning and
community food security to provide communities with actionable data to bolster
food system resilience and reduce food and nutrition insecurity following
hurricane disasters. Improved metrics will support mitigation and preparedness
amid slower onset environmental changes, especially among those most at-risk as
well as support more effective response and recovery of food systems and food
security. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a convergence approach and systems
dynamics modeling methodology, our team of academics, non-profits, government,
and industry partners will develop and validate the FIRST. The research team
will develop a conceptual and computational model of community-level food system
resilience (FIRST) then run the model to describe food system resilience for
pilot communities in North Carolina. The computational model will be evaluated
in three historical hurricane events in North Carolina to evaluate the validity
and reliability of the metric. FIRST scores for pilot counties in North Carolina
as well as historical case data will be shared with community members to ground
truth the results and elicit information about the usefulness of FIRST scores
and how the scores could be used to bolster food system resilience. Information
from pilot communities will set the stage for scaling up the model nationally
for hurricanes and developing a roadmap with tangible solutions for building
community food resilience. Annual measurement at the community-level will
support more equitable disaster preparedness, response, recovery, and mitigation
to reduce disaster-induced food and nutrition insecurity. Sub-system scores for
economic, health, social, and political systems will support more equitable
policies and programs to assist populations at greatest risk for both food
insecurity and disaster exposure, including lower income, racial and ethnic
minority, and households with children.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.