* 2236687
* 2025-2035 Decadal Survey of Ocean Sciences for the National Science Foundation
* GEO,OCE
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2026
* Susan Roberts, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Kandace Binkley
* 01/31/2026
* USD 487,003.00

In 2013 the NSF Division of Ocean Sciences (NSF-OCE) asked the National Academy
of Sciences to develop a decadal survey and with that, a list of the top ocean
science priorities for the next decade in the context of the current state of
knowledge, ongoing research activities, and resource availability. As a result,
in 2015 the committee for the Decadal Survey of Ocean Sciences 2015 (DSOS)
produced a report and the National Academy of Sciences published “Sea Change:
Decadal Survey of Ocean Sciences 2015-2025”. The report identified eight ocean
science research priorities and made recommendations to advise NSF on strategies
to reach a balance of investments to achieve those research priorities. This
report has been used by NSF and the Ocean Sciences Community to plan the way
forward. As the end of the decade (2015-2025) nears, there have been changes in
the portfolio of research and facilities supported by NSF-OCE. Future
investments in ships and observing platforms will require careful consideration
of the research facilities to support the main areas of ocean science funded by
NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides funding for the 2025-2035 Decadal
Survey of Ocean Sciences for the National Science Foundation The last decadal
survey prepared for the National Science Foundation (NSF) by the National
Academies was published in 2015: Sea Change: Decadal Survey of Ocean Sciences
2015-2025. Since Sea Change was published, there have been changes in the
portfolio of research and facilities supported by the NSF Division of Ocean
Sciences (NSF-OCE). Future investments in ships and observing platforms will
require careful consideration of the research facilities to support the main
areas of ocean science funded by the NSF. Investment in workforce training and
support to address the new research priorities will also be needed, such as
building interdisciplinary teams and strategies for using scientific information
to help address societal challenges. The Decadal Survey will advise the NSF-OCE
on forward-looking approaches to guide investments in research, infrastructure,
and workforce development. The committee will develop a compelling research and
infrastructure strategy to advance understanding of the ocean's role in the
Earth system and the sustainable blue economy. The report will recommend ways
that NSF-OCE could develop the capacity to respond nimbly as priorities change
and new opportunities emerge over the 2025-2035
decade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.