* 2236097
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track H: Smart Wearables for Expanding Workplace Access for People with Blindness and Low Vision
* TIP,ITE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Maurizio Porfiri, New York University Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Pradeep Fulay
* 11/30/2023
* USD 743,451.00

There are 285 million people with blindness and low vision (pBLV) worldwide. One
dramatic correlate of vision loss is unemployment, with rates as high as 81% in
urban environments. Employment disparities stem, at least in large part, from
difficulties with transportation to and from work and wayfinding within the
workplace itself. This project takes a fundamental step in addressing the
employment challenges of pBLV through a recently developed, powerful assistive-
navigation platform, the Visually Impaired Smart Service System for Spatial
Intelligence and Onboard Navigation (VIS4ION). VIS4ION is a discreet,
instrumented backpack with an array of miniaturized sensors integrated into
backstraps that connect to an embedded system for computational analysis. Real-
time feedback is provided through a binaural bone conduction headset and an
optional reconfigured waist strap turned haptic interface. The platform provides
valuable micro-services for pBLV, including real-time navigation, scene
analysis, and obstacle avoidance, all of which could transform workplace
experiences for pBLV. To realize the goals of the project, a transdisciplinary
team brings expertise across engineering (computer vision, haptics, sensors, and
wireless), medicine (neurology and rehabilitation), and management
(organizational change and behavior). These academic disciplines are partnered
with a start-up, Tactile Navigation Tools (TNT), which is commercializing the
technology, larger corporate firms in the space, a BLV-focused non-profit,
Lighthouse Guild, and key government agencies. &lt;br/&gt;The development and
deployment of advanced, connected wearables in workplace environments faces
significant technical, business, social, and logistical challenges. This
translational project seeks to overcome these challenges by completing four
inter-connected tasks: Task 1 performs the first detailed, workplace-oriented
study that assesses navigation accuracy of VIS4ION, as measured using additional
cameras and inertial measurement units; Task 2 builds on the current VIS4ION
interfaces to establish scalable, reproducible, and lower-cost tactile feedback,
together with a new audio-based “cognitive assistant” for guidance; Task 3
augments the wearable with high-speed 5G connectivity to provide real-time,
powerful cloud-based machine vision processing; Task 4 affords a series of novel
studies to assess the workplace experiences of pBLV via our partner, Lighthouse
Guild. The assessment includes both “think aloud” recordings and contextualized
reflections. &lt;br/&gt;The total cost of BLV was recently estimated to be $3
trillion dollars globally. The pathologic link between vision loss and
inactivity precipitates debility and unemployment. Mobility losses lead to
employment barriers, as pBLV struggle during daily commuting, wayfinding in the
workplace, and variable work routines that have been intensified by the
pandemic. This proposal aims to increase the safety profile and ease-of-use of a
wearable platform toward ‘connected’ dynamic navigation in complex workplace
environments. Future goals for scaling the platform include adding additional
social capabilities such as face and emotion recognition to substantively
improve quality of life in a smarter and more connected, disability-first city
landscape. Beyond the envisioned impact on science, engineering, and improving
the lives of pBLV, this program will foster formal and informal learning
opportunities for graduate, undergraduate, medical, and high school students in
clinical and fundamental STEM/STEAM research. These training opportunities will
foster multi-pronged and multi-disciplinary team approaches critical to the
development of innovative solutions for complex real-world
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.