* 2236126
* Promoting Problem-Solving Skills and Self-Regulated Learning in First-Year Engineering Students
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Lizzie Santiago, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 05/31/2026
* USD 599,999.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by improving curricula and
curricular interventions in engineering education. Research has demonstrated
that students’ early experiences with STEM coursework play a pivotal role in
their decision to persist in STEM. Many students express initial interest in
engineering but experience challenges with problem-solving skills that are key
to the discipline. Students that begin in engineering at the College Algebra,
Trigonometry, or Pre-calculus level (non-calculus ready students), in
particular, may benefit from supports that help them employ effective strategies
during problem-solving. Supporting these students’ success and persistence in
STEM is of particular significance given the continued national need for more
STEM professionals. Therefore, identifying and refining interventions that
promote students’ interest, achievement, and persistence in engineering are of
increasing importance and national concern. This project will test interventions
designed to promote problem-solving knowledge and skills among non-calculus
ready students, a population in which students from underrepresented, first-
generation, and economically-disadvantaged groups are overrepresented. The
project aims to advance understanding of supports that increase students’
success and retention in engineering and will generate knowledge about the use
of similar interventions in other STEM courses and programs. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The primary goals of this project are to: 1) build, test, and refine
a two-part, course-based self-regulated learning intervention that scaffolds
non-calculus ready students’ use of metacognitive skills during problem-solving
and 2) disseminate a set of integrated intervention activities and instructional
materials that support engineering students’ problem-solving. To address the
goals of the project, the researchers will: 1) implement and refine
contextualized methods of assessing students’ metacognitive skills during
problem-solving; 2) model patterns and profiles of students’ problem-solving
skills and their relations to problem-solving performance in engineering and
mathematics; 3) develop, test, and refine a model of self-regulated learning
during story problem-solving; and 4) implement iterative classroom-based
research to refine instructional materials supporting students’ conceptual
knowledge and strategic problem-solving. The researchers will implement matching
techniques to stratify and closely match students in intervention and control
groups and will conduct both person-centered and latent growth modeling
techniques to characterize and examine change in students’ problem-solving and
metacognitive skills. The project will incorporate substantive educational
activities and outreach that intend to increase the retention of students in
engineering who did not place into calculus in their first semester. Outcomes of
this project will guide the design of intervention materials to prompt and
promote students’ conceptual knowledge and strategic learning, providing
replicable tools to enhance STEM education and retention more broadly. The NSF
IUSE Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.