* 2236526
* CAREER: Resolving multi-scale ecological consequences of thermal refuges amidst climate warming
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Samuel Fey, Reed College
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 04/30/2028
* USD 928,161.00

Most life on Earth experiences changes in environmental conditions over time and
exists in environments that vary across space. One grand challenge the field of
ecology seeks to address is understanding the resulting biological consequences
of this variation. This project will address the significance of one important
type of spatial variation in the environment, thermal refuges. Thermal refuges
are locations organisms may find beneficial during periods of extreme weather in
that they are not as extreme as surrounding locations, and may maintain
biodiversity amidst periods of extreme heat. Using both experiments and
observations in freshwater ecosystems to document how common thermal refuges
are, the project will investigate how organisms use thermal refuges, and how the
presence or absence of refuges can alter the composition of organisms and their
traits. Additionally, this research will perform experiments to understand the
conditions over which thermal refuges may allow individual organisms to persist
during periods of thermal stress. The project will be conducted at a primarily-
undergraduate institution, and will help inform, and be completed as part of, an
undergraduate inquiry-based ecology course focused on the consequences of
environmental variation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While often lauded for their
capacity to promote taxonomic diversity by minimizing exposure to lethal
conditions, the demographic benefits of thermal refuges are more often assumed
than empirically measured, as are the population-level costs of refuge
utilization, and spatial scales and domains of environmental variation over
which refuges may influence ecological outcomes. This research will develop a
mechanistic understanding of the role of thermal refuges for the persistence of
populations amidst climate warming, as well their limitations. It aims to 1)
document the extent of, utilization of, and patterns of diversity associated
with, thermal refuges; 2) assess and generalize population-level costs and
benefits of thermal refuges amidst thermal stress, and 3) understand how thermal
refuges alter population persistence and dynamics in response to extreme
temperature events. Such information is valuable for refining estimates of
extinction risk as it focuses on elucidating the impact of environmental
conditions at the spatially relevant scales over which population and community
dynamics unfold. In particular, this research has the potential to help identify
early warning indicators amidst rising mean temperatures and episodic events.
The proposed activities will address the pressing societal concern regarding the
fate of biodiversity amidst climate warming, and represents an important initial
step in a path towards disaster mitigation by maintaining, preserving, or
engineering features of thermal refuges that promote desired ecological
consequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.