* 2236854
* CAREER: Data-Centric Evolutionary Contagion Models with Parallel and Quantum Parallel Computing
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Andrew Holbrook, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 06/30/2028
* USD 104,906.00

Global viral epidemics produce vast amounts of high-dimensional data indexed by
the location and time each virus is observed. Scientists, businesses,
governments and independent organizations want to learn from this data so they
can understand basic biological mechanisms, invest capital, allocate aid and
design coherent policy in a changing world. Evolutionary contagion (Evo-Con)
models seek to identify and predict viral variants with heightened rates of
spread by jointly modeling viral contagion and evolution. Analyzing spatial
patterns of viral contagion is an area of immense scientific interest, but the
task requires accounting for the nature of transportation networks that shape
the global economy. As a result, big data applications become computationally
intensive and benefit from high-performance computing. The project advances
knowledge and utility of Evo-Con models in the context of massive amounts of
complex, dynamic and geographically distributed data. In lockstep with these
developments, the investigator will develop "Statistical Learning Goes Viral", a
free-access MOOC (Massive Open Online Course), with concomitant free-access
expository textbook and further expand his efforts building bridges between UCLA
and key historically black colleges and universities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
investigator will combine theory, methods and computing in a way that
facilitates high-impact data analysis and easy measurement of success. The PI
will (1) develop a class of nonlinear and multivariate phylogenetic Hawkes
processes that use autoregressive neural networks to maintain both flexibility
and scalability. Nonlinear phylogenetic Hawkes process development will
capitalize on experience building heavily hierarchical models for joint data,
but a pragmatic approach will depart from previous Bayesian implementations to
enhance scalability and prediction; and (2) adapt these stochastic process
models to complex transportation patterns in a way that responds to spatial data
precision by combining nonlinear dimension reduction with convolutional neural
networks (CNN). When travel networks explicitly present themselves, the PI will
leverage experience building spatial models that account for network structures
by incorporating nonlinearities through graph CNNs. More radical within
phylogeography, the PI will eschew explicit network representations with the
help of spherical CNNs that build implicit representations of global spatial
dependencies to model viral contagion with increased flexibility. By
hierarchically combining (1) and (2) within the same factor graph, the joint
data neural model will fully integrate spatial, genomic, and temporal data.
Finally, the investigator will (3) construct high-performance computing
techniques that leverage conventional and quantum resources to fit complex,
multimodal and high-dimensional model geometries. Computational developments
will go well beyond track-record inventions of parallelized Markov chain Monte
Carlo algorithms that use graphics processing units and quantum
computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.