* 2236983
* CAREER: Problems in Commutative and Homological algebra
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Eloísa Grifo, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 07/31/2028
* USD 212,000.00

This is a project in commutative algebra, with connections to algebraic
geometry, combinatorics, and arithmetic geometry. Commutative algebra is a field
of abstract algebra that aims to understand the solution sets of system of
polynomial equations. It is a fundamental area of research with applications and
connections to fields such as robotics, statistics, and physics. This project
involves studying classical systems of polynomial equations in familiar settings
such as the real or complex numbers, but also the less understood setting of
mixed characteristic, which has connections with number theory and arithmetic
geometry. This award will also support activities in collaboration with local
elementary and middle schools and graduate student training, as well as the
promotion of work by early-career researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will
pursue research projects in homological and commutative algebra relating to the
study and applications of p-derivations in mixed characteristic commutative
algebra, symbolic powers, and cohomological support varieties. Many techniques
in commutative algebra and algebraic geometry only work for an algebra over a
field, because of the use of resolution of singularities and vanishing theorems
in characteristic zero and the homological properties of the Frobenius map in
positive characteristic. In contrast, the mixed characteristic setting is often
more delicate, and many questions remain open only in that setting. Recent
developments have shown that p-derivations, a tool from arithmetic geometry, can
be applied to solve problems arising in mixed characteristic commutative
algebra, especially when applied together with differential operators. These
provide new avenues of research that will further these applications. The
project will also address homological questions motivated by recent major
breakthroughs related to cohomological support varieties and applications of the
homotopy Lie algebra of a ring; and symbolic powers, an algebraic tool that can
be used to answer classical geometric questions. This project is jointly funded
by the Algebra and Number Theory Program and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.