* 2236905
* CAREER: Novel Powder-Bed Ceramic Additive Manufacturing Assisted with Water-Based Inks, Layerwise Uniaxial Compression and Temperate Heating for Selective Particle Fusion
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Xuan Song, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 03/31/2028
* USD 603,512.00

Structural ceramics are strategically important in many specialty applications,
including thermal insulators, armors, implants and sensors. Manufacturing of
complex ceramic components, however, has always been problematic and can be
costly and laborious due largely to their unique properties, e.g., high melting
points and excessive hardness. Additive manufacturing (AM) offers an alternative
to produce parts with complex geometries that are challenging to make using
traditional manufacturing processes. While of a great potential, current ceramic
AM technologies still have limitations in making complex structures with thick
walls (e.g., thicker than 10 mm), because of the use of an organic binder and
the difficulty in its complete removal during de-binding. This Faculty Early
Career Development (CAREER) award supports fundamental research to investigate
and mature a new ceramic powder-bed AM process that is assisted with water-based
inks, so to eliminate the need of binder removing, followed by compression and
mild heating to achieve particle fusion. If successful, this process will enable
complex thick-walled ceramic component manufacture in a commercial scale and
help accelerate wider adoption of ceramic AM in many industries, including
healthcare, energy and defense. This project will also pique the interest of
students at different grades in ceramic AM through ceramic-printing programs,
including “Print-in-the-Dark-Side” for students with vision impairment, “Ceramic
Art 3D Printing” for K-12 students, and cross-discipline ceramic printing
initiatives for undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER
research aims to understand the processing mechanism of a new ceramic AM in
making complex thick-walled ceramic parts through employing a selectively
deposited water-based ink, followed by uniaxial compression layer by layer. Once
the print is completed, mild heating is applied (50 to 200 Celsius) to the built
powder bed, in which upon evaporation of the ink due to heating, particles in
the ink-wetted region will be fused together. The project will study ceramic
particles made of lithium molybdate, calcium phosphate and barium titanate, and
employ instrumented compression tests (up to 100 megapascals), multi-scale
experimental characterizations, and pore-scale numerical simulations to
elucidate the effects of different processing conditions and material properties
on the fusion mechanism and degree of ceramic particles, including the ink
chemistry and saturation level, the compression magnitude, duration and cycles,
as well as the heating temperature and time. The research findings are expected
to uncover the mechanism that governs the neck formation and growth between
ceramic particles in the studied ceramic AM process, identify the key factors
that determine the particle fusion density and strength, and ultimately, enable
making complex thick-walled ceramic components with minimum defects, full
density and enhanced properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.