* 2236315
* Inclusive Course Design for Enhancing Active Learning in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Stephanie Shepherd, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Eleanor Sayre
* 04/30/2026
* USD 599,263.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by creating new knowledge about
the impact of faculty professional development on student success and engagement
in STEM courses. There is overwhelming evidence that inclusive teaching and
evidence-based learning strategies increase students' performance in STEM
classes. Separately, there is ample evidence on best practices for STEM faculty
development. However, few studies directly link faculty professional development
to student success via measurement of changes in faculty practices. This project
aims to change classroom culture across five STEM departments at a major
research-intensive institution through focused workshops for faculty and ongoing
engagement in an interdisciplinary faculty learning community. It plans to
investigate in what ways and to what extent faculty professional development can
impact student engagement and success, including both courses transformed by
faculty in the workshops and subsequent courses taken by the students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project intends to research: (1) changes to teaching
practice that faculty make as a result of the professional development program,
(2) faculty perceptions of the impact of changes made, and (3) the impact of
these changes on student engagement, sense of belonging, and success outcomes.
Analysis of faculty practices and perceptions will triangulate across multiple
data streams collected longitudinally, including classroom observations, textual
analysis of teaching artifacts, interviews with faculty about their pedagogical
knowledge and decisions, and faculty surveys of their teaching practices.
Student data will include performance on course assignments, reflections on
course activities, and biometric sensor data taken during class to measure
students' engagement. This project plans to include 30 STEM instructors in five
departments (geosciences, chemistry, mathematics &amp; statistics, physics, and
biology), and to inform departmental and college policies on the implementation
and value of faculty development for research-based instructional practices. The
NSF IUSE:EDU Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through its Institutional and
Community Transformation track, the program supports efforts to transform and
improve STEM education across institutions of higher education and disciplinary
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.