* 2236194
* Procollagen Assembly
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2025
* Matthew Shoulders, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 11/30/2025
* USD 994,050.00

This project seeks to uncover how collagen, the molecular scaffold for animal
life, assembles inside cells into the complex three-dimensional structures
required to form skin, bone, cartilage, and other tissues. The advances in
fundamental knowledge of collagen biochemistry achieved will have translatable
impact, yielding an enhanced ability to create designer biomaterials and an
improved understanding of collagen misfolding-related genetic disorders. The
research is tightly integrated with continuation and expansion of a successful
science outreach program targeting the homeschool community. One arm of the
program involves MIT HIP-SAT (Homeschool Internship Program in Science and
Technology), a nationally competitive program that brings homeschooled students
to leading labs at MIT for funded summer research internships. A second arm of
the program targets children in the 8–14 age range, distributing hands-on
molecular biology modeling kits that capture students’ attention with chemical
concepts that underpin life processes and training the community in effective
use of these kits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fibrillar procollagens are composed
of a lengthy, uninterrupted triple-helical domain flanked by a small
N-propeptide and somewhat larger globular C-propeptide (C-Pro). The triple helix
itself, which is the fundamental structural element of mature collagen, is a
trimeric structure in which three distinct, left-handed helical strands wrap
around each other to form the right-handed, parallel triple helix. In fibrillar
collagens, the most abundant types, these triple helices can span up to ~1000
amino acids in length. These lengthy, repetitive triple-helical domains cannot
fold properly on their own. Instead, they require assistance to ensure proper
strand selection (some collagens are homotrimeric, while others form 2:1 or even
1:1:1 heterotrimers) and alignment of individual polypeptides. Remarkably, the
molecular basis for collagen homo- versus hetero-trimerization is not yet known.
This research integrates strategies from synthetic chemistry, biochemistry,
structural biology, and cell biology to fill this key knowledge gap. The
outcomes will be a new paradigm for understanding collagen assembly mechanisms,
as well as a molecular explanation of the complex interplay between
thermodynamic and kinetic effects that ensures proper collagen assembly. These
results will impact fundamental understanding of the most abundant protein in
humans, enable biomaterial applications, and elucidate disease-relevant
biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.