* 2236969
* CAREER: Machine-guided design of enzymatically-synthesized polymers optimized for digital information storage
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Jeffrey Nivala, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Mitra Basu
* 02/29/2028
* USD 160,219.00

There is a growing need for new information storage methods that can bridge the
ever-widening gap between data generation and our ability to store it. Molecular
information storage is a promising solution to this problem because it has key
advantages over traditional storage media (e.g., magnetic tape and disk). These
advantages include extremely high density, long shelf-life, and low energy
costs. However, to make molecular information storage practical, several
barriers must be overcome. Namely, the relatively high costs associated with
reading and writing data in molecular form. This research is focused on
harnessing the advantages of two promising technological areas originally
developed for the life sciences (enzymatic DNA synthesis and nanopore DNA
sequencing) by developing a new information storage medium based on synthetic
polymers that can be synthesized at large scale and low cost, and can be quickly
decoded with inexpensive laptop-powered nanopore readers. Together, these
features will lower the cost, complexity, and latency of this system compared to
traditional DNA-based data storage. As part of this award, the investigators are
also committed to training students and professionals to be well versed in the
intersection of biology and computing, which is a very promising new area of
scientific and economic development. These research directions will be
integrated into a new special topics course in which computer science students
will be exposed to the concepts of molecular computing and information storage,
while also gaining hands-on experience in molecular biology and computer
hardware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award aims to achieve the
following goals: (1) Machine-guided design and chemical synthesis of new dNTP
analogs; (2) Concatenation of these analogs into homo- and heteropolymer
copolymers using enzymatic synthesis; (3) Demonstration of encoding digital
information into copolymer sequences; (4) Computational models for predicting
nanopore ionic currents from new analog sequences and for decoding new analog
kmer signals into representative bits. Ultimately, the investigators expect to
be able to demonstrate in their results that synthesis of an expanded polymer
alphabet is possible as is encoding digital information using it. The ability to
read this information out using nanopore technology will be a key driver of the
system's high-throughput and low latency thanks to the portability and cost
compared to mass spectrometry, which is the traditional readout for non-natural
polymers. In its sum, this work represents a significant step forward in the
feasibility of practical, large-scale digital data encoding in molecular
form.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.