* 2236587
* CAREER: The role of the resting brain in stereotyping &amp; stereotype change
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Meghan Meyer, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Allen McConnell
* 05/31/2028
* USD 579,367.00

Stereotypes (i.e., attributes associated with members of social groups) are
widespread, leading to negative treatment of social group members and
deleterious consequences. Understanding why stereotyping occurs and can be
weakened are important for creating a more equitable, prosperous society. This
research examines if brain processes during rest (i.e., when people are not
paying attention to anything in particular) predict stereotyping and the
weakening of stereotypes. It is commonly thought that the brain needs to rest by
taking a mental break to help learning new information, and this project would
test whether and how rest encourages fairer treatment of others.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the mechanisms underlying stereotypes and
how to change them is a central goal of psychology and neuroscience. Because
stereotypes are so well-learned that they come to mind effortlessly, they are
hard to reduce because people often cannot stop them. This research will measure
neural activity while participants briefly rest by taking a short mental break
before observing someone who they could stereotype to test whether the neural
responding during the rest period predicts their stereotyping moments later. The
second aim of this research is to determine if stereotypes are weakened during
rest (e.g., does rest following a positive social interaction with someone from
a stereotyped group weaken group stereotypes). To address these aims, the
current research will use functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to
examine brain responses during rest and how they relate to stereotyping and
stereotype change. Using fMRI will provide insights on why people stereotype and
how stereotypes are weakened as these mental events take place. This project
also has educational aims to disseminate social neuroscience education to under-
represented communities and to investigate these questions in societal contexts
in which stereotypes naturally change through positive interactions with diverse
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.