* 2236528
* CAREER: Discovery and Characterization of Strongly Correlated Topological Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Sheng Ran, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 05/31/2028
* USD 277,718.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The development of new quantum materials is
driven by two concepts, band structure topology and strong electronic
correlations. Due to the long-standing challenge of calculating band structures
of strongly correlated systems, the interplay of these two central themes of
condensed matter physics has not been actively investigated. The research team
is studying novel topological properties of strongly correlated electronic
systems, aiming for yet-unknown phases, transitions, and functionalities. Based
on a practical design principle developed by the research team, this project
accelerates the theoretical unification of strong correlation physics and band
structure topology, greatly enhances our understanding of quantum materials,
further expands the horizon of topological phases. These might lead to promising
applications for future technologies. A comprehensive education and outreach
plan is incorporated to transmit the core knowledge of quantum physics and
quantum materials to a large range of students and communities with diverse
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Due to the
interplay between Coulomb repulsion and kinetic degrees of freedom of electrons,
the prediction of topological properties in strongly correlated materials
represents a theoretical challenge. The research team is investigating exotic
phases and materials originating from the convergence between strong
correlations and band structure topology. The research team has developed a
practical design principle to guide the systematic discovery of novel strongly
correlated topological materials, which is specifically realized by combining
(1) strong correlations induced by Kondo hybridization, (2) band crossing
enforced by non-symmorphic crystal symmetries, and (3) large spin orbital
coupling in uranium systems. The research team will utilize single crystal
synthesis, electric and thermal transport measurement, first principle
calculations and photoemission spectroscopy to identify new systems with non-
trivial topology originating from strong correlations and discover new emergent
low energy excitations. Specific goals of the project include: (1) to reveal the
the mechanism by which Kondo hybridization gives rise to nontrivial topological
bands and its contribution to the anomalous Hall effect; (2) to discover novel
topological states induced by strong correlation in the 2D limit; and (3) to
understand the unusual field dependence of the anomalous Hall effect in Kondo-
Weyl semimetals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.