* 2236027
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Musculoskeletal Craniofacial Evolution and Developmental Plasticity
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Rachel Menegaz, University of North Texas Health Science Center at Fort Worth
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Ferrell
* 03/31/2025
* USD 29,600.00

This doctoral dissertation research project examines the effects of early
weaning on the evolution of the muscles and skeletal tissue in the developing
craniofacial complex. The modern human craniofacial complex has evolved to
become smaller, with shorter midface and globular brain shape, characteristics
linked to changes in diet and chewing. Previous investigations of this topic
using bone in comparative and fossil materials have methodological limitations.
Here, a novel combination of state-of-the-art imaging methods is used to analyze
changes in bone and soft tissues during craniofacial development. The research
has the potential to inform public health research on early life development.
The project fosters student training and mentoring in STEM, and resulting data
are disseminated through publications, presentations, and publicly available
imaging databases. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses a gracilized
comparative model to examine the influence of early and typical weaning on
musculoskeletal craniofacial development. The specific aims of this project are
to characterize the effects of (1) craniofacial gracilization and (2) early
weaning on musculoskeletal performance, integration, and symmetry during the
stages of oral motor skill development in early life. Previous research has
focused on changes in skeletal tissue, primarily due to limitations in what is
visible in a standard CT and what is preserved in the fossil record. A novel
combination of contrast enhanced micro-computed tomography (micro-CT) methods is
used in this project to analyze ontogenetic series of bone, muscle, and
cartilage. This multilevel research design incorporates evolutionary,
behavioral, morphological, and functional theories, allowing greater
understanding of the impact of function and tissue interactions on the
musculoskeletal development in the craniofacial complex. Furthermore, this
project can improve our understanding of the form-function interrelationships in
the craniofacial complex during highly plastic early life stages, with
implications for behavioral adaptations and growth trajectories during human
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.