* 2236173
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Nutrition, diet, and their influence on survival and reproduction across life
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,04/30/2024
* David Watts, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Robin Bernstein
* 04/30/2024
* USD 25,197.00

Animals need different combinations of nutrients to survive and reproduce, but
for many species, we do not know how survival and reproduction is affected by
nutrient intake across a lifetime. It is difficult to study this relationship in
humans because of our long lifespans, which may encompass many different periods
of food availability that might not be known. This Doctoral Dissertation
Research project assesses how lifetime nutrient intake and diet influence
survival and reproduction in a wild primate, including during an extreme
drought, which had major impacts survival. Extreme climatic events are
increasing in severity and frequency world-wide, and the results of this project
can therefore enhance our understanding of how diet and nutrition interact with
survival during such events. This project serves as the doctoral dissertation
for a student in biological anthropology and nutritional ecology, trains two
early career female scientists, contributes to the conservation of a wild
primate and its endangered habitat, and provides early education opportunities
for local school children. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on three
objectives: 1) Identify the nutritional goals of female white-faced capuchins
(Cebus capucinus) across the life course, 2) Identify the best possible diets of
female white-faced capuchins across the life course, and 3) Examine how poor
nutrient and dietary intake relates to survival and reproduction, especially
during an extreme drought that occurred between 2014 - 2016. To address these
objectives, researchers collect feeding data on capuchins to determine what
individuals eat. Researchers also collect food samples to determine nutrients
that capuchins consume. Lastly, researchers use a long-term database (33+ years)
to relate intake to survival and reproduction, especially during the
drought.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.