* 2236887
* Role of Diffusion-Induced Grain Boundary Migration in Alloy Oxidation
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Emmanuelle Marquis, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 08/31/2026
* USD 397,284.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oxidation resistance remains a
critical requirement for materials applications at medium to hightemperatures in
many key sectors such as energy, transportation, and aerospace. Decades of
studies have generated significant knowledge about how to improve the oxidation
resistance of structural materials, with strategies including the use of
alloying elements, coatings, and surface treatments. However, many of the
mechanisms behind these strategies remain elusive limiting our ability to design
better performing alloys. In this context, the project addresses the impact of
deformation and small grain sizes on the oxidation response of selected
structural alloys. The work specifically focuses on elucidating the key role of
diffusion along moving grain boundaries supplying elements to the alloy surface
to form an oxide layer. This ubiquitous mechanism has been largely ignored and
therefore unexplored in the context of alloy oxidation; yet it can explain the
impacts of surface deformation and small grain sizes on the oxidation behavior
of alloy systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program contributes to the general
scientific understanding of diffusion along moving grain boundaries as a
ubiquitous mechanism in crystalline materials under diffusive conditions and
increases our mechanistic understanding of materials under extreme environments
with impact on the development of new alloys and microstructures, particularly
in the context of advanced manufacturing processes. Because of its focus on
materials under extreme environments and specifically high temperature
oxidation, the proposed research impacts key areas of industrial and national
importance, including transportation, energy, and aerospace. In addition to its
scientific and technological impacts, the program also contributes to the
recruitment, retention, and training in advanced research methods and techniques
of a diverse student body and workforce through its research activities. The
project also includes activities and practices focusing on increasing diversity,
equity, inclusion, and accessibility awareness in the classroom, laboratories,
and campus wide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oxidation resistance remains a critical requirement
for applications at medium to high temperatures in many key sectors (energy,
transportation, aerospace). While avenues to improve the oxidation resistance of
structural materials, i.e., alloying, coating, and surface treatments, are
commonly used, many of the mechanisms behind these strategies remain elusive
limiting our ability to design better performing alloys. The project addresses
the hypothesis that diffusion-induced grain boundary migration (DIGM) is
ubiquitous in alloy oxidation and uniquely explains the impacts of surface
deformation and grain refinement on the oxidation behavior of alloy systems. To
support this hypothesis, this project uses a series of increasingly complex
alloys, from model Ni alloys to multi principal element alloys for which
diffusion kinetics have been the object of debate. The program quantifies DIGM
during alloy oxidation, generating observations, experimental data, and analyses
necessary to increase our understanding of solute transport and phase
transformation during DIGM with implications for not only oxidation modeling and
mitigation but also for any conventional and complex concentrated alloy under
diffusive conditions at intermediate temperatures where DIGM can occur. The
approach combines systematic series of experiments using state-of-the-art
characterization techniques tying micron scale observations to atomistic
mechanisms, establishing the knowledge base for future modeling and
computational approaches within the Materials Genome
Initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.