* 2236384
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A bioarchaeological examination of early institutional services and juvenile care and health
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2023,10/31/2023
* Susan Sheridan, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Robin Bernstein
* 10/31/2023
* USD 20,926.00

Juveniles are an especially vulnerable group whose health is strongly influenced
by the care they receive. Such care is a major health determinant, as early life
stress can influence lifetime and even intergenerational health outcomes.
Numerous institutions arose historically to provide this care, including
religious institutions like monasteries that offered social and health services.
This doctoral dissertation research project investigates the impact that such
services had on juvenile health by comparing skeletal evidence of stress in
juveniles from monastic and non-monastic sites. The research provides historical
context for understanding how and why these institutions survived and how they
operate today, including how access and effectiveness vary with factors such as
age, status, or location. The project contributes to undergraduate and graduate
training in transferable laboratory skills, as well as to open data projects and
science outreach efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study has three primary
objectives: (i) to propose an expanded bioarchaeological model of juvenile care
which fully considers sociocultural context and is applicable to juveniles of a
range of biological and social age categories, (ii) to subsequently demonstrate
the model’s efficacy by applying it to a complex care network, and (iii) to
determine how early social and health services functioned in the network of care
to impact juvenile health. Bioarchaeology of care models use a step-by-step
approach which includes the diagnosis and analysis of pathological and stress
indicators, biological and social care needs of the individual/group and the
nature of that care, and the agency of both the caregivers and receivers. Within
this framework, the researchers compare skeletal stress indicators, mortality
data, and cultural data between three skeletal collections (urban monastic,
rural monastic, and non-monastic). Results from this project can demonstrate the
applicability of an expanded bioarchaeology of childcare framework as well as
contribute to the understanding of social and health services by more thoroughly
characterizing their early history and impact on juveniles across
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.