* 2236643
* CAREER: Characterization and Evolution of N-hydroxylase Biocatalysts: Solutions to Catalysis and Remediating Metal Pollution
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Lesley-Ann Giddings, Smith College
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 02/29/2028
* USD 458,975.00

Most bacteria create small molecules that bind to iron atoms. These molecules
are called siderophores. Many siderophores can also bind toxic heavy metals.
This project will search for siderophores with novel heavy metal binding
activities in a polluted copper mine site in Vermont. Once found, the enzymes
responsible for producing these metal-binding molecules will be identified and
engineered for enhanced capabilities. The project will engage undergraduate
women, including women of color, in research. There will also be community
outreach in the form of annual workshops on climate justice involving the Urban
League of Springfieldâ€™s Youth STEM enrichment program in Springfield,
MA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conserved sequence motifs identified in genes for novel
siderophores isolated from a metal-polluted environment will be identified and
characterized. Since alkyl diamine N-hydroxylase monooxygenases (NMOs) are
involved in siderophore biosynthesis, the novel siderophores will likely be the
product of unique NMOs. It is expected that NMOs involved in novel siderophore
biosynthesis have broader substrate specificity, making them a target for
identifying and developing new industrial biocatalysts. For example,
hydroxylamines, valuable building blocks in the chemical and pharmaceutical
industries, are enzymatically made in a single step from primary amines in the
biosynthesis of hydroxamate siderophores. This project will characterize the
selectivity of newly-identified NMOs and evolve these enzymes, increasing their
yield and product diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.