* 2236961
* CAREER: Biomechanics and Mechanobiology of Uterine Growth and Remodeling During Pregnancy
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Kyoko Yoshida, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 04/30/2028
* USD 584,770.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project will investigate
how mechanical loading controls changes in the uterus during pregnancy. During
pregnancy, the uterus remains relaxed while growing and stretching to
accommodate the developing fetus. Conversely, the uterus activates at term to
produce forceful contractions for delivery, only to return to its original shape
to prepare for the next pregnancy. If the uterus contracts too early, the
pregnancy can result in preterm birth, which is a leading cause of death in
children under five. The understanding of how the uterus remains relaxed,
activates, and reverses its adaptations to pregnancy is limited - making it
difficult to predict the timing of labor. This project will develop a computer
model to identify how changes due to the growing fetus control uterine
adaptations and mechanical function during pregnancy. This research will advance
the health of pregnant patients and babies by providing an improved
understanding of uterine changes during pregnancy. The knowledge gained from
this project also has implications for other organs, where deformations of even
a fraction of the amount observed in the uterus can lead to mechanical failure.
Further, this project will support an educational program to foster engagement
of pregnant and parenting high school girls in science and engineering. The
research will be incorporated into a hands-on educational module for pregnant
and parenting high school girls, who will be hosted for an on-campus college
experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this project is to
uncover the mechanical signals that drive uterine growth, remodeling, and
mechanical function during pregnancy. Based on the known mechanoadaptive
capabilities of the uterus, the research objectives include 1) experimental
quantification of uterine growth and remodeling biomechanics during a normal
mouse pregnancy, and 2) building, validating, and testing a growth and
remodeling finite element model of uterine mechanobiology. Critical questions to
be answered include: A) How do uterine loading, growth, and remodeling interact
and influence the mechanical cues that uterine smooth muscle cells experience?
B) What mechanical cues control uterine smooth muscle cell growth? and C) Do the
mechanobiological mechanisms of normal uterine adaptations apply to abnormal
pregnancies? Through these experimental and computational studies, this research
will advance the knowledge of uterine biomechanics and mechanobiology. The
research is integrated into outreach activities that target pregnant and
parenting girls, who are severely underrepresented in science and engineering.
Together, this project supports the principal investigator's long-term vision to
improve the lives of women through research and to diversify the engineering
workforce pursuing careers in women's health research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.