* 2236747
* CAREER:  Cooperation on the tree of life: Understanding the drivers of mite-plant defense mutualisms via the integration of evolution, ecology, and education
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Marjorie Weber, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 08/31/2028
* USD 1,040,113.00

Cooperative interactions between species are common in nature and play a central
role in the generation and maintenance of biodiversity and the functioning of
ecosystems. However, our understanding of cooperative interactions in the
natural world has historically lagged behind the study of antagonistic
interactions, such as competition and predation, perpetuating gaps in our
ability to maintain biodiversity and ecosystem function. This research focuses
on a highly common, but relatively unexplored, cooperative interaction between
North American trees and “bodyguard” mites that live on leaves and protect
plants against disease. This research asks why some tree species cooperate with
mites as a form of defense, while other closely related tree species do not,
testing a range of hypotheses about the factors that promote (or break down)
cooperation in nature. This project will also include the development of a new
science course that allows students to participate in research on cooperative
interactions in plants and develop critical thinking skills through the study of
trees. Together, the research and education goals of this proposal will result
in publicly available data on economically and ecologically important North
American trees, their herbivores, and the beneficial mites that protect them
from pests and disease. The project will also result in the hands-on training of
young scientists, and will include the development of tools aimed at increasing
the visibility of research in classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will examine processes driving large-scale patterns of variation in investment
in plant-animal defense mutualisms. Specifically, the project will investigate
the drivers of ecological, micro-, and macro-evolutionary variation in mite
domatia (heritable plant structures that house predaceous and fungiviorous
mites) at three scales: (a) across eastern North American forest communities,
(b) within three genera (Viburnum, Vitis, and Prunus) and (c) within three
geographically wide-spread species, Vitis riparia, Viburnum dentatum, and Prunus
serotina. This evolutionary research is coupled with an educational plan that
integrates data objectives with teaching/training goals through the development
of a new mid-level non-majors course titled “Seeing the forest and the trees:
The Study of Trees through Science, Art, and Society.” The course will
incorporate research activities into undergraduate education to enhance
scientific literacy, and will be aimed at groups that have traditionally lacked
exposure to science (non-science majors), combining humanities and science
perspectives into a course focused on the study of trees. Together, the research
and education aims will allow for tests of evolutionary and ecological
signatures consistent with long-standing hypotheses about ecological drivers of
mutualism across geography and evolutionary time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.