* 2236229
* Exploring the Impact of Community Engagement on STEM Undergraduates via Math Circles for Urban Elementary School Students
* EDU,DUE
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Gail Baxter, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 01/31/2026
* USD 299,591.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by fostering partnerships
between higher education and local communities to improve K-12 math education
while developing the teaching, leadership, and communication skills of
undergraduates majoring in STEM fields. The project will develop and assess an
innovative year-long community engagement program that prepares undergraduates
to lead math circles with urban elementary school students in multiple community
settings. Through exploration, collaboration, and problem solving, math circles
promote positive perceptions of mathematics, children's ability to do math, and
the relevance of math to everyday life. This project will advance understanding
of the potential impact of math circles as a vehicle to enhance undergraduate
STEM learning experiences. Undergraduate facilitators will be empowered to apply
mathematics to effect positive change in their community. The project will also
serve to broaden participation in math education, strengthen pathways to the
STEM workforce, foster deeper understanding of important mathematical concepts,
and build knowledge of best practices in teaching and
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project’s overarching goal is to develop an
innovative community engagement program to harness the knowledge, skills, and
enthusiasm of well-prepared STEM undergraduates to facilitate collaborative
mathematics problem solving among elementary school students in their local
community. Over three years, the project will design, implement, and iteratively
improve a credit-bearing course that will prepare STEM undergraduates to lead
math circles with elementary school children in various community settings: a
school-based after school program, a public library, and the Boys and Girls
Club. Four key tasks each year guide the project. First is to offer an elective
community engagement course for all STEM majors. Second is to collaborate with
partner sites to recruit elementary school students to participate in a math
circle program. Third is to collect and analyze data to ascertain the impact on
undergraduate math circle facilitators. The fourth and final task is to
undertake formative and summative evaluation to strengthen outcomes for
undergraduate facilitators and improve both the project-developed course and the
overall community engagement program. The data gathered will provide a rich
picture of who chooses to be a math circle facilitator and why, and the impact
on students’ knowledge, skills, and perceptions of mathematics within and across
community sites. Results will be disseminated via research publications,
presentations at major conferences, webinars, a public-facing website, and a
blueprint for replicating the project model at other institutions of higher
learning. The NSF IUSE: EHR Program supports research and development projects
to improve the effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through its
Engaged Student Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration,
and implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.