* 2236215
* CAREER: Merging Graph Theory and Automation for Chemical Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Timothy Cernak, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 02/29/2028
* USD 308,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Timothy Cernak of the University of Michigan is building a program that merges
chemical synthesis with data science. This is important because chemical
reactions are required to invent the medicines, polymers, agrochemicals, and
energy storage materials of the future; however, at the present time, it is
difficult to predict the outcome of such processes with accuracy. Publicly
available chemical reaction data are needed, alongside algorithms and theories
that can improve predictive reaction models toward applications in molecular
synthesis even at high levels of target complexity. This project leverages
state-of-the-art automated and robotic systems to perform thousands of chemical
reactions using the strategy of high-throughput experimentation (HTE). Data from
these experiments will then be partnered with machine learning, artificial
intelligence, and other forms of data science with the aim of building robust
predictive models of chemical reactivity. To facilitate the advancement of
machine learning models by the wider community, thousands of chemical reaction
data points in a machine-readable format will be released to the public domain.
The broader impacts of the award are extended by a range of educational
activities being spearheaded by Dr. Cernak and his research group that focus on
introducing undergraduate and graduate students to the interface of chemical
synthesis and data science through coding exercises and the use of freely
available software. Young children are also included in the educational and
outreach plans with age-appropriate activities designed to provide
kindergartners with their own experiences of high-throughput experimentation
through play with a well plate color-mixing toy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research supported by this award is divided across three investigational themes,
all at the interface of chemical synthesis and data science, as follows: (1)
identification of new transformations with the potential for high strategic
value in synthesis, (2) experimental realization of novel reaction types, and
(3) AI-based retrosynthetic analysis and subsequent experimental route
validation. In the first case, conceivable reactions are computationally studied
using graph theory-based methods to illuminate key transformations for future
development. For instance, adjacency matrix mapping techniques will be applied
to total syntheses of terpenes, alkaloids, and pharmaceuticals to reveal
chemical transformation types that do not yet exist but that could nonetheless
become impactful additions to the synthetic chemistry toolbox. In the second
thrust, theoretically sound reactions will be experimentally developed using a
merger of high-throughput experimentation and machine learning methods.
Applications center on the formation of carbonâ€“oxygen bonds from amine and
carboxylic acid building blocks. These reaction method applications are to be
complemented by the advancement of overall techniques for miniaturized high-
throughput experimentation, both at the hardware and software level, as well as
in the development of machine learning algorithms. The final theme focuses on
multistep synthesis of complex target molecules such as pharmaceuticals and
representative alkaloids (e.g., stemoamide and gelsemine), where sequences of
chemical reactions are stitched together via retrosynthetic algorithms.
Collectively, this research is anticipated to advance basic knowledge and
education at the interface of chemical synthesis and data
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.