* 2236075
* A Model for Human-Centered Engineering Education:   Broadening Engineering Teaching with Theory-based Educational Resources (BETTER)
* EDU,DUE
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2026
* Somesh Roy, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Abby Ilumoka
* 02/28/2026
* USD 300,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by providing professional
development for faculty in order to significantly enhance engineering education
by placing greater emphasis on the affective domain of teaching. Overall,
engineering faculty adoption of learner-centered pedagogical practices tends to
be slow and short-term. It is thought that this is because even when evidence-
based pedagogical practices are implemented, faculty still approach their
teaching based on their own beliefs and conceptions about teaching and teacher-
student interactions. As in many educational systems, there is an emphasis on
control, conformity, and objectivity rather than freedom, creativity,
engagement, and empowerment. This non- human-centered approach compromises the
preparation of students for the challenges of professional engineering practice.
The proposed faculty development project seeks to address this challenge by
calling for a significantly more human-centered way of teaching. Such a
humanistic-educative caring framework, grounded in “Caring Science” from the
discipline of nursing, is proposed for engineering education. The process
involves dialogue, reflection, and co-creation of knowledge by both the teacher
and the learner. Expected benefits include enhanced student learning and better
faculty appreciation of the lived experiences of
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novel framework proposed embraces openness to
the teaching-learning process through the use of Communities of Practice (CoP)
which support professional development of faculty to promote greater emphasis on
the affective domain of teaching. The intellectual merit of the project centers
around researcher plan to examine the impact of a faculty development
curriculum, grounded in a humanistic-educative framework, on promoting a human-
centered model to engineering education. Two research questions are posited to
guide the investigations on the impact of the intervention on faculty
instructional style. The first question seeks to understand the impact of this
caring framework on the faculty participants. The second question seeks to
understand differences between courses offered by faculty who experience the
framework via a Community of Practice or a Self-Paced Learning Group. These
research questions are to be answered using a multi-site quasi-experimental,
explanatory sequential mixed-methods design. The broader impacts of the project
include the advancement of the current state of engineering pedagogy through
equipping of faculty members with a conceptual understanding of important
learning theories and knowledge of evidence-based pedagogical practices. There
is independent external evaluation of the process of conducting the activities
by a qualified external evaluator. Findings from this project – disseminated via
national conferences and peer-reviewed journals - could potentially
revolutionize faculty training and result in increased use of evidence-based
teaching practices across a broad scale of institutions and disciplines. The NSF
IUSE: EDU Program supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students. Through its Engaged Student
Learning track, the program supports the creation, exploration, and
implementation of promising practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.