* 2236579
* Collaborative Research: III: Small: Taming Large-Scale Streaming Graphs in an Open World
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Laurent Cherubin, Florida Atlantic University
* Standard Grant
* Raj Acharya
* 06/30/2026
* USD 300,000.00

Data plays an essential role in shaping social decisions and scientific
conclusions. With the abundance of data available, many data-intensive
applications involve data with an underlying structure. Graphs provide a natural
mathematical language to precisely describe this structure. Graph data have a
ubiquitous presence in our daily lives, found in hydrological systems,
transportation networks, cellular networks, social media, and the Web, among
many others. Graph Learning (GL) is a crucial research area that focuses on
processing graph signals and building predictive models on graph data, and has
become a key topic in statistical modeling, data science, data mining, machine
learning, and computer science in general. Despite considerable progress,
traditional GL algorithms commonly assume that the important factors of the
graph data remain unchanged during the learning process. Such static and closed
assumptions tend to offer an overly simplified abstraction of complicated tasks
in the real world, making GL models fail to characterize and express the data
generated from natural or societal phenomena that constantly evolve. The
project’s overarching goal is to provide generic solutions to these core issues.
Specific applications studied in this project include the development of better
approaches for monitoring waterbody impairment and detecting malicious behaviors
and cyber-attacks in a timely manner. This project will also provide training
opportunities for both graduate and undergraduate researchers in computer
science. There will be a specific emphasis on gender diversity and participation
of underrepresented groups, allowing individuals from diverse backgrounds to
contribute to the advancement of GL
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project aims to
build a new, holistic, and standardized Graph Learning (GL) framework. The
project focuses on open-world and streaming network (OWSN) learning, which
considers the evolution of graph data over time in four critical factors: nodal
features, topological structures, target labels, and graph domains. To achieve
this goal, the project seeks to address fundamental challenges and answer
research questions aligned in two threads. The first thread is Graph
Representation, which aims to answer fundamental questions such as how to
characterize nodes with complex and ever-growing contents using vector
representations, and how to delineate the underlying process that drives the
evolution of graph topologies. The second thread is Graph Predictive Modeling,
which addresses how a graph learner can identify the emergence of new and
unknown classes and adapt to them without sacrificing performance on other known
classes, and how to generalize to other disparate graph domains in an
unsupervised manner. To address these questions, the project integrates tools
and advances from diverse areas, such as online optimization, uncertainty
quantification, variational analysis, and decision theory. The aim is to deepen
the understanding of graph data analysis and shed new light on related questions
in these areas. Real-world data from engineering applications, including
hydrological system data and computer network data, will be used to extensively
evaluate progress in each of the above themes. Collaboration with domain experts
in the specified application areas will ensure that the new theory, tools, and
software emerging from this project lead to meaningful societal
benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.