* 2236055
* Scaling Experiential, Community-Engaged Learning using Micro-Role Based Curricula
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* David Lee, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 03/31/2026
* USD 299,499.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by establishing a new model for
project-based courses that enables courses to scale apprenticeship learning and
to support richer real-world community-engaged learning for all. The rapid pace
of technological innovation has led to a labor market undergoing continuous
change and an increasing use of digital systems in society. This has led to
calls for higher education to prepare students with more real-world,
experiential, and community-engaged learning that can, in the former case, equip
students with the skills needed for transitioning into the workforce, and in the
latter case, equip students with the skills needed for developing technology for
the public interest. This will create a novel pedagogical approach through which
learning is modeled after the workplace, with lectures, sections, and
assignments organized around small experiential micro-roles that are the
building blocks for learning pathways that scaffold learning and organizational
structures that coordinate many students towards large real-world
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will take a design-based research
approach to designing, developing, and repeatedly deploying two project courses
and supporting tools to provide scalable, real-world, community-engaged learning
experiences for students of any background. The objectives of the project are;
to develop organizational patterns that scaffold effective learning while
enabling learners to complete significant real-world projects; study peer
support chaining, a networked form of mentorship for enhancing peer and near-
peer mentorship in ways that enable real-time personalized guidance from a
community without overwhelming people or triggering the bystander effect;
develop a learner sourced rubric creation process that creates detailed rubrics
while facilitating reflection and critique at scale, and develop a theory of
micro-role based apprenticeship learning that characterizes how the methods of
apprenticeship learning play out in micro-role based learning and their impact
for learning, especially for underrepresented students. The NSF IUSE: EHR
Program supports research and development projects to improve the effectiveness
of STEM education for all students. Through the Engaged Student Learning track,
the program supports the creation, exploration, and implementation of promising
practices and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.