* 2236695
* CAREER: A Molecular Level Investigation of Halogenation as a Mechanism of Trace Gas Production and Organic Carbon Transformation at the Surface Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Yina Liu, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 04/30/2028
* USD 263,514.00

Halogenation occurs when elements such as chlorine and bromine are added to
organic compounds in the ocean. This process can produce gases that damage the
ozone layer. Halogenation in the ocean is not well understood because most
halogen-containing molecules remain unknown. Understanding halogenation in
seawater is key because: (1) it may control recovery of the ozone hole as the
Montreal Protocol phases out the use of man-made ozone-depleting substances and
(2) some halogen-containing molecules can contribute to removing carbon dioxide
from the atmosphere. This CAREER research project will develop new analytical
and data science tools that can be used to identify halogen-containing molecules
in the marine environment. The research also contributes to public health
because damage to the ozone layer in the stratosphere is known to increase risks
for skin cancer and cataracts. This CAREER research project includes educational
activities to improve scientific literacy and to train the next generation of
scientists and policymakers. Project activities include: (1) cutting-edge
research training for undergraduate and graduate students, (2) partnerships with
high school teachers to develop teaching materials, and (3) building
relationships with communities underrepresented in STEM by working with
established outreach programs led by the Texas Sea Grant
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The motivation for this NSF CAREER research
project is that organic carbon (OC) halogenation simultaneously affects the
carbon cycle and atmospheric chemistry, contributing to stratospheric ozone
depletion. The overarching research goal of this CAREER project is to identify
the molecular-level chemical drivers of volatile and non-volatile halogenated
organic carbon (VHOC and HOC) formation in the surface ocean. A series of
laboratory experiments, student-led field observations, untargeted analyses
using high-resolution mass spectrometry, and novel data pipelines will be used
to achieve this goal through the pursuit of four specific research objectives:
(1) identify OC moieties susceptible to halogenation, (2) identify VHOC
precursor compounds in halogenation and assess production efficiency in single
model compounds and complex mixtures, (3) identify HOC precursor compounds,
trace HOC products, and predict their stabilities, and (4) determine the natural
occurrence and chemical characteristics of HOC in the ocean. These research
objectives are integral to the educational objectives. HOC characterization in
the ocean will be achieved through annual undergraduate student-led cruises that
will expose students to cutting-edge research. High school teachers will be
funded in the summer to contribute to laboratory experiments alongside the
Principal Investigator (PI) and graduate and undergraduate students. The
collaboration between the PI and teachers will be used to develop high school
instructional resources and classroom activities for a Marine Organic
Biogeochemistry curriculum. Research results from this CAREER research will be
synthesized and communicated to underrepresented communities through
collaboration with the statewide network of the Texas Sea Grant agents,
specialists, and communicators. This project will produce a first-of-its-kind
HOC library and time series in the Gulf of Mexico that will provide a solid
foundation for future HOC research by the broader scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.