* 2236093
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track I: Building a Sustainable, Innovative Ecosystem for Microchip Manufacturing
* TIP,ITE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Juejun Hu, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Linda Molnar
* 11/30/2023
* USD 750,000.00

Microelectronics technology is the pervasive solution across functions ranging
from communications and computation to sensing and imaging, for products ranging
from washing machines to automobiles and mega-data centers. Transistor
dimensional scaling has reduced energy consumption and increased speed and
functionality, simultaneously. To maintain performance scaling: i) iterative
technology change is insufficient, and ii) supply chain sustainability in terms
of workforce quality, materials criticality, and manufacturing effluent has no
inherent scaling vector. Economic risk for the nation has never been so large,
and rarely been so dependent on a particular technology evolution. The end of
transistor/chip scaling requires a new chip/package scaling paradigm. This
research program will create a formal industry/government/academic
infrastructure called the Microelectronics Manufacturing Sustainability Program
(MMSP) for the microelectronics packaging supply chain that will deliver
consensus policy recommendations, technology goals and timelines, as well as
education and workforce development products in chip/package scaling; and will
prototype a new massive-bandwidth chip package. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MMSP will
be led by six Convergence Teams (Technology, Workforce, Manufacturing, Supply
Chain, Materials Criticality, Roadmap) to realize:&lt;br/&gt;(a) Innovative
packaging prototypes for scaling microelectronics &lt;br/&gt;(b) an industry
Technology Roadmap for materials, processing, design, and sustainability
scaling&lt;br/&gt;(c) Grand Challenge sustainability studies of materials
criticality, process effluent and cradle-to grave energy consumption in IC chips
for information and automotive industries, and &lt;br/&gt;(d) Databases of
materials properties, process tools, and workforce skills to guide packaging
innovation. &lt;br/&gt;MMSP will: (i) inform industry R&amp;D with innovative
prototypes; (ii) embrace Diversity, Equity, Inclusion and Accessibility with
education and training for human capital of the US microelectronics industry,
using an agile continuous education methodology; (iii) create K-12 Science,
Technology, Engineering and Mathematics awareness to support a critical pipeline
for the next-generation of engineers and technicians; (iv) engage with
Historically Black Colleges and Universities and Hispanic Serving Institutions;
and (v) build diverse working groups for the creation of technology and
education roadmaps. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There will also be three major
technical components to the proposed project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1)
Electronic-Photonic Packaging (EPP) Research: How will a $400B semiconductor
industry supply chain transition from chip-scaling to a new package-scaling
platform? Can teams of experts who bridge applications from pure electronics to
photonics jointly create a common glossary, design infrastructure, and supply
chain alignment? MMSP is driven by the Integrated Photonics Systems Roadmap-
International (IPSR-I) Consortium: a forum to construct a common manufacturing
platform and establish a learning curve to identify performance/cost benefits of
research and development Grand Challenges. Global electronic/photonic industries
have committed to construction of an EPP Roadmap for the microelectronics supply
chain with sustainability metrics. Phase 1 research will include feasibility
demonstration of innovative EPP designs for scaling package I/O to &gt;1
Petabit/second data transfer rates. &lt;br/&gt;(2) Sustainability Attributes
&amp; Boundaries: Sustainability is the critical ‘small planet frontier’ for
high volume manufacturing. Phase 1 white paper studies will guide EPP Roadmap
tasks to assess how materials, workforce, life-cycle, and energy become supply
chain limiting resources; the Roadmap releases will anticipate disruptions and
specify trade-offs in engineering, economic, social, and policy constraints with
research, design, and manufacturing Process-Based Cost Models. &lt;br/&gt;(3)
Workforce Agile Continuous Education: Technology transitions introduce risks to:
(i) firms’ business and sustainability propositions; (ii) worker careers; and
(iii) incumbent technology compatibility. Converging Learning Science with
Manufacturing Innovation will enable research discovery to translate into a new
Design for Packaging/Test education program (Phase 1 outlines curriculum). MIT’s
Lab for Education and Application Prototypes (LEAP) will train 2-year and 4-year
college students and upskill incumbent workers by its extant blended instruction
strategy: (a) Massive Open Online Courses (conceptual learning); (b) Virtual
Reality sims (fortify conceptual learning, pre-train in procedural skills); (c)
hands-on labs (fortify procedural/conceptual learning) in on-site
bootcamps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.