* 2236302
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track J: Data-driven Agriculture to Bridge Small Farms to Regional Food Supply Chains (L02619644)
* TIP,ITE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Ngan Le, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Michael Reksulak
* 11/30/2023
* USD 743,651.00

Global climate change and pandemic have exposed vulnerabilities in the
globalized food system, exacerbating food insecurity, especially for diverse and
underserved communities who already experience disproportionate access to safe
and affordable food and nutrition. The need for resilient local food supply has
refocused efforts on domestic sourcing of food in the United States. Yet,
logistical and market knowledge barriers limit the viability of productive local
food systems. The convergence of multiple scientific research fields and modern
technological innovations such as artificial intelligence and machine learning
can improve supply and demand efficiencies by extending small farmers’ access to
market insights. This project will empower regional food producers to understand
the economic value of the specialty crop assortment and food animals on their
farms in comparison to market demand for institutional sales (e.g., retailers,
food hubs, distributors, grocers, restaurants, hospitals, schools or colleges).
The end-platform’s data-driven market and financial insights will enhance
regional food producers’ abilities to obtain procurement contracts with
institutional buyers, supporting local farms to bring their products to store
shelves, restaurant tables, and cafeterias. &lt;br/&gt;Addressing the challenges
of regional food systems will have broad societal implications for the economic
livelihoods of small farmers and local businesses, and for the increased
availability of safe and nutritious local food that will support metabolic
health, particularly for disadvantaged communities. Furthermore, enhanced
knowledge of sales channels will reduce food losses and enhance crop diversity,
thus creating income streams for farmers practicing climate-friendly
regenerative agricultural techniques such as mixed farming and crop
diversification. Ultimately, this project advances the health and prosperity of
the United States’ population, as well as environmental stewardship, through its
focus on food and nutrition security. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
assesses user needs to design a scalable technology platform that provides
market insights to small farmers. The primary research objectives are: (a) to
understand the knowledge barriers that small farmers experience to sell to
institutional markets; and (b) to converge use-inspired research of multiple
scientific disciplines and novel data-driven techniques to develop the
conceptual design for a software platform that would support small farmers to
access the relevant market information. The research methods include: (a) user
discovery with small farmers and other stakeholders about the barriers that they
face; (b) market analysis; (c) data collection that contributes to the
conceptual design and data feeds for computational models in the platform. Data
collection includes: (i) inventory assessments and interviews with institutional
buyers in the underserved pilot regions to identify local demand for food
products; (ii) product-level data collected on-farm via robotics, remote
sensing, satellite data or drone, including both existing datasets and data
collected from growers; (iii) assessment of low-cost validated on-farm
preventative controls and detection of microbial risk for analysis of food
safety economic risk models to support production decisions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Central to the translation of research discovery to market
impact, this project will identify the barriers that small farmers experience to
understand institutional market demand and sell to institutional buyers. By
identifying where gaps in knowledge contribute to supply and demand
inefficiencies, it will also extend understanding of the data across scientific
fields that could be integrated to inform business decisions, leveraging
artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning (ML) techniques, such as
computer vision, to price farm products and create predictive models to
anticipate future food demand and pricing. This work will advance the field for
data-driven agriculture for small producers, supporting their livelihoods and
local economic growth and food security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.