* 2236708
* CAREER: Insect-scale Flapping-Wing Micro Aerial Robots Capable of Self-powered Hover and Agile Maneuvering
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Yufeng Chen, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 03/31/2028
* USD 600,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will create new
capabilities for insect-scale flying robots, that is, flying robots that weigh
less than five grams and are less than five centimeters in length. These robots
have the potential to provide unique benefits to society, but their development
has been slowed by major engineering challenges. The goal of this project is to
demonstrate both agile maneuvers and precise hover, for flight durations of up
to ten seconds using only on-board power. These capabilities will set insect-
scale flying robots on the path to important future applications, such as
assisting in the pollination of crops, or conducting remote inspections of
inaccessible areas. Some features of these robots are inspired by their
biological analogs, such as the soft, muscle-like actuators that drive their
wings. Other important functions, such as hovering at a precise location, must
diverge from natural strategies due to size, weight, and power restrictions. For
example, when the robot attains its desired orientation it resists disturbances
such as wind gusts by using its wings to spin like a top. And, rather than carry
a heavy and power-hungry high-speed camera and image processing system, the
hovering robot will rely on low-frequency updates from nearby companion robots
to correct its flight. The research is complemented by educational and outreach
activities including exhibits at distinguished science museums in Boston and New
York, programs for underrepresented high school and undergraduate students
hosted through MIT’s summer research programs, and workshops organized at
international robotics conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop soft-actuated micro-aerial-robots capable of demonstrating insect-like
agile maneuvers and passively stable untethered flight. We aim to enable
transformative flight capabilities through leveraging the unique properties of
dielectric elastomer actuators and the dynamics of insect-scale robots.
Specifically, the project will focus on the following three directions: (i)
demonstrate fast (&gt;1.5 m/s) flight and acrobatic maneuvers such as rapid
banked turns and somersaults; (ii) leverage passive stability and implement low
frequency (&lt;5 Hz) vision-based tracking to demonstrate hovering flight
without requiring the state-of-the-art infrared indoor tracking system; and
(iii) incorporate compact power electronics and a battery to achieve a 10-second
untethered flight in a 2.3 g soft aerial robot. Achieving these flight
capabilities will represent a major milestone in the long-term effort of
developing fully autonomous insect-scale aerial
robots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.