* 2236822
* CAREER: Physicalizing Small Data: A First-Person Approach to Examining IoT Data
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2028
* Audrey Desjardins, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 05/31/2028
* USD 93,898.00

By working with artists in residence, this project will generate novel tools and
methods around physical representations of data in the context of the home. Home
Internet of Things (IoT) devices such as smart home cameras, smart speakers,
motion sensors, smart watches and more are a fast-growing global market that not
only represents one of the most important new ways of collecting data about
people, but also takes place in a particularly private space, the home. As
articulated in recent public debates, it is crucial that people be able to
access, assess, and control their own data in order to better understand both
themselves and what others can learn about them, as well as to manage possible
privacy and surveillance risks of allowing these data to be collected. To help
people control their own data, the project team will bring together
technologists and artists to create new ways for individuals to experience the
data they create through IoT systems that observe them and their homes. This
‘small data’ approach is designed to center individual agency and control around
data, helping people be more aware and engaged participants in the data economy
while advancing knowledge around visualization and sense-making of
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is structured as a series of first-person
research collaborative artist residencies that develop and then generalize
bespoke physical representations (“physicalizations”) of data. Starting with a
first-person approach is crucial because developing meaningful physicalizations
require a close understanding of both the context and the people involved in the
data collection, such as, the circumstances of the home, the particular
technologies in play, the residents’ current understanding of data, and so on.
Thus, each residency will start by developing a series of physicalization
prototypes tuned to the resident artist’s context. Then, the project team will
iterate on both the prototypes and the methods used in creating them to create
public-facing activities and tools that a wider range of people can experiment
with and customize to their own homes, technologies, and understandings.
Together, the work will (1) develop new tools and methods for physicalizing IoT
data in context, (2) increase rigor in first-person methods with regards to
documenting, analyzing and disseminating findings, (3) examine the creative
possibilities of collaborations between technology design and the arts that will
generalize beyond the specific problem of data physicalization, and (4) advance
the practice and tools available for other researchers interested in small data-
focused research. The collaboration of technology designers and artists also has
the potential to invite and involve communities who are often underrepresented
in computing, for instance women and students in the arts and
humanities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.