* 2236524
* Collaborative Research: IRES Track I: Future Mobility for Smart City
* O/D,OISE
* 11/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Seri Park, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 09/30/2025
* USD 191,687.00

By 2050, the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) estimates that
approximately 66% of the world’s population will reside in urban areas, posing
significant challenges associated with environmental and social sustainability.
To address these challenges, many national and global agencies have launched
initiatives such as the U.S. Department of Transportation’s Smart City Challenge
program, World Bank’s Sustainable Cities Initiative, and the United Nations’
Sustainable Development Goals. A multifaceted and holistic approach is the core
element in achieving the goals of smart cities, especially balancing the digital
infrastructure with the physical infrastructure. Considering the ever-advancing
sensors and information technology coupled with the urgency of adapting cities
to be resilient to climate change and to provide adequate mobility to the
public, the onus is on educators to develop a pedagogic and scholastic approach
to preparing our students for the future. There is an urgent and unmet need to
expose our students to a research environment where they can appreciate the
integrated and interdisciplinary nature of sustainable and smart cities to
address a variety of issues surrounding urban areas and develop a multifaceted
problem-solving mindset. This project aims to initiate an international research
experience for students (IRES) program at Seoul National University (SNU) in
South Korea with an overarching research theme of mobility for sustainable and
smart cities. The proposed IRES program will support an 8-week summer research
experience for a cohort of six U.S. undergraduate/graduate students each year
for the three-year duration of the grant. The goals of the proposed IRES program
are: (i) To foster creative and multidisciplinary perspectives on problem-
solving by exposing students to the research fields of sustainable and smart
cities; (ii) to develop global competence by providing students an immersive
academic and cultural experience in South Korea; and (iii) to ultimately
motivate students to pursue a career in STEM. Furthermore, this proposed IRES
program will help our students grow not just as prepared engineers but also as
community leaders with a broad and diverse worldview.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IRES project addresses the fundamental
research question: How and to what extent a digital infrastructure (e.g.,
sensors and data science) can enhance human life from an urban mobility
perspective? A three-level approach will be emphasized in exploring and delving
into the data analytics, optimization techniques, and model building using
various tools (e.g., GIS, Unity3D). This innovative and holistic research
approach will advance knowledge of the relationship between digital
infrastructure and physical infrastructure, and ultimately provide the essential
digital infrastructure layout to further support physical infrastructure - a
much-needed fundamental information to build a smart city. Furthermore, this
will allow our students to capture and understand the importance of a holistic
and multidisciplinary approach. Seoul National University’s Smart City
Engineering Program provides a state-of-the-art research environment for
sustainable and smart cities, with leading experts in engineering, planning,
science, and policy, as well as world-class lab and testbed equipment and
facilities. Upon completion of this IRES project, we expect students will
achieve: (i) Elevated interest and intellectual growth in the immediate and
related fields of future mobility for sustainable and smart cities (e.g., big
data analyses, code development, design and programming of a multimodal system);
(ii) increased awareness of diversity within and across cultures in problem
solving in engineering; (iii) confidence in the ability to work as a member of a
cross-cultural engineering team; and (iv) diverse and knowledgeable
worldview.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.