* 2236894
* CAREER: Viscosity-tunable Photopolymers with Metal Powder Mixtures for Cost-effective, High-speed and Large-area Metal Additive Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Haseung Chung, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 04/30/2028
* USD 567,121.00

Modern metal additive manufacturing (AM) mostly relies on a point-by-point
printing scheme, in which the fabrication time increases substantially with the
size of a part, in particular, the cross-sectional area of the part. Such a
processing constraint prevents metal AM from being a viable alternative for
large-scale production of parts in transportation, construction and many other
applications. To overcome the challenge, this Faculty Early Career Development
(CAREER) award supports fundamental research for an untested metal AM process,
whereby a whole layer is first printed at once by curing a mixture of
photopolymer and metal powder using digital light projection, followed by
debinding and sintering, resulting in high-speed production. The new process
hinges on a unique photopolymer with tunable properties, to balance the print-
layer curing depth and homogeneous mixing of metal powder in a photopolymer
suspension. If successful, this metal AM system, first of its kind, will be
beneficial to heavy industries such as transportation, machinery and
construction, and provide a competitive edge to U.S. industries in the global
market. The project team will also organize webinars and workshops tailored for
engineers to learn how the new metal AM system can be incorporated into
practices, as well as introduce basic AM principles to K-12 students, offering
hands-on activities (i.e., LEGO 3D printing) to inspire their interest in STEM
professions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this research is to
understand the process mechanism of a metal AM system that utilizes
photopolymerization of a photopolymer and metal-powder mixture based on light
projection rather than scanning, with emphases on challenges in metal powder
sedimentation, curing capacity and possible oxidation-related defects. The
project will first investigate the combination of thermoset-thermoplastic
polymers to comprehend and control the viscosity of photopolymers. Numerical
models of curability and powder packing will then be utilized to characterize
the curing depth and the packing density as a function of particle size
distributions in a photopolymer-powder mixture. Thermal gravimetric and
microstructural analyses will also be employed to study debinding and sintering
behaviors of photopolymer-powder mixtures. Moreover, a solid-state sintering
model will be developed to evaluate the final part quality. The research
findings will reveal principles that influence the rheological properties as
well as behaviors during the curing, debinding, and sintering of photopolymer-
powder mixtures. The new AM approach has the potential to allow fabrication of
fully-dense, complex, and large metal parts at a high speed without oxidation or
deformation. The new knowledge obtained is expected to also support advances in
other AM processes, such as binder-jet 3D printing of ceramics, to improve the
fabrication speed as well as the part quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.