* 2236235
* NSF Convergence Accelerator Track J:  Aqua Sacs for Sustainable Agriculture in a Changing Climate
* TIP,ITE
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2023
* Jon Chorover, Pratt Institute
* Standard Grant
* Michael Reksulak
* 11/30/2023
* USD 750,000.00

Climate change has stressed the availability of global water resources and
increased water scarcity, particularly in arid and semiarid regions. The
situation will only worsen, leading to more severe and frequent droughts
followed by flooding, decreasing arable land, and increasing food insecurity. A
more efficient irrigation system is needed, especially for water-intensive
crops, such as soybeans, wheat, and sugarcane. Hydrogels added to soil reduce
irrigation frequency by absorbing and retaining water and releasing it when the
soil dries. They improve the hydro-physical properties of the soil, such as
porosity, and they can reduce erosion and runoff and thereby mitigate the effect
of flooding. Hydrogels function as small water containers in the ground with
osmotic membranes that increase microbial activity, growth, and performance
rate.&lt;br/&gt;Currently, most of the hydrogels on the market are synthetic
polyacrylates and polyacrylamides, which are petroleum-based materials and not
ecologically friendly for large-scale agriculture. Some semisynthetic starch-
based polymers are also available. However, a better alternative is possible.
Alginate-based hydrogels have been shown to be efficient in controlling soil
moisture for plant growth. In this project, we introduce the ecologically
friendly water container Aqua Sac, an alginate-based hydrogel that can be
produced in various patterns such as sheets or meshes. Osmotic membranes can be
formed by binding calcium at the surface, making them similar in function to
synthetic hydrogels. Moreover, adding alginate hydrogels to soil can stimulate
microbial activity, which generates microbial biomass and diversity, and the
biodegradation of alginate can contribute to soil health and, in turn, leads to
increased crop production. Alginate is extracted from seaweeds, such as kelp,
which can be sustainably farmed while providing a suite of environmental
benefits. Seaweeds are a zero-input crop that does not require the use of
fertilizers, pesticides, or fresh water. Rather, seaweeds extract excess
nutrients from the surrounding waters, including dissolved nitrogen and carbon
dioxide, which helps to combat eutrophication and climate change. Thus, the
development of Aqua Sac will benefit agriculture and soil health on land and the
marine environment by helping to increase the demand for aquacultured seaweeds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project aims to understand and develop
the industrialization steps required to produce Aqua Sac at a commercial scale.
The technique that was developed allows the production of alginate hydrogel in
rolls that can be deployed to the field in the form of sheets or meshes of
various patterns that can be used as an additive material for applications
ranging from soil hydration to food preservation. The scaling from a laboratory
to an industrial scale requires an understanding of seaweed farming, alginate
extraction, hydrogel optimization, and field performance. Information obtained
from these steps will give us the elements necessary to create a business model
and seek industrial partners for the production and distribution of Aqua Sac on
an industrial scale. Specifically, we will seek to: 1) identify seaweed species
and growing regions that maximize domestic alginate production and quality; 2)
refine methods of alginate extraction and hydrogel production to minimize waste
production, 3) optimize the hydrogel membrane for water absorption and
retention, and 4) conduct field tests to understand the performance of the
hydrogel under actual agricultural conditions. All steps will be developed
within a circular economy model to minimize environmental impact. The project
will be documented by photo and filmed for public
dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.