* 2237843
* CAREER: Robotic Augmentation of Human Reflexes and Reach through Collaborative Grasping
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Hannah Stuart, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 05/31/2028
* USD 600,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project will create a new
generation of effective and affordable wearable robotic assistance for people
with severe weakness or partial paralysis of the hands and arms, such as might
arise from cervical spinal cord injury. The objective is to help the user with
grasping and holding actions, and enable performance of tasks of daily living.
The project focuses on three assistance methods. The first is to use the high
reaction speed of the robot to anticipate and augment the user's own grasp
reflexes. The second is to provide natural and comfortable collaborative
grasping and holding, by having the robot adapt its response to user preference.
The third combines both anticipatory reflex augmentation and adaptive
collaborative grasping to bestow maximal benefits under conditions of realistic
variability and uncertainty. This work addresses fundamental issues of shared
human-robot collaboration and the design of assistive mechanisms. It advances
the health and welfare of people with disabilities, and increases their ability
to function independently. Other benefits to society are the development of new
educational techniques to broaden participation of people with disabilities in
engineering and science, both in the classroom and in the local
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For people with disabilities capable of partial
body-power, miscoordination with a robotic exoskeleton can lead to inefficiency,
slowness, and frustration. This project introduces an unexplored modality for
assistive grasping devices called collaborative grasping, or co-grasping, which
is suitable to augment people with partial body power. This approach
fundamentally alters the role of robotic elements with the goal of improving
shared task performance and device embodiment. The project pursues two primary
functional outcomes: (R1) reducing the rate of accidental object drops using
tactile sensors and robot-led reflexes and (R2) easing body movements with
robotic support to improve comfort and skill during reach-and-grasp. The methods
used include the modification of a novel co-grasping testbed to also enable
human-only and robot-only control cases, to probe interwoven questions of
intelligence and embodiment through human subjects experiments. Specific
experiments investigate the role of inherent haptic feedback on physical human
robot interaction and user perception during challenging grasping tasks. The
capstone of this project (R1+R2) is a collaborative arbitration prototype to
accomplish (R1) and (R2) concurrently, including during realistic tasks of daily
living. Overall, this work generates new tools and knowledge to improve and
personalize the integration of robotic systems with the hands to enhance human
independence and wellbeing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.