* 2237741
* CAREER: Engineering Extracellular Matrix Ligands for Macrophage Control
* ENG,CBET
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2028
* Erika Moore, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2028
* USD 483,492.00

Macrophages are immune cells that can direct wound healing by adopting
functional states that range from pro-inflammatory (bad) to pro-tissue healing
(good). To change their functional state, macrophages receive signals from their
environment/extracellular matrix (ECM). One of the ways the ECM can direct
macrophage function is through integrins. Integrins are receptors found on
macrophage membranes, and their associated ligands (molecules that can bind to
the receptors) are found throughout the ECM. The ECM integrin receptor-ligand
pair can determine the macrophage functional state. Currently, there are limited
strategies to understand the fundamental relationship between ECM ligands and
macrophage integrin receptors. In this CAREER project, the investigator will
combine ECM ligands with peptide polymer chemistry to design biomaterial tools
for investigating the influence of ECM ligands on macrophage function. The
proposed program will increase fundamental understanding of how ECM ligands
inform macrophage function by introducing biomaterial tools to quantify ECM
ligand influence. Education and outreach activities are integrated with the
proposed research and involve introducing a biomaterials business project plan
for undergraduate students, developing a workshop for biomaterial career
exposure to historically excluded students, and extending biomaterial projects
for middle school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Macrophage immune cells
determine tissue homeostasis, wound healing, and tissue regeneration through
signals from their microenvironment. The investigator’s long-term research goal
is to understand how extracellular matrix (ECM) composition directs macrophage
function. In support of this goal, this CAREER project focuses on developing
polyethylene glycol-based biomaterial tools with known peptide-derived ECM
ligands to quantify integrin ligand-receptor influence on macrophage activation.
While it is understood how some cues direct macrophage function, as a field it
is not understood how the extracellular matrix (ECM) directs macrophage
function. Existing experimental systems designed to investigate macrophage
function in the ECM are limited due to lack of control over incorporation of ECM
ligands. The tools developed in this project will overcome this limitation.
Studies are designed to test the central hypothesis that ECM-derived ligands
from collagen, laminin, and fibronectin direct macrophage activation either
towards a pro-inflammatory state or towards a pro-tissue healing state.
Leveraging polymer chemistry and known ECM ligands, the proposed work comprises
three research objectives: 1) quantifying integrin ligands influence on
macrophage function via three-dimensional peptide screening, 2) designing
combinatorial ECM ligand biomaterials to quantify ECM niche impact on macrophage
function; and 3) quantifying the influence of age on human-donor macrophage
function via combinatorial ECM ligand biomaterials. To successfully complete
these aims, techniques established in the investigator’s lab will be employed
for polymer-peptide conjugation, hydrogel formulation, mechanical assessments,
and soluble stimulation of macrophages in a three-dimensional biomaterial.
Molecular evaluations of macrophage function will include secretome analysis,
immunocytochemistry, and interrogation of genetic expression alterations as a
result of interaction with each ECM ligand. Completion of the tasks set forth
will lay the foundation understanding how ECM ligands direct macrophage function
through design of biomaterial tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.