* 2237357
* CAREER: Physics-inspired Machine Learning with Sparse and Asynchronous p-bits
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Kerem Camsari, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 12/31/2027
* USD 113,233.00

Recent advances in the fields of Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence
(AI) have created practical applications ranging from powerful chatbots that can
generate meaningful conversations or AI artists that can generate striking art.
Behind the stage, however, there are enormous costs in energy, time and physical
resources to train such AI models, making them costly, limiting accessibility
and preventing democratized use. Moreover, these revolutionary advances have
come at the worst possible time from a microelectronics viewpoint, since it has
become significantly hard to improve the energy efficiency and performance of
modern transistors whose dimensions have reached atomic dimensions. This project
is about designing a new kind of physics-inspired and probabilistic computer,
contrasting conventional fully-deterministic computers. The approach is to start
from inherently noisy magnetic materials and devices to build probabilistic bits
(p-bits). Networks of connected p-bits can then be suitably configured to
efficiently solve computational problems encountered in probabilistic machine
learning containing a large family of powerful algorithms that are hard to train
in conventional computers. Because the underlying building blocks are naturally
probabilistic in this approach, they can be used to implement probabilistic
learning algorithms far more efficiently compared to conventional computers,
where mimicking true randomness comes with high costs in area and energy
consumption. The interdisciplinary nature of this project will require the
synergy and rethinking of several different layers of the computing stack from
devices, architectures and algorithms such that new types of energy-efficient,
physics-inspired and probabilistic computers can be built to help with the
greatest computing challenges of society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
approach of this CAREER project is to design physics-inspired probabilistic
computers (p-computer) tailored for probabilistic machine learning algorithms.
These p-computers will go beyond existing small-scale prototypes by combining
magnetic nanodevices called stochastic Magnetic Tunnel Junctions with powerful
CMOS-based field programmable gate arrays. The main aim will be to demonstrate
the first large-scale demonstration of a CMOS + stochastic MTJ architecture for
probabilistic computing where 10,000 digital p-bits will be augmented by 100
stochastic magnetic tunnel junction-based p-bits. Augmented by the true
randomness and the asynchronous dynamics naturally provided by stochastic
magnetic tunnel junctions, these heterogeneous processors are expected to
provide orders of magnitude energy and performance improvement over optimized
Graphical and Tensor Processing Units commonly used by present-day AI systems.
The application of these p-computers to quantum and classical machine learning
algorithms in physics-inspired, hardware-aware and sparse networks will lead to
computational advantage and better energy efficiency, facilitating the eventual
integration of million p-bit computers. The findings of this project will lead
to the development of unique device models and algorithms, interdisciplinary
courses and tutorials. These will be disseminated on nanoHUB and YouTube
covering a diverse array of topics, including statistical mechanics, machine
learning and quantum computing. Through partnerships with supporting
institutions in academia and industry, this project will strongly contribute to
the workforce training of the “technology maestros” of the future who are deep
in one field but broad enough to connect to related
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.