* 2237119
* CAREER: An accessible, dynamic model of pricing applied to wage and housing purchases
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Peter Kvam, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Gonzalez-Vallejo
* 05/31/2028
* USD 114,808.00

Employers across the United States are facing a crisis of labor supply, driven
in part by changes in the working conditions employees desire and the wages they
perceive as fair. Simultaneously, prospective homebuyers are faced with rising
costs and fierce competition for housing – with aging adults, veterans,
minorities, and low-income families hit hardest by rising home prices. This
project seeks to understand how people assign value in these types of
transactions (wages, homebuying), focusing on how individuals respond to
competition and market changes. The project team is partnering with financial
education programs on money management and first-time homebuyers to understand
how differences between people – such as their tolerance for risks or
willingness to delay purchases until a future date – predict their success on
job and housing markets. The findings will allow us to better understand the
psychology of value, create educational resources to help people adopt better
strategies for finding jobs or housing, and identify public policy interventions
that can alleviate housing and labor shortages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Across a
series of experiments, this project tests computational models of pricing in
multi-alternative, multi-attribute settings. These experiments manipulate
simulated market competitiveness, delays, risks, and attributes of the choice
alternatives in order to examine the dynamics of price-setting among individuals
and test the cognitive mechanisms of pricing models. To improve the
accessibility and efficiency of pricing model fitting and comparison, the
project embeds them in neural networks trained to map observed pricing data onto
generative model parameters. These will be added to online tools, teaching
materials, and workshops to make them widely available. The pricing models will
be used to estimate risk and delay aversion, bias, and pricing dynamics in
multi-alternative choice experiments. The model parameters will also be used to
predict the outcomes of job and home searches among participants in financial
education programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.