* 2237046
* CAREER: Unraveling the Developmental Processes Underlying the Twining Motion of Vines
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Joyce Onyenedum, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Gallagher
* 01/31/2028
* USD 750,000.00

Climbing vines weave through the forest canopy wrapping themselves around host
trees in search of light at the top of the canopy. Climbing vines are a critical
part of forest ecosystems, where they frequently outcompete and kill forest
trees. Moreover, these plants are increasing in size and abundance in response
to forest fragmentation and climate change. However, we still lack a basic
understanding of precisely how these plants perform their dramatic snake-like
twining motions. In this CAREER award, the developmental basis of twining will
be investigated. How cells, tissues, hormones, and molecular biology interact to
build a twining vine will be investigated, with the aim of revealing the
fundamental reasons that vines are distinct from erect plants. To enhance public
and professional literacy of how plants are constructed – the field of plant
anatomy – the PI will launch an educational video series teaching plant anatomy
with live dissections and animations. This video series will be made freely
available to engage novice, and as a primer and teaching tool for professional
scientists and educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this CAREER award, the
investigator seeks to address the following question – “how do vines climb?” –
by leveraging a multiscale integrative approach linking gene expression, cell
wall construction, and hormone regulation to organismal form to explain the
developmental processes that generate twining vines. Using common bean,
Phaseolus vulgaris L. (Fabaceae), as the model species, the research aims of
this proposal are to: (1) Characterize the developmental basis underpinning the
continuum of habits, from twiners, to prostrate vine, to erect shrub; (2)
Elucidate how phytohormones determine plant habit; and (3) Test the functional
role of gelatinous fibers in twiners. At present, there is a significant
imbalance in training and pedagogy between molecular biology and plant anatomy
in the United States, therefore hindering advancements in the plant sciences.
The broader impacts aim of this work is to generate an animated educational
Plant Anatomy video series. This resource will serve as a freely available
resource to advance public literacy of botany while providing critically absent
expertise for the scientific community. The educational aims are to: (1)
Identify gaps in the pedagogy for targeted intervention through surveying the
needs of the botanical community; (2) Write, produce, and disseminate a plant
anatomy educational videos series “Build a Plant”; and (3) Integrate plant
anatomy learning outcomes in undergraduate courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is co-funded by BIO-IOS-Developmental Systems and the BIO-IOS-
Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.