* 2237082
* CAREER: Synthesis of Emerging Chalcogenide and Chalcohalide Semiconductor Nanomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Sidney Creutz, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 03/31/2028
* USD 508,116.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many modern technologies rely on
semiconductor materials for their function. For example, solar cells use
semiconductors to absorb light and generate electricity. Scientists and
engineers are continuously working to improve the efficiency and cost-
effectiveness of solar cells to help decrease global dependence on non-renewable
energy sources. Many promising new semiconductor materials have been proposed
based on computations. Some of the materials that have been predicted to have
excellent properties have been, so far, difficult to synthesize under the mild
conditions that would make it possible to incorporate them into devices. This
includes a class of materials known as chalcogenide perovskites, and certain
other materials which contain mixtures of halide and chalcogenide ions. Through
this award, jointly funded by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program in
the Division of Materials Research and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR) at NSF, Prof. Sidney Creutz is developing new
methods to make some of these materials on the nanoscale under relatively mild
conditions and is studying their electronic and optical properties to better
understand their potential applicability in solar cells and other devices.
Undergraduate and graduate students are trained in materials chemistry and gain
exposure to alternative energy concepts, contributing to the development of a
green energy workforce. This includes the development of a materials chemistry
bootcamp to introduce new undergraduate students to research in this area.
Additionally, outreach is carried out to high school students in the state of
Mississippi to increase awareness about and interest in chemistry and its
relationship to energy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is a critical need for the development of new
potential photovoltaic materials that may help spur the widespread global
adoption of solar energy. With this CAREER project, Prof. Creutz will develop
new synthetic approaches to emerging semiconductor nanomaterials, and to probe
the properties of the resulting materials using a range of spectroscopic and
chemical approaches. This work focuses on two general classes of materials:
chalcogenide perovskites and chalcohalides, including split-anion perovskites.
The first major objective is to study in detail the structure and optoelectronic
properties (including luminescence and tunable absorbance) of nanocrystals of
the chalcogenide perovskite barium zirconium sulfide and the related material
barium titanium sulfide. The second major objective is to extend these synthetic
methods to several classes of closely related materials that have been proposed
to have promising optoelectronic properties, including alloys, layered phases,
rare earth chalcogenide perovskites, and doped materials. The third major
objective is to develop new synthetic approaches to mixed-anion chalcohalide
materials, focused on a detailed fundamental understanding of heterovalent anion
exchange between chalcogenides and halides. Integrated with these research
objectives is an educational program targeted at K-12 students and early
undergraduates, focused on increasing interest and achievement in materials
science and chemistry, especially related to applications in energy and
sustainability, through activities and outreach programs at local high schools
and an intensive materials chemistry bootcamp to prepare new undergraduates for
research positions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.