* 2237661
* CAREER: Mitigating vigilance decrement in the clinical environment
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Ji-Eun Kim, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Todd Leen
* 05/31/2028
* USD 100,776.00

Maintaining consistent levels of vigilance over time is critical for workers in
high-risk systems. Vigilance decrement, the decline in performance that often
occurs when monitoring and screening for occasional and unpredictable signals,
endangers health and safety and threatens the efficiency of workers. Vigilance
decrement is common in clinical healthcare environments, as clinical
environments require shift work and long working hours with limited time for
rest. Monitoring vigilance decrement is critical given the impact of vigilance
on job satisfaction and productivity of clinicians, patients safety, and
healthcare quality. Even so, monitoring of clinical vigilance relies largely on
behavioral indicators that depend on retrospective or laboratory-based data,
neither of which is feasible for continuously tracking vigilance levels for
individuals in real time in the clinic. To date, no human technology interfaces
have been deployed to provide personalized monitoring and intervention to
mitigate vigilance decrement in real world clinical
operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to test the
research hypothesis that a sensor-based self-monitoring system can reduce
vigilance decrement. The anticipated outcomes of this study include (1)
assessment metrics for vigilance decrement using physiological responses (i.e.,
heart rate, skin temperature, electrodermal activity) and eye movement; (2) a
framework for predicting vigilance decrement using probabilistic models; (3) a
human technology interface that provides personalized interventions to mitigate
vigilance decrement; and (4) an evaluation toolkit for measuring the
effectiveness of the intervention on vigilance decrement for any high-risk
environment. Data collected from field studies, controlled experiments, and
usability studies will be integrated into a framework that can be used to
monitor and mitigate vigilance decrement. The project will provide insight into
how best to model and mitigate vigilance decrement in the clinical environment,
with its potential integration into hospital staff scheduling using up-to-date
and objective data. In the long term, the monitoring interface using user-
friendly and low-cost, lightweight commercial off-the-shelf wearable sensors
will make it well suited for use in remote healthcare systems and beyond
clinical settings, such as transportation and air traffic control, where
operators need to perform demanding tasks under high workload
situations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.