* 2237888
* CAREER: Block Polyelectrolyte Complexes for Controlled Mixed Ionic-Electronic Conduction
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Laure Kayser, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2028
* USD 327,104.00

This project is jointly funded by the DMR Polymers Program and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART
1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The use of electronic materials
and devices at biological interfaces (i.e., bioelectronics) enables important
applications in human health, such as for electrostimulation (e.g., to treat
Parkinson’s or Alzheimer’s disease), biosensing, nerve/wound healing, and
electrophysiological measurements. But, most common electronics in everyday
devices are made of precious metal conductors, such as gold or platinum. These
materials are not ideal for applications related to human health because they
are too rigid and brittle. They also use electrons for communication instead of
ions like biological systems do (e.g., neurons communicate through differences
in ion concentration); this makes it difficult to “translate” electronic signals
to ionic ones for stimulation, or vice versa for sensing. To address these
problems, new materials are needed that are much softer, biocompatible, and
enable the conduction of both electrons and ions. This research will introduce a
new class of polymers that fit these criteria and have properties inspired from
biology. These electron- and ion-conducting polymers will be synthesized,
characterized and integrated in devices, to provide design rules to optimize the
efficiency of electronic materials specifically made for bioelectronics
applications. This research will therefore have an impact in both fundamental
research on materials and applications in healthcare. It will also provide
educational activities, hands-on demonstrations, and a mentoring program
designed to broadly educate about the uses of polymeric materials and trigger
and nurture interest in materials science and engineering. These educational,
outreach, and research activities will actively engage graduate and
undergraduate students to help develop their capabilities as interdisciplinary
researchers, and thereby also increase the participation and retention of
marginalized students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electrically-conductive polymers that can also
transport ions (i.e., organic mixed ionic-electronic conductors) could play a
major role in the study and treatment of neurological disorders by acting as
transducers between ionic and electronic signals. However, current methods to
functionalize these materials for bioelectronic applications have been limited
to blending with additives and to side-chain modification, which often decrease
the electronic performance of the devices. The goal of the planned research is
therefore to access organic mixed ionic-electronic conductors that maintain or
improve their electronic performance upon functionalization with an
electronically-insulating polymer. To achieve this goal, the complexation
between neutral-anionic diblock copolymers and positively-charged conductive
polymers (i.e., block polyelectrolyte complexes) will be leveraged to control
the ordering of otherwise disordered mixed conductors, and ultimately tailor
their properties for applications specific to bioelectronics. These block
polyelectrolyte complexes will mimic key properties of biological systems while
precisely controlling the relative contribution of ionic and electronic
transport and ionic-electronic coupling. The research will focus on mimicking
three biological properties: (1) specificity, (2) dynamic and adaptable
properties, and (3) biodegradability. The results of this research will enable
new functionalities for bioelectronic devices (e.g., ion-selective sensors,
injectable and conductive tissue scaffolds, and transient devices), and
contribute to the establishment of fundamental molecular design rules for high
performance organic mixed ionic-electronic conductors. This research will also
integrate educational activities for students and parents about the positive
societal impact of functional plastics, in particular plastic electronics. A
laboratory module will be developed to introduce junior undergraduate students
to authentic research in organic electronics. The samples produced during this
laboratory will be used in an outreach module on plastic electronics for K-12
students. This grant will also support the creation of a mentoring and support
network for high school girls interested in pursuing a college degree in
materials science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.