* 2237739
* CAREER: Developing a Participatory Model for Elementary Science for Community Change
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Terrance Burgess, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 04/30/2028
* USD 227,694.00

Elementary students need opportunities to see science as meaningful and relevant
to their lives. One way to increase this relevance is with learning experiences
that are grounded in community-based questions and inquiries that students
identify and carry out themselves. An important contribution of this project is
investigating how culturally relevant and community-based science curriculum
helps to affirm and develop Black studentsâ€™ science identities in an urban,
elementary classroom. This project will partner with third, fourth and fifth-
grade elementary teachers to create and to investigate such learning
experiences. The planned partner for the collaboration is a public, charter
school in Detroit. The research will document how teachers and students identify
and explore science questions that are drawn from their local community context
and use the results of their inquiries to enact local community change. The
project will develop resources to help teachers create similar experiences for
elementary students in their own communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to design equitable, culturally relevant and community-centered
science learning with Black elementary-aged youth and to understand how the
learning experience influences their multiple identities, specifically their
disposition toward science. This work uses the youth participatory science model
to engage students and teachers in the cycle of community-based scientific
inquiry. The youth participatory science model engages students in identifying
community-based issues, using scientific inquiry to analyze and understand those
issues, and then sharing their findings with the broader community. A
significant contribution of the project is the adaptation of this model from
secondary science classrooms to elementary school. This research will address
the following research questions. First, how does a justice and community-
centered science curriculum impact the racial, science, and academic identities
of Black elementary students within an urban school? Second, through engaging in
identity-affirming science instruction, how do Black elementary students view
themselves as active participants within the scientific community? The research
will include a range of qualitative data to document the design of the
curriculum and the experiences of students and teachers. The project includes a
partnership with an elementary school and the Black Male Educator Alliance, a
community organization based in Detroit, to develop and share the resulting
science curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project is funded by the
Racial Equity in STEM Education program (EDU Racial Equity). The program
supports projects that advance racial equity in STEM education and workforce
development through research and practice. This award is also funded by the
Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) which seeks to significantly enhance
the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of
innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.