* 2237151
* CAREER: Preparing Middle and High School Pre-service Teachers for Critical Mathematics Education
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Zareen Aga, James Madison University
* Continuing Grant
* Toya frank
* 05/31/2028
* USD 322,800.00

Promoting equity-focused mathematics education requires models that will prepare
and support mathematics pre-service teachers (PSTs) who will question existing
norms and advocate for all their students. This project will develop a model of
support for middle and high school mathematics PSTs to support them in becoming
critical mathematics teachers (CMTs), teachers who address the needs of diverse
students, are mindful of achievement disparities, and aware of their own biases.
The main objective of the project is to develop a cohesive system of support for
middle and high school PSTs to become CMTs. The objective will be achieved by
supporting PSTs in their methods courses and their fieldwork. Support in
fieldwork will be provided in collaboration with cooperating teachers and
university supervisors through extended professional development focused on
critical mathematics education, including supporting PSTs in creating lessons
relevant to students' lives and introducing the cultural and historical origins
of mathematical ideas. This project is supported by the Discovery Research
preK-12 program (DRK-12), which seeks to significantly enhance the learning and
teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12
students and teachers, through research and development of innovative resources,
models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research
in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that provide
theoretical and empirical justification for proposed projects. 
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research activities include developing instructional
materials for PSTs in their methods courses to help PSTs develop the habits of
CMTs. Additionally, cooperating teachers and university supervisors will attend
monthly extended professional development meetings focused on critical
mathematics education. The influence of these activities will be examined via
qualitative methods including interviews, observations, and artifact analysis,
to understand factors needed to develop CMTs. The project adds to the current
body of research on mathematics teacher education in two ways. First, it extends
existing work on critical mathematics education for PreK-8 PSTs by creating
instructional materials specifically designed for middle and high school methods
courses, an area of need barely explored in existing research. Second, it
develops an integrative model for preparing middle and high school PSTs through
extended professional development. This provides dual support for tackling the
problem of discrepancies between PSTs’ classroom and fieldwork experience,
specific to critical mathematics education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.