* 2237463
* CAREER: Robot Learning of Complex Tasks via Skill Reusability and Refinement
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Reza Ahmadzadeh, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 04/30/2028
* USD 399,164.00

The creation of robots capable of performing complex manipulation tasks in
unstructured environments will open up new applications for helping people in
their homes, at work, and in society to impact and enhance quality of life.
Existing work in robot learning has enabled robots to replicate very simple
manipulation tasks. However, learning complex manipulation tasks to assist
people (e.g., loading a dishwasher, grocery shopping, changing a lightbulb)
demands algorithmic advancements. This project will contribute new theoretical
methods and algorithms that will advance the state-of-the-art in robot learning
and accelerate the development and adoption of robots capable of supporting
people with a variety of assistive and autonomous applications. In addition,
this project will integrate research, education, and outreach by developing new
courses, mentoring and supporting students from underrepresented groups,
reaching out to K-12 students and the general public, and organizing educational
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop a unified
framework for learning and generalization of complex manipulation tasks. Our
framework leverages human-robot interaction and learning-from-human approaches
to address several existing challenges: Robots that can model and learn
primitive skills from human examples mostly ignore characteristics of human-like
movements. All the individual skills needed to construct a complex task plan
must be modeled a priori and cannot be discovered during the process. As the
task conditions change, the learned skills cannot be adapted or refined
effectively and need to be remodeled. To further knowledge in these areas, this
project focuses on: (a) building a unifying formalization for modeling primitive
skills by integrating fundamental concepts and experimentally proven
mathematical models of human movements into existing learning frameworks; (b)
developing approaches for discovering common and reusable primitive basis for a
family of complex manipulation skills during the task learning process; (c)
creating novel skill refinement methods with strong adaptability properties
utilized for the decomposition and reconstruction of complex tasks that can
benefit from multi-modal human feedback and other task-related context, while
being computationally inexpensive. The potentially transformative aspects of our
research ideas include: bringing a new perspective to the mathematical modeling
of primitive skills, finding practical solutions to the problems of skill
refinement and reusable skill discovery, and shedding light on the development
of a complete framework for complex manipulation task
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.