* 2237520
* EAGER: Scenario-based COMET Training for Careers in the Weather, Water and Climate Industry
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Elizabeth Page, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 07/31/2024
* USD 281,037.00

Weather, water, and climate impact nearly every sector of the economy. In the
coming years, jobs in the atmospheric sciences are expected to grow at a faster
rate than average and the best job prospects are expected to be in private
industry. However, the traditional curriculum in atmospheric science often falls
short of developing in students the skillsets necessary for private sector
employment. By emphasizing training content specific to industry and societal
needs, this project will produce educational materials to transform the
instruction of the atmospheric science workforce and promote a cohort of
atmospheric science graduates prepared to meet the evolving needs of society
with the skills to address the types of work in the private sector. The overall
goal of this project is to develop online and classroom training materials that
expose university students to careers in the private sector of the weather,
water, and climate enterprise and allow them to apply relevant skills within
real-world industry scenarios. The project is a collaborative effort involving
the University Corporation for Atmospheric Research, the National Center for
Atmospheric Research’s Research Application Lab, private industry subject matter
experts, and atmospheric science faculty. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The expected
outcomes of this project are to address the most critical skill gaps and needs
of the atmospheric science workforce and promote greater use and adoption of
scenario-based pedagogical approaches in providing online, active learning
opportunities. Development of introductory level course material aimed toward
students entering the atmospheric sciences/meteorology major will cover: 1) what
function(s) each industry primarily performs and the importance of their
services, 2) how weather, water and climate information are generally used in
these functions, 3) what the most common positions in these functions are
responsible for performing and 4) what additional technical and power skills
enable staff to succeed at these functions. The introductory course material
will include video vignettes from subject matter experts representing the
diversity of the private sector. A learning resource for upper-level
undergraduate students to apply associated technical and power skills within a
real-world industry scenario will be developed. The upper-level material will
involve selection of a weather event that broadly impacted many industries to
serve as a case study in which students can assume the role of one of several
industry professionals. Materials for the scenarios classroom exercise may
include, but are not limited to: 1) a package of typical weather case data for
meteorological analysis of the event, 2) four to eight multimedia industry
scenarios that contain service delivery task prompts, 3) a package of
complementary industry-specific data for each scenario, 4) a set of industry
subject matter expert service-delivery experiences and explanations for each
scenario, and 5) an instructor’s guide with instructions and course integration
and adaptation tips.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.