* 2237344
* CAREER: Catalytic Living Materials Constructed with Engineered Spores and Polymer Scaffolds
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Seunghyun Sim, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 05/31/2028
* USD 98,149.00

Non-technical summary&lt;br/&gt;Bacterial spores are like seeds. They are hardy,
preserve well, and can grow into living organisms when the conditions are right,
even if it requires waiting many years. Like a sunflower seed growing into a
sunflower that produces multiple seeds, a bacterial spore can grow into billions
of cells that later become billions of spores. Scientists can now engineer
bacterial spores to decorate their surfaces with biological machinery called
enzymes, a category of proteins that are essential to all life because of their
ability to speed up useful chemical reactions. Combining these functionalized
spores with engineered polymers enables the production of new materials
performing catalytic reactions. This project investigates recipes for creating
such materials by engineering both synthetic polymers and bacterial spores, with
special emphasis on making materials degrading toxic compounds from the
environment. The outcome of this research will establish a foundation for
creating a diverse array of materials that can facilitate a wide range of
chemical reactions. It will also provide new fundamental knowledge in building
engineered interfaces between synthetic materials and bacterial spores. Along
with the research activities, educational and outreach programs will be
developed for community college students, K12 students, and polymer chemistry
students at UC Irvine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to develop robust, intelligent catalytic living materials utilizing
dynamic covalent bond formation between engineered polymer scaffolds and B.
subtilis spores. In particular, the team will focus on creating living materials
for catalytic bioremediation. Because bacterial spores can survive harsh
conditions, such as dehydration, nutrient limitation, organic solvents, and
oxidative stress, spore-containing composite materials could be produced and
stored in a dried form. Upon engineering both the bacterial spores and polymeric
materials constituting living materials, they are expected to perform robust
catalysis for a wide range of substrates, are stable under dry storage for a
long period of time, and are recyclable after use. Specifically, the following
four research objectives will be pursued: (1) evaluating various motifs for
building a well-defined molecular interface on B. subtilis spores, (2)
engineering B. subtilis spores for catalytic bioremediation, (3) synthesizing
and studying physical properties of spore-containing living materials. (4)
evaluating and engineering catalytic behaviors of living materials. The
educational objectives to complement the research activities are (1) the
development of an outreach and research program targeting local community
college (CC) students and CC transfer students, (2) participation in the
outreach program targeting local K12 students, and (3) mentoring and educating
students at UCI and leading the polymer chemistry club
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.