* 2237288
* CAREER: Geometric Techniques for Topological Graph Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Hung Le, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Brass
* 01/31/2028
* USD 246,590.00

Classical techniques for designing graph algorithms do not assume structures of
input graphs and therefore suffer from worst-case guarantees by artificial
instances. Graphs arising in practical applications, including logistics and
planning, very large-scale integration (VLSI) design, image processing, and
robot navigation, often have nice topological structures: they can be drawn on
the plane without (or with a few) edge crossings. Can these structures be
exploited for algorithmic advantage? Research on this question has produced
powerful algorithmic techniques. Nevertheless, algorithm designers have
exploited these techniques to their limits over the past two decades. This
project aims to develop a new class of techniques inspired by geometry
counterparts that could overcome the limitations of the existing ones. The
central idea is to study the metric space induced by shortest path distances of
topological graphs and translate algorithmic ideas from discrete geometry to
solve problems. In addition to potential impacts on practical applications, this
project outlines specific plans to train students at both graduate and
undergraduate levels; the practical aspects of this project would particularly
be appealing to students from different backgrounds. The project also plans to
disseminate state-of-the-art algorithm design techniques for topological graphs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on two specific research thrusts.
The first studies graph embeddings for designing approximation algorithms. This
direction is inspired by the success of embedding techniques for general
metrics. The goal is to develop new relaxations of the traditional metric
embedding by taking topology into account, specifically focusing on designing
approximation algorithms. The second thrust concerns different geometric
structures of topological graphs. Developing new geometric structures has
resulted in recent breakthroughs in topological graph algorithms. The project
proposes an in-depth investigation of geometric structures, including various
types of decompositions and dimensions inspired by those studied in geometry.
Both thrusts complement each other well: understanding these structures gives
insights into what it takes to construct the embeddings and vice versa. This
project also includes a number of algorithmic problems that can be settled by
geometric techniques for which the traditional techniques
fail.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.