* 2237947
* CAREER: Unlocking Recalcitrant Carbon to Enhance Denitrification of Nonpoint Source Nitrogen in Woodchip Bioreactors
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Matthew Reid, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2028
* USD 497,835.00

Nonpoint sources of nitrogen (N) such as nitrate from agricultural and
stormwater runoff are among the most intractable drivers of pollution and water
quality impairments in the United States, contributing to eutrophication,
harmful algal blooms, and hypoxia, which adversely impact the ecological health,
economic, and recreational values of the Nationâ€™s surface water systems
including lakes, rivers, and large estuaries such as the Chesapeake Bay and the
Gulf of Mexico. Woodchip bioreactors (WBRs) have emerged as promising and
scalable biofiltration systems for removing nitrate from agricultural and
stormwater runoff. Most WBRs consist of subsurface trenches filled with a carbon
source (woodchip) designed to stimulate microbial denitrification (DN) to remove
nitrate from a flowing runoff stream prior to its discharge into a receiving
surface water system. The effectiveness of current WBRs is limited by the slow
release of the bioavailable carbon (C) from the woodchip media required to
support the growth and metabolism of DN bacteria. The overarching goal of this
CAREER project is to probe, elucidate, and leverage the redox biogeochemical
reactions that control the release and mobilization of bioavailable C from
woodchip media to stimulate DN in WBRs. To advance this goal, the Principal
Investigator proposes to test the hypothesis that oxic-anoxic cycling during the
operation of a woodchip bioreactor enhances denitrification by accelerating the
decomposition of recalcitrant, lignocellulosic woodchip biomass into labile C
during oxic periods to stimulate the growth and metabolic activity of DN
microorganisms during subsequent anoxic periods. The successful completion of
this project will benefit society through the generation of new fundamental
knowledge to support the development and deployment of more efficient and
sustainable solutions to manage and mitigate nonpoint sources of nitrate
pollution. Additional benefits to society will be achieved through student
education and training including the mentoring of a graduate student at Cornell
University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biogeochemical reactions of iron (Fe) and
manganese (Mn) minerals at redox interfaces play an important role in the
decomposition of lignocellulosic biomass (LB) in the environment, and
mechanistic understanding of these organo-mineral interactions is rapidly
evolving. This CAREER project will investigate and unravel the redox active
biogeochemical reactions that control the release of labile carbon (C) from the
degradation of woodchip media with the goal of leveraging this new knowledge to
improve the performance of woodchip bioreactors (WBRs) that utilize LB as C
source to stimulate the growth of denitrifying (DN) microorganisms to remove
nitrate from agricultural and stormwater runoff. The specific objectives of the
research are to 1) probe and elucidate Mn- and Fe- driven redox reactions that
control the release of dissolved organic carbon (DOC) from woodchip media in
model WBRs using state-of-the-art characterization techniques including
synchrotron-based spectroscopy and microscopy (e.g., micro-XANES and micro-XRF)
and advanced mass spectrometry (e.g., FT-ICR MS); 2) assess and evaluate the
effects of enzymatic vs. nonenzymatic transformations on the quantity and
quality of DOC released from woodchip media in model WBRs; and 3) develop and
validate process-based models to simulate the effects of redox fluctuations and
cycling on the release of DOC and DN efficiency in flow-through WBRs. The
successful completion of this project has the potential for transformative
impact through the generation of new fundamental knowledge to advance the design
and implementation of more efficient WBRs for the removal of nitrate from
agricultural and stormwater runoff. To implement the educational and outreach
activities of this CAREER project, the Principal Investigator (PI) proposes to
leverage existing programs and resources at Cornell University to develop and
deliver new hands-on experiential learning opportunities in environmental
engineering (EE) for students from underrepresented groups. The proposed
activities will include i) an outreach program to high school students and
teachers from rural areas of Central New York State and ii) a summer training
and mentorship program for undergraduate and community college students. In
addition, the PI proposes to leverage the project resources and research
findings to develop and integrate new course modules on sensing and control of
water infrastructure systems for nitrogen pollution removal into the EE
undergraduate curriculum at Cornell University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.