* 2237137
* CAREER: Nanoscale Interfacial Phenomena and Reaction Kinetics of Calcium Silicate Minerals in Cements
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Alexander Brand, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 05/31/2028
* USD 598,917.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award is to advance the
understanding of portland cement reactions and mechanisms at the micro- and
nanoscales. Portland cement is a critical material for civil infrastructure,
with around 4 billion tons of cement produced annually worldwide, and the
majority of cement is used as the binder in concrete, which is used to build
structures, bridges, buildings, dams, roadways, ports, airfields, and other
critical civil infrastructure. Despite the widespread application, the
fundamental reactions and kinetics of how cement reacts with water to serve as
the binder in concrete are poorly understood. This research studies two minerals
in cements, tricalcium silicate and dicalcium silicate, which comprise around
75% of the cement composition. This study quantifies the fundamental kinetics
and mechanisms that govern how tricalcium silicate and dicalcium silicate react
with water at the nanoscale, which will provide new insights into the reactivity
of cements. By understanding the fundamental hydration reactions in cements, the
longer-term goal of the research is to develop high performance concrete that is
more durable and sustainable, thereby ensuring improved resiliency and safety of
American civil infrastructure. The experimental data from this award will be
used to refine a kinetic Monte Carlo model of surface dissolution, resulting in
a more robust model to gain insights into cement reactivity. An education
component of the research will expand outreach to K-12 students through programs
at Virginia Tech and at the Science Museum of Western Virginia to learn about
cement and concrete, how cement reacts with water to make concrete, and the
important role that concrete has in civil infrastructure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary challenge to understanding cement reactions
with water is that there are a significant number of competing dissolution and
precipitation reactions owing to a dynamic solution chemistry. The aim of this
project is to simplify the problem by first understanding the reactions of
specific minerals found in cements before scaling the complexity to systems with
different solution compositions. Specifically, this study evaluates the real-
time nanoscale dissolution rates of calcium silicate surfaces through in situ 3D
surface topography measurements by spectral modulation interferometry. Coupled
with additional characterization by X-ray reflectivity, X-ray photoelectron
spectroscopy, and electron microscopy, these data will quantify the
spatiotemporal variability of rate constants and define the mechanism through
which a calcium silicate surface interacts with an aqueous solution.
Subsequently, these data will be integrated into a kinetic Monte Carlo model of
surface dissolution to yield a more accurate prediction of dissolution kinetics.
The key contribution of this work is to advance new characterization techniques
to accelerate the quantification and understanding of cement hydration,
including the derivation of fundamental kinetic rates and mechanisms that can be
integrated into computational materials science models of hydration. This
contribution is significant because the data will revolutionize the
understanding of how kinetic phenomena are involved in cement hydration, which
will unlock new techniques or materials to rapidly advance towards improved
sustainability in concrete materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.