* 2237284
* CAREER: An objective reduction framework for sustainable process systems
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2027
* William Allman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 12/31/2027
* USD 440,822.00

Decision making occurs in all facets of the human experience, and in almost
every case requires the consideration of tradeoffs between multiple goals that
cannot be fully satisfied simultaneously. For critical chemical manufacturing
infrastructure, system design and operation decisions require a balance between,
for example, supplying an affordable and reliable stream of products to
customers, providing well-paying jobs to the community, maintaining safe
performance of all production units, and reducing detrimental environmental
impacts. Mathematical tools that allow for the identification of decision-making
tradeoffs are essential to ensuring that US industries can meet these varied
goals while remaining economically competitive. Unfortunately, existing rigorous
methods for doing so do not scale well to problems with many (greater than four)
objectives. The proposed research program aims to address this challenge by
developing a computational framework that systematically reduces the number of
objectives in decision making situations with many criteria by identifying sets
of objectives that are correlated, or give similar solutions when considered
individually, and grouping them into a single objective. Tools also will be
developed that efficiently identify a single decision that provides a high-
quality compromise between competing objectives. Through the proposed integrated
educational activities, this program also will provide training to the next
generation of scientists and engineers in multi-criteria decision-
making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this research are to develop
generalizable methods for objective reduction in many objective optimization
problems (MaOPs) which preserve maximum tradeoff information and provide orders
of magnitude reduction in the required solve time, and to apply these methods to
representative decision-making problems in the chemical process industries. In
particular, this project aims to develop methods that (1) provide a first of its
kind approach for systematically reducing high dimensional MaOPs a priori to
solving the problem, (2) apply machine learning methods and develop a stochastic
community detection approach for finding objective groupings that work well in
use cases with dynamically evolving or uncertain parameters, such as real time
operation and strategic planning, and (3) use a novel robust single objective
optimization approach for a priori identification of knee points on many
objective tradeoff curves. Publicly available software to implement the above
methods will be developed and shared with the broader academic and industrial
chemical process systems community for use in furthering research and education
in this area, as well as improving industrial process outcomes. The methods
developed will be tested using timely chemical systems applications, such as in
electrified chemical production, green fertilizer production, and chlorine
manufacture and distribution. However, the methods developed in this project
will be highly generalizable and applicable to other fields, including but not
limited to artificial intelligence, finance, medicine, and robotics.
Furthermore, the project team will pursue integrated educational activities such
as the developing a set of educational modules for multi-criteria decision
making for inclusion throughout the undergraduate chemical engineering
curriculum, teaching underrepresented K-12 students about multi-criteria
decision making through games, and mentoring K-12 students for academic
competition programs in STEM areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.