* 2237586
* CAREER: Organic Transformations Enabled by Redox-Active Ligands and d0 Metals
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Courtney Roberts, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Tong Ren
* 08/31/2028
* USD 447,162.00

With funding from the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Dr. Courtney Roberts and her group will work toward developing a an alkyl–alkyl
cross-coupling reaction that uses earth abundant and previously unutilized
metals in groups 3 and 4 as catalysts for this transformation. These metals
provide ideal reactivity but have not been used before for this reaction due to
their electronic nature. The Roberts group is leveraging the power of catalyst
design to overcome this limitation. By overcoming this challenge, other new
types of reactivity beyond cross-coupling will be explored. Dr. Roberts and her
group will actively engage in efforts to promote equity in both graduate and
undergraduate education. These activities include a program called cheMNext that
engages in educating minoritized students in chemistry about applying to
graduate school as well as the development of active learning programs for
undergraduate organic chemistry at the University of
Minnesota.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing new catalytic methods to form carbon-
carbon bonds has the potential to impact many levels of society from
agricultural chemistry to materials chemistry. Dr. Courtney Roberts and her
group from the University of Minnesota are developing new reactions that require
redox events using early transition metals and redox active ligands. This fresh
perspective offers a new approach to address the long-standing challenges
associated with alkyl–alkyl cross-coupling. The Roberts group has found that by
pairing early transition metals catalysts with redox active ligands they are
able to facilitate such cross-couplings even with substrates that bear beta-
hydrogens. These early transition metals have not been utilized for cross-
coupling previously due to their lack of d electrons and hence the
inaccessibility of typical oxidative addition pathways. Their propensity to
exist in the highest oxidation state, also makes reductive elimination
unfavorable. By using tridentate redox-active ligands, redox chemistry can be
leveraged to enable radical catalysis. Mechanistic insights will be leveraged
for new multicomponent reaction development based on radical-polar crossover
reactivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.