* 2237937
* CAREER: Building bridges between number theory and harmonic analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Theresa Anderson, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 06/30/2028
* USD 111,264.00

Two areas of mathematics often viewed as separate are number theory and
analysis. Number theory deals with properties of whole numbers, such as quickly
factoring large numbers into primes, and underpins computer security and
behavior of black holes. Harmonic analysis can be viewed as mathematically
making a sculpture out of unformed clay; this field takes a complicated function
and breaks it up into simple pieces – its harmonics – and is central to medical
imaging and quantum states. Imagining and building a new landscape where areas
sometimes perceived as disconnected can harmonize is at the forefront of this
project: Instead of exploiting known connections, new ones will be created
centered around three distinct areas. Firstly, quantitative behavior of discrete
operators with curvature will be undertaken; while relevant to many
applications, the novelty here will be developing the infrastructure to use both
analysis and number theory from the perspective of both fields. The second part
will be a continuation of the discovery of hidden number theoretic properties in
the framework underlying harmonic analysis, furthering this mathematical grid
system in both areas. Finally, determining the behavior of a random object of
algebraic interest, such as a polynomial, is a central problem in mathematics.
By integrating Fourier analysis into this playing field, will enable a better
prediction of this randomness in a wide variety of ways. Undergraduates will be
heavily involved in research, especially in the second part, via a summer and
semester research and training program. The multifaceted and network-building
education plan further includes the teaching of a graduate class intitled
“Widening the margins: the experience of URMs in the mathematical sciences,”
which will be developed in collaboration with the institution’s Diversity,
Equity and Inclusion office.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project consists of three
main programs, all on the intersection between harmonic analysis and number
theory. Firstly, operator bounds for discrete operators involving integration
over curved submanifolds will be obtained. This is a delicate topic in
continuous analysis and the discrete setting introduces new challenges and
obstacles. A development of number theoretic tools in tandem with the analysis
will dramatically push forward understanding of these objects. Additionally,
these bounds are connected to lattice point counts and information on this front
will be quantified via refined analysis of exponential sums, including discrete
restriction problems for a variety of surfaces that are translation dilation
invariant. Secondly, a continued uncovering of a hidden number theoretic
structure and techniques in the realm of dyadic analysis will be pursued,
leading to a myriad of structure theorems. Thirdly, the program in Fourier
analytic techniques in arithmetic statistics will use novel insights from
analysis to improve a variety of counts of algebraic interest, such as fields
and polynomials. Prior investigations here have already been successful as
recent results include a major step in resolving a conjecture of van der Waerden
on Galois groups of random polynomials and counting number fields of bounded
discriminant. Investigations along these lines will be
continued.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.