* 2237004
* EAGER: Exploiting Quantum Tunneling for Zero Side-Channel Key Generation and Distribution
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Shantanu Chakrabartty, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 09/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

The project is investigating a key generation and a key distribution framework
that is devoid of any practical side-channels that an adversary could exploit
into eavesdrop into private communications or private data. With continual
advancements in computing power and the possibility of an operational quantum
computer becoming a reality, the vulnerability of classical public-key
distribution algorithms is a major concern. While quantum-based key distribution
can potentially address some of the security vulnerabilities associated with
classic key distribution techniques, the current state-of-the-art quantum key-
distribution systems require dedicated and specialized peer-to-peer
communication links. Not only do these links require careful maintenance and
calibration to ensure quantum-coherence, compared to classical approaches, these
systems are not portable and cannot be used for key distribution over public or
unsecured channels. This project will also provide excellent training
opportunities for REU students and students belonging to underrepresented
communities in the interdisciplinary fields of quantum devices, circuit design,
and cybersecurity. We plan to organize a special cybersecurity workshop where
our goal will be to showcase the self-powered time-keeping technology to
researchers, practitioners and industrial partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed key generation and key distribution framework is exploiting the
synchronization capability and the security features of our previously reported
self-powered time-keeping devices that operate on the physics of quantum-
tunneling. An array of synchronized timers is used to emulate the functionality
of phase-synchronized photons in the context of quantum currency and quantum
key-exchange protocols. The physics of quantum-tunneling and self-powered
operation ensures that no power or electromagnetic side-channel can be exploited
by an adversary to probe the state of the timers. &lt;br/&gt;1. The project is
investigating a self-powered phase-locking and synchronization principle
combining the physics of Fowler-Nordheim quantum-tunneling of electrons with
spectral noise-shaping. The project is also investigating methods to restrict
access to the internal timer-state which will self-destruct after a single
measurement. In this manner, the state of the timers cannot be reverse
engineered. &lt;br/&gt;2. The project is investigating a system-on-chip
architecture will exploit the synchronization between self-powered timers to
generate keys that can be used for communications and
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.