* 2237401
* CAREER: Understanding Dynamic Recrystallization Mechanisms in Hybrid In-situ Rolled Additive Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Shunyu Liu, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 05/31/2028
* USD 503,613.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project aims to generate new
knowledge necessary for establishing a novel, hybrid in-situ rolled additive
manufacturing (HI-RAM) process. Fusion-based metal additive manufacturing
employs a high-energy heat source to fabricate three-dimensional (3D) metal and
metal-based parts through a layer-by-layer process. Despite the high density,
additive parts have inherent limitations in mechanical properties such as
anisotropy and low ductility, which will significantly hinder their use in
critical structural applications. To address these limitations, this project
will perform fundamental research to enable a transformative manufacturing
process—HI-RAM. This new process incorporates an in-situ thermomechanical hot
rolling process in the additive manufacturing process, in which a micro-roller
trails the heat source and rolls the deposited metal bead. The high-performance
structural parts fabricated by HI-RAM could increase the adoption of 3D printed
metal parts by many industries, and thus HI-RAM could significantly enhance U.S.
manufacturing leadership. This project will build partnerships with colleges,
high schools, local manufacturers, and manufacturing organizations to deliver
professional training related to HI-RAM, aimed at motivating and preparing a
high-quality manufacturing workforce. The project involves multiple disciplines,
including advanced manufacturing, materials science, structural mechanics, and
applied mathematics, and also expects to broaden the participation of women and
underrepresented minorities and strengthen education in STEM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The HI-RAM technology could drastically improve the
mechanical properties of additive metals by eliminating anisotropy, improving
ductility, and increasing strength, through the mechanism of recrystallization-
induced texture elimination and grain refinement. A new 3D multi-physics
simulation platform will be established to study the dynamic recrystallization
mechanisms, which will be the first model to accurately and efficiently capture
the thermal-mechanical-metallurgical relationship in deformation-enhanced 3D
printing. The project will address gaps in knowledge about the relationships
between dynamic recrystallization and additive manufacturing’s non-equilibrium
features and in-situ plastic deformation. It will explore strategies to obtain
homogeneous recrystallization in the as-printed textured microstructure, using
rolling parameters, roller profiles, and the cyclic and accumulative process
conditions. Additionally, this project will investigate the critical multi-
physics phenomena to guarantee process performance, such as laser–material
interaction, solidification, crystal plasticity, and recrystallization. While
this research focuses on the promising in-situ hot rolling and laser-directed
energy deposition process, the research outcomes and manufacturing methodology
will inform different metal additive manufacturing processes and microscopic
forming processes. This project is jointly funded by the Advanced Manufacturing
Program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.