* 2237244
* CAREER: Probing Quantum Matter using Programmable Quantum Simulators
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2028
* Soonwon Choi, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/29/2028
* USD 98,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in the ability to control quantum
devices are ushering in new approaches to study the rich and complex physics
that emerges from quantum systems of many interacting particles such as quantum
materials. One promising approach is quantum simulation, in which a quantum
device with several tunable parameters is carefully manipulated to emulate the
physics of various other systems of interest. Despite their promise, present-day
quantum devices are still far from ideal, as their operations are noisy and the
ability to control them is imperfect. The central challenges are (i) to
understand how to optimally exploit such devices to explore the largest wealth
of physics possible despite the restrictions and (ii) to extract physically
meaningful information from potentially noisy and limited data. Here, the
principal investigator proposes to address these challenges through novel ideas
from theory leveraging recent advances in quantum information science and
machine learning. The principal investigator will pursue this research goal in
parallel with a diverse set of outreach activities fostering high-school and
undergraduate student research, attracting talented students, and preparing them
as the next generation scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Understanding, controlling, and harnessing the quantum
dynamics of increasingly complex many-body systems are among the most important
goals of quantum science research. The first half of the research component aims
to develop practical methods to achieve these goals, focusing on existing
experimental capabilities. In particular, the PI and his team will develop
methods to robustly engineer effective Hamiltonians of a given quantum hardware
by means of optimized pulsed controls and to perform advanced measurements of
arbitrary observables or nonlocal properties by utilizing information
scrambling. These capabilities are otherwise difficult owing to limitations in
quantum control of current devices, calling for novel theory ideas. Leveraging
improved capabilities, the research team will pursue probing exotic emergent
phenomena such as deconfined quantum criticality using existing quantum
simulators. Deconfined quantum criticality may plan an important role in
understanding high temperature superconductors and other quantum materials.
Successful observations of exotic emergent phenomena using quantum simulators
will allow the experimental investigations of them in greater detail, deepening
our understanding of quantum phases and phase transitions. The second half of
the research activities introduces a new perspective to study quantum matter
using the language of quantum information theory. Specifically, the research
team will develop quantum and classical algorithms to efficiently extract
important information such as the phase of quantum matter from experimental data
and investigate the fundamental limitations in computational power of these new
algorithms. This will provide new ways to characterize the properties of quantum
matter such as the computational hardness of distinguishing two different
phases. Successful outcomes will establish a rigorous connection between
different disciplines of physical sciences such as renormalization group in
theoretical physics and error corrections information
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is jointly supported through funds
contributed by the Division of Materials Research and the Physics Division
within the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.