* 2237663
* CAREER: A multi-scale and hierarchical computational framework to model III-nitride devices operating in the near-terahertz regime
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Shaloo Rakheja, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 04/30/2028
* USD 442,433.00

Wide and ultrawide bandgap III-nitride semiconductors have the foundational
capability to meet the power and frequency requirements of near-terahertz
communication systems with bandwidths exceeding 100 gigahertz. III-nitrides are
also well positioned to be used in extreme environments, from the cryogenic
limit to high temperatures. However, the demonstrated performance of III-nitride
devices today is still below theoretical expectations, and the promise of III-
nitrides for near-terahertz applications remains unfulfilled. Still experimental
advances in isolation of theoretical advances are unlikely to change this
existing landscape. To tackle this challenge, in this research, we will create a
multi-scale and hierarchical computational framework that will provide a high
fidelity insight into the underlying physics of III-nitride devices at different
length-, time-, and temperature-scales. These fundamental insights are crucial
for identifying material- and device-level advances that will push the bounds of
III-nitrides’ based wireless technologies, be it for commercial wireless
communication or scientific investigations in extreme environments. This
research will have a far reaching impact in areas like healthcare, energy,
transportation, space programs, and social and educational advancements. The
models developed here will be fully open-source and available to researchers
world-wide, amplifying the scale and impact of this research. We will inaugurate
an afterschool semiconductors-focused summer camp for middle school students and
collaborate with the Inclusivity, Diversity, Equity and Access Institute at the
University to recruit low-income and minority students in the department and in
our research lab. Web-based learning library on semiconductor physics will be
developed to encourage students to think creatively about the possibilities of
semiconductors in next-generation electronic systems. The success of this
research, outreach and educational plan holds promise to result in decades of
productive fundamental knowledge, contribute to translation into important near-
terahertz technologies, and motivate the participation and retention of a
diverse community of electrical engineers, materials scientists, and
physicists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modeling and simulation tools are the
cornerstones of the physics-based and application-driven device and circuit
design. Because III-nitride devices are intended for use in high-field and high-
frequency applications, current models that neglect Maxwell’s full-wave effects
and full-band physics fail at guiding experiments for technology optimization
and cannot fully explore the materials-to-circuit design space, which is highly
desirable for meeting target performance metrics. Thus, it is safe to say that a
fundamental rethinking of computational methodologies for III-nitride devices
will be a game-changer for a myriad of near-terahertz applications that can
address some of the biggest challenges of current and future times. In this
research, we will create a multi-scale computational framework that combines
first-principles calculations through numerical transport simulations to a
compact circuit model. This framework will identify new theoretical means to
interrogate and control the high-frequency and off-equilibrium physics of the
near-terahertz III-nitride devices. Salient features of this computational
framework include full electronic bandstructure, hot-electron effects, self-
heating, quantum-mechanical scattering, charge trapping, low-temperature
physics, and full-wave electromagnetics. Because the numerical framework will be
complemented with a SPICE-compatible and experimentally validated compact model,
the proposed research will enable large-scale circuit simulations and systems
design. The outcomes of this research will benefit many stake holders, from
material scientists to circuit designers, and enable cross-disciplinary
interactions that will set the global stage for multi-generational research in
wide and ultrawide bandgap semiconductors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.