* 2237534
* CAREER: Synergistic Inverse Wave Analysis and Computation
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Yang Yang, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2028
* USD 162,012.00

Non-destructive probing techniques utilize waves to probe targets that are not
directly observable. They have found broad applications in medical imaging for
tumor detection, in seismic imaging for oil prospecting, and in military
scenarios for hidden threat detection. The success of modern non-destructive
probing techniques relies in an essential way on the mathematical principles
that reveal the hidden connection between the observation and the targets. In-
depth understanding of such principles will not just reveal the strengths and
limitations of the techniques, but also indicate possible directions for future
enhancement and improvement. This project aims to promote understanding of the
mathematical principles in non-destructive probing techniques from both
theoretical and computational perspectives. The theoretical perspective will
develop fundamental mathematical tools and methods that are adaptable to resolve
challenges in other mathematical branches. The computational perspective will
turn the theory into innovative imaging algorithms that empower non-destructive
probing techniques to acquire enhanced visualization. Implementation of the
project will be integrated with numerous educational activities to involve K-12,
undergraduate and graduate students majoring in STEM disciplines, especially
those from underrepresented groups with limited educational resources. Students
will receive rigorous scientific research training in mathematical and
programming skills to prepare them as the next generation of STEM workforce that
can continue advancing science and technology in the next few
decades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to investigate fundamental
mathematical theory and computational methods for inverse problems for wave
equations. This will be achieved by developing the computational boundary
control method as well as its underlying mathematical theory. A feature of the
approach is the synergy between mathematical analysis and wave-based scientific
computing. From the theoretical perspective, the interdisciplinary research will
enhance the interplay among PDE analysis, wave physics, geometry, and scientific
computing. From the computational perspective, the research will inspire novel
computational paradigms that utilize the nature of wave propagation to achieve
optimal, theoretically justifiable algorithms for non-destructive probing
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.