* 2237003
* CAREER: Understanding Nanoscale Radiative Transport in Multi-Body Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Mohammad Ghashami, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 06/30/2028
* USD 504,782.00

Thermal management of nanodevices requires a solid understanding of radiative
heat transfer in reduced dimensions. To date, experiments involving radiative
heat transfer have been limited by a focus on two-body systems. This CAREER
program will explore the potential of systems containing more than two objects
(i.e., multi-body systems) to lead to new physical and transport behaviors and,
as a result, enable new applications in domains of national importance such as
aerospace electronics, energy conversion technology, and information processing.
To create these new technologies, it is essential to experimentally study and
understand nanoscale radiative heat transfer between multiple objects and
explore its use for improving heat exchange and thermal control. Thus, a primary
outcome of this research will be a novel technique that enables the study of
nanoscale radiative heat transfer among multiple objects. In addition to
providing the fundamental knowledge necessary to advance thermal control at the
nanoscale, this program will implement an innovative educational platform that
promotes practical workforce development in academia by bridging the gap between
academic work and industrial problems and stimulates curiosity among K-12
students in exploring engineering careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER
program will apply the physics of radiative transport in multi-bodies to solve
thermal control problems in nanodevices. Specifically, this research will
experimentally uncover the governing physics that drive electromagnetic waves-
matter interactions in multi-body systems to identify the contributing factors
in near-field radiative heat transfer (NFRHT). This work will provide new
knowledge critical to the development of next-generation nanodevices by: (1)
understanding the effect of structural factors on NFRHT in multi-bodies and (2)
elucidating the role of multi-body physics in NFRHT for active thermal
management. Significant structural and material factors in the spatial
confinement of evanescent photons between multi-bodies will be identified
through precision heat transfer measurements. Findings will provide in-depth
understanding on how multiple interactive objects within micro/nano-dimensions
impact radiative transport mechanismsâ€”knowledge that will have far-reaching
implications for advancing the thermal management of state-of-the-art high-power
systems in industrial and technological applications. This research is
integrated with education objectives to: (1) create an Academic-Industry Bridge
(AIB) initiative for undergraduate and graduate students and (2) extend the AIB
initiative to include an interactive platform for hands-on research projects for
K- 12 students. Collaborations with Navajo Technical University and the
University of Texas Rio Grande Valley will ensure engagement with diverse
audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Thermal
Transport Processes Program in the Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and
Transport Systems (CBE) Division of the Engineering Directorate, and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.