* 2237550
* CAREER:  Particle dynamics at the free surface: waves, turbulence, and microplastics
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Michelle DiBenedetto, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 01/31/2028
* USD 449,936.00

Plastic pollution is a ubiquitous issue impacting the health of marine
ecosystems worldwide. Yet, critical knowledge gaps surrounding the fate and
transport of plastic once it enters the ocean impede remediation and prevention
efforts. Predicting transport is difficult for any particle in the ocean, but
microplastics present a particular challenge because their size and density fall
outside the regimes of traditionally studied environmental particles such as
low-density bubbles and high-density sediment. Thus, the goal of this award is
to (1) observe plastic particles in realistic ocean flows recreated in a
controlled laboratory setting, and (2) use the observations to build a modelling
framework that describes the vertical mixing and transport of plastic at the
ocean surface. By examining fundamental interactions between particles and ocean
flows, this award will enable more accurate modelling of buoyant particles at
the ocean surface. The investigator will partner with local beach-cleanup
organizations to share this work through outreach events. This award will
additionally support educational activities for both undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ocean surface boundary layer is a multiphase
flow forced by the overlying wind, which generates waves and turbulence. These
processes affect the transport and mixing of materials ranging from nutrients
and pollutants to bubbles and organisms. Microplastics are a new environmental
particle that is increasing in concentration at the ocean surface; yet,
predicting the behavior of microplastics is non-trivial because it depends on
poorly understood interactions among waves, turbulence, and particle inertia in
the ocean surface boundary layer (where most microplastics reside). To help
close this foundational knowledge gap in particle-laden flows and improve
microplastics transport modeling, this award seeks to describe how the rise
velocity of buoyant particles is modulated by the combined effects of waves and
turbulence, the processes by which particles are entrained beneath the surface,
and the controls on particle diffusivity in waves and turbulence. The research
will be conducted in a laboratory facility that can generate both wind and
waves. Advanced optical techniques will be used to track particles both at the
surface and beneath it under a range of surface conditions, including breaking
waves. These observations will be used to develop a wave phase-resolved model
for the transport and mixing of buoyant particles in a free-surface boundary
layer, a model which will be broadly applicable to microplastics, and other
particles found at the ocean surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.