* 2237142
* CAREER: MOEMS-based Head-mounted NIR-II Microscopy for Molecular Imaging of Brain Tumor in Freely Behaving Small Animal Models
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Zhen Qiu, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 04/30/2028
* USD 401,005.00

Brain diseases represent a considerable social and economic burden in US. With
yearly costs of about 800 billion and an estimated 50 million people afflicted
per year, brain diseases are a grand challenge for scientists. Presently, there
is no effective cure for brain diseases (especially glioblastoma) despite the
efforts of many investigators and significant financial investment. There is a
pressing and unmet need for miniaturized deep tissue imaging tools that can help
neuro-oncologist study the fundamental mechanism of brain tumor and the dynamics
in the ligand-receptor interactions. This project will be focused on the
development of a tiny microscope for molecularly targeted imaging on freely
behaving small animals. The ultimate goal of this research is to provide
advanced biomedical tools to drive advancements in both scientific understanding
and future clinical applications. The techniques may lead to new imaging-guided
surgery and therapies for clinicians to improve the quality of life for a
sizable population. The generalized molecular imaging strategies will be applied
to other organs, such as the breast, lung, and colon. Interdisciplinary
educational activities will be developed for MSU and surrounding communities
(Greater Lansing) with emphasis on increasing participation by women and
underrepresented minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to conduct
research leading to head-mounted near-infrared-II confocal fluorescence
microscope that allows in vivo longitudinal cellular resolution imaging of brain
tumor with deep penetration (1000Âµm) for studying molecular contrast agents
targeting tumor biomarkers associated with brain diseases, including
glioblastoma. Fiber-coupled superconductive nanowire single photon detector
enables deep imaging in the biological transparency window (1000-1700nm). Based
on magnetic field-compatible ultra-low power thin-film piezoelectrical materials
and all-dielectric metamaterials-based flat lens, micro-system enabled three-
dimensional laser scan engine with long-range focus tunability deep in the
turbid solid brain tumor will be developed. Integration of monolithic focus
tuning and beam steering devices on a tiny platform allows broad-bandwidth scan
with ultra-low power consumption, which is currently impossible with macro-scale
instrumentation. The development of microscopic system will help exploit new
knowledge of opto-electronics on single photon detection. In-depth understanding
of multimodal imaging on biomarkers will lay the foundation for developing new
imaging modalities for applications in basic cancer biology studies and
translational medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.