* 2237529
* CAREER: Evaluating the contribution of Sensory Drive to the divergence of flower color
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Matthew Koski, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Judy Stone
* 01/31/2028
* USD 819,230.00

Plants have evolved flowers of notably different colors, often due to
preferences of different pollinators. However, within some plant species there
are populations that have different colored flowers although the pollinator
species are the same. Floral color differences could evolve without pollinator
shifts if plant populations live in different habitats that affect the way that
flowers appear to pollinators. In particular, the color of the background can
affect the way that pollinators see colors. Alternatively, differences in
environmental factors like water availability could also affect flower color.
This project assesses how flower color may evolve to be different between
populations without major shifts in pollinator species. It focuses on
populations of a widespread plant in different habitats that differ starkly in
background color. The research will help us better understand how flowers evolve
to attract pollinators. It can also help predict how floral signals may change
as climate change affects the timing and location of flowering. In addition, the
project provides training in research and scientific outreach for undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In animal behavior studies, Sensory Drive
describes the situation whereby communication signals change when the signaling
environment changes. This project will assess the contribution of Sensory Drive
to flower color evolution while also testing longer-standing theoretical drivers
of floral diversity. Using a bee-pollinated annual, Phacelia dubia, that
transmits floral signals to pollinators in either rocky outcrops or grassy
meadows, the project will employ 1) observations and experiments in 12 natural
populations to evaluate the contributions of Sensory Drive and pollinator-shifts
to changes in flower color, 2) a 4-generation experimental evolution study to
evaluate whether the background habitat color spurs rapid flower color
evolution, and 3) growth chamber experiments and long term data collection in
natural populations to assess the role of environmental variables in shaping
flower color. With an integrative educational program the project will also
engage undergraduates, 4-H Junior Naturalists, and Native Plant Society members
to address whether background-dependent evolution contributes to color
diversification across a broad range of species, and to link pollinator behavior
with the results of natural selection in experimental
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Division
of Environmental Biology (DEB) and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.