* 2237250
* CAREER: Impact of Green Roof and Vertical Greenery Systems on Structural Performance for Multi-Hazard Scenarios
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Jenna Wong, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 05/31/2028
* USD 510,436.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will contribute to the
resilience and capacity of communities to address climate change and recover
from natural hazard events, such as earthquakes, by producing a novel design
approach for green infrastructure (GI) (i.e., green roof and vertical greenery
structures) to decrease monetary losses, deaths, and downtime associated with
these events. Sustainable structures with GI are needed to tackle climate
change. This research will address a critical gap in resources for practicing
engineers and users of buildings with GI in regions with seismic/wind risk with
a set of applied guidelines for weight variations of GI, including associated
demands at various moisture content levels for optimal structural performance.
The educational plan includes an educational video series on sustainable
structural resilience for undergraduate and graduate students and research
experiences for five university student assistants from underrepresented groups.
Further, open access to research results, design guidelines, and new educational
materials will inform civil engineering students in the California State
University system, practicing civil engineers in the U.S., and public consumers
to increase sustainability efforts and decrease negative impacts of climate
change and natural hazard events. Data generated from this project will be made
publicly available in the National Science Foundation (NSF)-supported Natural
Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure Data Depot (https://www.DesignSafe-
CI.org). This award supports the NSF role in the National Earthquake Hazards
Reduction Program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this award is advance
knowledge on GI’s sensitivities, influences on structural behavior, and
potential as a mitigation strategy. There is an established need to characterize
structural response as a combined effort between sustainable and resilient
design because the increase in GI usage over the past several decades has
outpaced research to support the engineering community in its design efforts.
The project’s research objectives include: (1) quantification of structural
behavior distributions due to changes in the GI from natural hazards (i.e.,
drought, storm surge), natural growth, and other life-cycle factors (i.e., poor
maintenance); (2) development of an initial design strategy for increased
seismic performance; and (3) creation of a transformative set of design
guidelines for sustainable structures considering GI variabilities. This will be
achieved through sensitivity analyses of modal behavior and testing of a
strategic GI plan using nonlinear time history analyses for a seismic scenario.
The educational goals are to train the next generation of civil engineers to
understand sustainable building designs with new, open-access educational
materials and to inform practicing civil engineers and the public about the
positive impacts of sustainability efforts that decrease the negative impacts of
climate change and wind/seismic events. Informing and building engineering
confidence in GI design will: (1) increase structural resilience with improved
designs, modeling, and analysis procedures; (2) reduce the human/economic costs
associated with structural failure; and (3) increase the use of GI while
promoting sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.