* 2237124
* CAREER: Bottom-Up Understanding of Liquid Breakup at Supercritical Conditions
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2027
* Dorrin Jarrahbashi, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 11/30/2027
* USD 409,419.00

The design of modern liquid-fueled engines is shifting toward higher pressures
exceeding the fuel critical point (supercritical) to improve fuel-air mixing,
enhance combustion efficiency, and reduce engine emissions. Liquid fuel
injection generally entails liquid jet breakup into droplets, forming a spray.
At supercritical conditions, however, spray formation transitions into a gas-
like mixing behavior. The underlying mechanism of this transition, i.e., trans-
critical breakup is elusive. Trans-critical breakup is linked to dramatic
changes in fluid properties and reduced surface tension due to weakened
intermolecular forces. However, the effect of molecular-level interactions on
the breakup of microscopic droplets is not understood. This grant supports
fundamental research to elucidate the mechanisms underlying liquid breakup at
supercritical conditions from molecular interactions to higher scales to advance
supercritical combustion. The results will enable new predictive capabilities in
controlling supercritical mixing before combustion over multiple scales. This
knowledge will promote the next generation of high-speed liquid-fueled
propulsion systems for supersonic/hypersonic air and space transportation and
supercritical power generation cycles. These benefits will promote U.S. clean
energy initiatives and strengthen national security, defense, and economic
competitiveness. The educational activities will cultivate an inclusive learning
environment in multiphase flows and foster sustained mentorship for under-
represented minorities and women to diversify the pipeline of future STEM
leaders. Training teachers and informing students and parents at schoolâ€™s STEM
events will enhance public literacy on fluid mixing to promote clean
combustion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project intends to fundamentally
understand the breakup of an isolated liquid droplet at supercritical conditions
in both low-speed and shock-laden flows where shockwave interaction with
droplets promotes breakup. The trans-critical shock-driven breakup mechanism is
not known, as experimental diagnostics are not adequate for such extreme
conditions, and models are decoupled from the molecular interfacial behavior
that dictates droplet breakup. This project will address these knowledge gaps
and generates new knowledge on the relationship between surface tension and
phase change at supercritical conditions and its effect on droplet breakup.
Three research objectives will be to (1) Identify the molecular interfacial
behavior of a trans-critical droplet from molecular- to microscale; (2)
Understand the breakup mechanisms of a trans-critical droplet in low-speed
crossflow, and (3) Determine the shock-driven breakup mechanisms of a trans-
critical droplet. The technical approach involves a bottom-up approach based on
first principles involving coupled Molecular Dynamics-Direct Numerical
Simulations and high-speed experimental measurements. The generated knowledge is
critical for controlling fuel-air mixing in high-pressure liquid injection
systems in diesel, rocket, gas turbine, scramjet, and rotating detonation
engines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.