* 2237684
* CAREER: The role of local adaptation to reproductive conflict in the distribution of facultatively parthenogenetic reproduction
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Mercedes Burns, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 03/31/2028
* USD 622,506.00

The most common reproductive mechanism in animals involves males and females but
often comes at a cost to females and reduces their rate of reproduction overall.
Alternatively, some species can reproduce either with or without male
involvement facultatively. This combinatory reproductive mode presents a
compelling opportunity for researchers to understand why reproduction that
produces males is so widespread. The project will quantify the relationships
between density, reproductive behavior, and reproductive mode among populations
of a species with just such facultative reproduction in the group Opiliones
(harvestman or “daddy-longlegs”). In particular, the work will assess when
reproductive mode changes occur, and whether they are in response to male
harassment behavior. A novel genetic approach will be employed to identify
whether offspring have been produced with or without the involvement of a male.
In addition, the project will examine whether female resistance to mating
affects the reproductive mode they ultimately use. Students involved in the
project will be trained in observational and molecular research approaches as
part of a new laboratory course on biodiversity and global applications.
Diversity, equity, and inclusion programming for a new committee for the
American Arachnological Society will also be developed and deployed. This
research is being jointly supported by IOS Behavioral Systems and DEB
Evolutionary Processes programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although facultative
parthenogenesis has long interested evolutionary biologists due to the
opportunities presented by these systems to examine the evolutionary fitness
benefits of alternative reproductive modes, locally adaptive mechanisms for the
maintenance of reproductive alternatives, and detailed geographic patterns of
reproductive mode have not been explored in natural systems. Additionally,
models predicting the maintenance and pattern of multiple reproductive modes
that are expressed facultatively commonly assume irreversibility of reproductive
mode; an assumption that has not been established empirically. The local
adaptation to sexual conflict (LASC) hypothesis was developed to predict when
and where females would switch among reproductive modes. LASC predicts that
females in habitats with high male density are adapted to frequent male coercion
and will resist coercion by males and adopt parthenogenetic reproductive modes,
particularly in the early breeding season. Alternatively, females from low-
density, female-biased populations will be less likely to exhibit antagonistic
behaviors towards males, and/or will be more easily overcome by coercive males.
Thus, this study will characterize the geographic landscape of male density,
reproductive behavior, and reproductive mode to evaluate this hypothesis. This
study and the robust evaluation of the LASC hypothesis will make a valuable
contribution to our understanding of the maintenance of reproductive mode
diversity, particularly in the understudied arachnid order,
Opiliones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.