* 2237011
* CAREER: Next-Generation Surgical Robots for Energy-based Surgery
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Loris Fichera, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 06/30/2028
* USD 599,663.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will enable a new class of
surgical robots to treat disease via focused delivery of energy, without the
need for physical contact with the affected tissue. The project will investigate
multiple forms of energy, including lasers, radiofrequency, and ultrasonic
waves. The project will create energy-based sensing modes that probe anatomical
structures with a low-energy beam to determine their shape and thermal
properties. These measurements, which can be updated in real-time even during a
procedure, will allow safer and more precise removal of diseased tissue.
Initially, all functions will be performed by command of a surgeon but because a
robot is capable of reacting much faster than a human, the eventual goal of the
project is to enable autonomous implementation of certain procedures. Energy-
based surgical robots have the potential to improve public health by reducing
surgical invasiveness, recovery times, and treatment costs, and by enabling
entirely new procedures for life-threatening conditions that are currently
considered inoperable. Participation of undergraduate and graduate students in
this project will contribute to the training of the nationâ€™s next generation of
surgical robotics engineers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research project will
support the creation of a new framework of perception and control techniques to
enable surgical robots that monitor and regulate the thermal effects created by
their energy-based end effectors. The project will combine ideas and approaches
from multiple areas of computer science and engineering, including heat
transfer, finite element modeling, biomedical imaging, statistical state
estimation, and nonlinear control theory. Expected scientific contributions
include (1) new perception techniques that efficiently integrate thermal
sensing, imaging, and physics-based simulations to infer critical patient
information; (2) new control algorithms that leverage this enhanced perception
to automatically regulate energy delivery and so achieve prescribed outcomes in
the presence of uncertainty; and (3), strategies to appropriately integrate
human operators into the control of robotic energy-based instruments. The
expected long-term impact of this work will be to extend understanding of the
interactions of robots with their environments beyond the analysis and control
of contact forces, to incorporate non-contact functionality enabled by energy-
based heat exchange and the control of structural
temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.