* 2237454
* CAREER: CAS-Climate: Structure-Property-Performance Relationships of Iron- and Copper-Based Hybrid Mie-Resonator Photocatalysts for C-C and C-N Coupling Reactions
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2027
* Marimuthu Andiappan, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 12/31/2027
* USD 466,981.00

Carbon-carbon (C-C) and carbon-nitrogen (C-N) cross-coupling reactions are
important reactions used in the chemical and pharmaceutical industries to
produce a variety of valuable products. These products include pharmaceuticals,
polymers, and agrochemicals. The current methods used in the industry for cross-
coupling reactions require high-temperature processes and expensive metal
catalysts such as palladium (Pd). This project develops iron- and copper-based
inexpensive photocatalysts for C-C and C-N cross-coupling reactions. These
photocatalysts use visible light as energy input to drive cross-coupling
reactions under atmospheric temperature and pressure reaction conditions. The
development of iron- and copper-based photocatalysts will result in significant
reductions in the overall cost, energy requirements, and greenhouse gas
emissions from the cross-coupling processes. The project includes educational
activities that build upon the proposed research to infuse photocatalysis and
solar energy concepts into the chemical engineering curriculum at Oklahoma State
University (OSU). The proposed curriculum will prepare the students for the 21st
century`s challenges and directly benefit the undergraduate and graduate
students at OSU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The C-C and C-N cross-coupling reactions
have been conventionally carried out by homogeneous Pd complex-catalyzed batch
processes. There remains a critical need to develop inexpensive heterogeneous
nanocatalysts for these cross-coupling reactions since nanocatalysts are the
ideal catalysts for the most desired continuous flow processes. This project
will focus on the design of earth-abundant and inexpensive iron- and copper-
based hybrid Mie-resonator nanoparticles as heterogeneous visible light
photocatalysts for C-C and C-N cross-coupling reactions. Specifically, the
project will develop the structure-property-performance relationships by
examining the size/shape of hybrid Mie-resonator nanoparticles against their
charge carriers generation rate, the electron-transfer efficiency, and the
photocatalytic rate for the C-C and C-N cross-coupling reactions. To accomplish
this research objective, the project will utilize a combination of experimental
and theoretical tools, including nanoparticles geometry-controlled synthesis
techniques, finite-difference time-domain optical simulations, in-situ
spectroscopic techniques, and photoreactor studies. The project will also
establish the conditions of photocatalytic stability for the iron- and copper-
based hybrid Mie-resonator nanoparticles to operate under the cross-coupling
reaction conditions. The photocatalytic stability of the hybrid Mie-resonator
nanoparticles of different sizes and shapes (spheres and cubes) will be
investigated as a function of light intensity. The stability and the possible
phase transformation at high light intensity will be characterized using in-situ
UV-Vis extinction spectroscopy. The outcomes of this specific research objective
will identify the combination of optimal geometries and optimal light intensity
that can maintain the photocatalytic stability of iron- and copper-based hybrid
Mie-resonator nanoparticles for the C-C and C-N cross-coupling
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.