* 2237052
* CAREER: Harnessing horizontal gene transfer to engineer environmental microbiomes in situ
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Lauren Stadler, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 01/31/2028
* USD 443,477.00

Microbiomes are communities of microorganisms found in natural and built
environments. Microbiomes are vital to our ecosystems and environment. They
drive global biogeochemical cycles and can be harnessed to drive various
environmental and sustainable engineering processes including wastewater
treatment and resource recovery, food production, and energy generation. This
CAREER project will explore the development and validation of engineered
microbiomes for wastewater resource recovery using horizontal gene transfer
(HGT). Two key goals of this CAREER project are to 1) develop and demonstrate
novel HGT systems for engineering wastewater microbiomes to enhance resource
recovery from organic wastes and 2) evaluate and unravel the environmental and
ecological factors that control the structure, function, and long-term stability
of the proposed engineered microbiomes. The successful completion of this
project will benefit society through the generation of new fundamental knowledge
to advance environmental microbiome engineering with the goal of developing more
efficient and sustainable wastewater treatment and resource recovery processes.
Additional benefits to society will be achieved through education and training
including the mentoring of one graduate and one undergraduate student, and high-
school STEM teacher trainees at Rice University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Horizontal
gene transfer (HGT), the movement of DNA between organisms, is central to
microbial community function and evolution. If harnessed properly, HGT could be
used to engineer microbiomes for environmental bioremediation, the selective
inactivation of microbial pathogens, or the recovery of valuable chemicals from
wastewater. However, critical knowledge gaps remain that hinder the successful
and reproducible engineering of environmental microbiomes via HGT, including how
to best deliver functional genes, how to metabolically engineer unculturable
microbes, and how to identify the environmental conditions that promote the
stability and function of a gene after HGT. The overarching goal of this CAREER
project is to develop and validate novel and safe strategies for harnessing HGT
for environmental microbiome engineering. The specific objectives of the
research are to: (1) develop donor and plasmid-based systems for delivering
functional genes to environmental microbial communities; (2) characterize
environmental and ecological factors that control HGT rates, host range and
stability of functional genes delivered via HGT in a microbial community; and
(3) demonstrate in situ editing of a wastewater microbiome by HGT to enhance
resource recovery from organic wastes in an acid fermentation reactor with the
goal of overcoming a critical bottleneck in lignocellulosic bioconversion. By
converging and integrating synthetic biology and environmental engineering, the
Principal Investigator hopes to develop and validate novel tools and strategies
to advance the design and control of engineered microbiomes for sustainable
environmental remediation, wastewater treatment, and resource recovery. The
proposed research activities will be integrated with an education plan that
focuses on increasing knowledge of ethical issues in synthetic biology and
microbiome engineering and revamping ethics curriculum for environmental
engineering/science courses. The educational and outreach goals of this CAREER
project will be implemented through (1) a research experience for teachers (RET)
for high school STEM teachers in Houston; (2) the co-development of curricular
modules on bioethics for high school and undergraduate courses; and (3) the
dissemination of the teacher training modules through a workshop for Houston-
area high school teachers and by making them publicly available
online.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.