* 2237075
* CAREER: The Origins of Discourse: How Children Develop Communicative Rationality Across Three Diverse Societies
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Jan Engelmann, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Leher Singh
* 06/30/2028
* USD 130,138.00

To become reasonable and responsible members of society, children have to
acquire skills of citizenship. This proposal focuses on a key citizenship skill:
how children learn to be proficient and critical contributors to public
discourse. Research on how children acquire these essential skills is lacking.
Rational discourse consists of two main skills: Reason-Responsiveness, the
ability to form, maintain, or revise one’s beliefs appropriately in response to
reasons provided by others; and Reason-Giving, the ability to provide adequate
reasons supporting one’s own claims. The proposed project advances basic
knowledge of the development of these two social critical thinking skills and
reveals similarities and differences between children in these developmental
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the development of
communicative rationality: how children between the ages of 4 and 9 develop
fundamental skills to become proficient and critical contributors to public
discourse. Using a mix of experimental and observational methods, the proposed
research objectives focus on two key sets of psychological capacities: the
development of reason-responsiveness and reason-giving. Additionally, the
hypothesis that the development of communicative rationality can be fostered
through a specific form of socio-linguistic interaction – parent-child metatalk
– is tested. This research advances knowledge by i) developing a new perspective
on rationality as a social phenomenon (communicative rationality) and further
understanding of its development; ii) providing the first systematic test of how
communicative rationality can be fostered in children; iii) revealing the
influence of cultural factors on children’s developing communicative
rationality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.