* 2237881
* CAREER: CAS-Climate: Urban Transportation-Energy Nexus: Environmentally Sustainable Transportation Systems with Bidirectional Energy Exchange
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Eleftheria Kontou, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 04/30/2028
* USD 402,969.00

Bidirectional electric vehicle (EV) and infrastructure technologies enable EVs
to serve as mobile energy storage resources, provide services to buildings, and
enhance resilience of urban energy systems during power outages. Toward enabling
electric vehicle-to-everything (V2X) power solutions, this project will develop
methods for holistic transportation, residential, and other commercial energy
use management to enhance urban environmental sustainability. The research plan
will advance systems science at the transportation-energy nexus by (1) creating
coupled electric vehicle and residential/office energy use profiles that capture
alternative management objectives and EV drivers preferences, (2) developing EV
one-way and bidirectional infrastructure location decision-making models that
center on distributive equity, and (3) modeling of EVs as distributed resources
and assessing their services during power outages that are exacerbated by
climate change. This research envisions urban electrified transportation systems
with management of bidirectional energy exchanges and infrastructure deployment
for urban environmental sustainability, equity, and resilience. The integrated
education and policy outreach plans include (1) providing research opportunities
in energy data analytics and applied optimization to diverse undergraduate
students, (2) organizing a Midwest Sustainable Transportation Datathon, and (3)
communicating the research methods and outcomes to policymakers and
practitioners through an EV Steering Committee that enables research-practice
feedback loops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research approach includes data fusion
and curation for the creation of a new dataset coupling US travel patterns and
residential energy use characteristics as well as benchmarking bidirectional
power profiles under various EV management objectives and preferences such as
cost minimization, pro-environmental attitudes, valley filling and peak saving.
Optimization models and solution algorithms will be developed for one-way and
bidirectional EV charging infrastructure location modeling, integrating
distributive equity objectives for ubiquitous EV infrastructure and sustainable
mobility access. Consideration of the bidirectional EVs services provided during
power outages will include the development of new resilience metrics for the
coupled EV and residential energy use systems, at both the residential household
and the community scales.&lt;br/&gt;Results from the project are targeted to
provide EV infrastructure providers, utilities, and policymakers the engineering
means to model and manage bidirectional EV energy exchanges based on
environmental sustainability, equity, and resilience objectives. A policy
outreach program with media resources on electric vehicle-to-everything demand,
infrastructure deployment and management will be developed. Research insights
will be distributed to a group of 50 stakeholders via the EV Steering Committee.
The project will engage a diverse group of undergraduate and graduate research
assistants at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign in the transportation
and energy fields, offering a multidisciplinary STEM research experience. The
integrated education plan involves organizing a Datathon that mobilizes an
ecosystem of academics, national laboratory researchers, and public agencies to
come together and provide data-driven tools for educating the workforce of the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.