* 2237404
* CAREER: Methane emissions from the US and Canada -- novel insights from an expanding observation network
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Scot Miller, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 05/31/2028
* USD 400,872.00

Methane is the second-most important greenhouse gas (GHG) after carbon dioxide
in terms of its climate impact. Compared to carbon dioxide (CO2), methane (CH4)
has a much shorter residence time in the atmosphere approximately 9-12 years
compared to 300-1000 years for CO2. However, the global warming potential of
methane is 28 times larger than that of carbon dioxide over a 100-year period.
In the United States, several federal and state agencies have set goals for
reducing methane emissions. However, there are large uncertainties in the
current knowledge and accounting of CH4 emissions and how these emissions are
changing over time. The overarching goal of this CAREER project is to quantify
how methane emissions in the United States, Canada, and Mexico have changed over
nearly two decades from 2007-2026. To advance this goal, the Principal
Investigator (PI) proposes to leverage an expanding network of atmospheric
methane observations (collected from airplanes, atop TV towers, and satellites)
and recent advances in inverse modeling (algorithms and software) that enable
the estimations of previously unaccounted sources of CH4 emissions in North
America using massive satellite datasets. The successful completion of this
project will benefit society through the generation of new data and fundamental
knowledge that could be used to (1) better understand and quantify CH4 emissions
in North America, and (2) guide the implementation and evaluation of policies
and solutions designed to reduce the global emissions of a potent GHG such as
methane. Further benefits to society will be achieved through student education
and training including the mentoring of a graduate student at Johns Hopkins
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methane (CH4) emissions in North America
(United States, Canada, and Mexico) have changed significantly during the past
twenty years driven to a large extent by a substantial increase in oil and gas
production. This CAREER project will address critical knowledge gaps in the
current level of understanding and quantification of CH4 emissions in North
America. The specific objectives of the research are to: (1) quantify how
anthropogenic methane emissions in North America have changed over two decades
(2007-2026) using a combination of ground-based and satellite observations, (2)
evaluate the changing contribution of large and super-emitters of methane in
North America using satellite observations from the TROPOspheric Monitoring
Instrument (TROPOMI), (3) estimate the distribution and year-to-year variability
of CH4 fluxes from wetlands in the United States, Canada, and Mexico, and 4)
quantify the relationships between CH4 fluxes from wetlands and key
environmental drivers with the goal of developing more accurate and robust
process models of methane emissions by wetlands. The successful completion of
this research has the potential for transformative impact through the leveraging
of an expanded network of atmospheric methane observations and new approaches to
inverse modeling that could enable the identification and quantification of
previously unaccounted sources of CH4 emissions in North America using massive
satellite datasets. To implement the educational and outreach activities of this
CAREER project, the Principal Investigator (PI) proposes to leverage existing
programs and resources at Johns Hopkins University (JHU) to develop and deliver
two integrated educational activities focused on greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions
and climate change (CC). For the first educational activity, the PI will work
with the JHU Center for Educational Outreach to create hands-on activities about
GHG emissions and CC for Baltimore City middle school students enrolled in the
Barclay Summer Academy. For the second educational activity, the PI proposes to
develop an interdisciplinary undergraduate course on GHG emissions and climate
policy at JHU that will include discussions with scientists, engineers, and
policy experts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.