* 2237792
* CAREER: Accelerated Chemical Reactions in Unique Solvation Environments
* MPS,CHE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Jesse McDaniel, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Ryan Jorn
* 12/31/2027
* USD 650,000.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
in the Division of Chemistry, Jesse McDaniel of the Georgia Institute of
Technology is investigating the acceleration of chemical reactions at interfaces
and within specific solvation environments. Developing new chemistries that
address a wide range of societal applications requires fundmental understanding
of the rates of chemical reactions, which in certain cases can be substantially
accelerated by the presence of interfaces or confinement of reactants in small
droplets. In all cases, reaction acceleration occurs through interactions at the
atomic scale, and molecular simulations using high-performance computers are
routinely engaged to characterize reaction mechanisms. Dr. McDaniel and his
research group will build on these approaches by pioneering a new framework for
calculating and predicting rate acceleration in complex environments. The
project aims to improve mechanistic understanding of catalytic rate enhancements
at interfaces and heterogenous solvation environments for important C-C bond
forming reactions and conversions of fructose and polyalcohols. This has the
potential to enable tailored design of reaction environments (e.g.
microdroplets, thin films) to optimize the reaction rates/yield. The McDaniel
team will partner with regional high school teachers to better integrate
software and data science tools within the high school educational curriculum
and effectively train the next generation of computational
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are many compelling examples of
dramatically accelerated chemical reactions in microdroplets, thin films, and
other heterogenous solvation environments. In all cases, the key questions
concern the microscopic mechanisms and atomistic interactions through which the
reactions are accelerated within these unique contexts. Jesse McDaniel and his
research group will investigate these catalytic mechanisms by developing a new
computational framework for calculating chemical reaction free energy profiles
in complex environments. The new approach will include quantum
mechanics/molecular mechanics (QM/MM) with exact long-range electrostatic
embedding, coupled with physics-based/neural network (PB/NN) reactive force
fields. Both methods will be implemented within a unified software
infrastructure to simultaneously optimize accuracy and sampling. The McDaniel
group will apply this novel framework to investigate a variety of examples of
accelerated chemical reactivity in heterogeneous solvation environments
including Claisen-Schmidt condensation reactions within thin films, fructose
conversion within ionic liquid/water solutions, and accelerated Friedel-Crafts
alkylation within microdroplets. These efforts have the potential to provide for
a detailed microscopic understanding of the accelerated chemical
reactivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.