* 2237478
* CAREER: Harnessing Microfabrication for Chemical Control During High Pressure Synthesis of Non-Equilibrium Carbides
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* James Walsh, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 02/29/2028
* USD 306,902.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technology often relies on
the use of materials with specific properties. Since these properties arise from
microscopic interactions between atoms, we depend on chemists to discover and
optimize the recipes for making them. For example, the stainless steels used in
surgical tools and medical implants rely on the presence of very specific
amounts of chromium, which prevents oxygen from converting the iron and nickel
into rust. Although many materials can be created using high temperatures, some
of them—such as diamond—also require very high pressures to form. High pressure
chemistry is much less explored than traditional chemistry, but it has already
led to the discovery of many exciting new materials with properties such as
lossless electrical conductivity, exceptional hardness, and exotic forms of
magnetism. One major obstacle in the field is that the exceedingly small scales
required to perform high-pressure reactions make it difficult for chemists to
fine tune their recipes for preparing materials as easily as they can for
reactions under normal pressure. This in turn makes it much more difficult to
investigate and tune the new high-pressure materials being discovered. Through
this award, funded by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry program and the
Ceramics program in the Division of Materials Research at NSF, Prof. Walsh's
research team develops a completely new approach to high-pressure synthesis that
uses cutting-edge microfabrication methods to precisely tune elemental ratios to
a much higher precision than is possible with current methods. This project
supports the expert training of graduate students as they develop these next-
generation methods, greatly strengthening our nation’s future scientific
workforce. The award also enables the development of new educational kits that
provide high school and undergraduate students with hands-on access to high-
pressure science, promoting their exposure to forefront scientific
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-pressure synthesis is a rapidly growing field
that is enabling the experimental exploration of uncharted phase space in search
of novel materials. However, a longstanding issue in the field has been a poor
control over elemental composition under the strict constraints required to
access extreme pressures. This has precluded experiments that rely on an exact
control of stoichiometry, such as site doping studies or high-yield syntheses,
which in turn has limited the degree to which the bulk properties and
stabilities of unrecoverable phases can be studied. With this CAREER project,
Prof. Walsh implements and expands novel methods developed in his laboratory to
experimentally examine longstanding predictions surrounding the superconducting
properties of high valence electron count mid-row carbides that until now have
remained untestable. Alongside these studies, his team also examines the effect
that chemical site doping has on the stability fields of unquenchable high-
pressure phases. The exquisite control of chemical composition required for
these studies is enabled by a completely new approach to sample preparation that
uses sputtering and microlithography to prepare micropellet precursors with
precise chemical composition and spatial homogeneity. These precursors are
readily integrated with the diamond anvil cell method, allowing for the
collection of X-ray diffraction and spectroscopic data under extreme pressures.
The discovery of new methods for optimizing the properties and recoverability of
high-pressure phases would break new ground toward their integration with
existing technology infrastructure, greatly enhancing their potential for
societal impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.