* 2237166
* CAREER: Super-resolution Ultrasound Imaging for High-resolution Functional Mapping of the Brain
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2028
* Pengfei Song, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 04/30/2028
* USD 404,921.00

The brain is the most complex organ in the human body. How does the brain work
remain one of the most challenging scientific problems for humanity. For
decades, scientists and engineers continually develop and refine new methods and
techniques to advance our understanding of the brain. Out of these tools,
imaging is essential for deciphering the brain because it allows us to directly
visualize and investigate the complex brain tissues and their organizations and
functional networks. However, even with the multitude of brain imaging
technologies that are currently available, our ability to probe deep brain
tissues beyond the cerebral cortex is still limited. This limitation can largely
be attributed to the physics of imaging, which dictate the inevitable trade-off
between how small of an object we can see and from how deep we can see them.
This shortcoming ultimately limits our ability to explore beyond the superficial
tissues of the brain and to understand how the human brain works in its
entirety. The long-term objective of this CAREER proposal, therefore, is to
overcome this shortcoming by developing a new ultrasound imaging technology that
can probe deep brain functional neural activities at a microscopic spatial
resolution. Our technique leverages the power of deep learning and ultrafast
ultrasound imaging to break the barrier of imaging speed for conventional super-
resolution ultrasound. If successful, this transformative new technology will
become a paradigm-shifting imaging tool that provides functional brain mapping
at a much finer spatial resolution with a much deeper and wider territory than
ever before. The unique capabilities of this new imaging technology will also
open new doors for many under-explored opportunities in both basic neuroscience
research and in many neurological disease applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER proposal is to develop a new and
transformative functional brain imaging technology that allows continuous, real-
time monitoring of neural activities of the entire brain at a micron-scale
through intact skull. Thrust 1 will focus on improving the temporal resolution
of conventional super-resolution ultrasound imaging by developing deep learning-
based super-resolution imaging techniques. Thrust 2 will address the
computational challenges associated with ultrasound image reconstruction by
developing a new ultrafast ultrasound system based on modern high-speed FPGAs.
Thrust 3 will concentrate on developing phase aberration correction methods
based on deep learning and novel 3D ultrafast imaging techniques to achieve
robust intact skull imaging of the whole brain. In vivo mouse brain imaging
studies will be conducted throughout the technical thrusts to evaluate and
validate the performance of the newly developed super-resolution imaging
techniques. If successful, the proposed work will result in a new, radiation-
free, low-cost, and widely accessible functional brain imaging technique that
will be the first to enable noninvasive probing of in vivo, deep-brain neural
activities with high spatiotemporal resolution. In addition to the technical
thrusts, this CAREER proposal also includes educational and outreach programs
aimed to instill in the new generation of students the desire to improve the
standard of healthcare such that all patients have access to state-of-the-art
treatment, diagnostic, and screening options. By providing research
opportunities, creating ultrasound engineering labs, developing innovative
teaching strategies, and establishing new courses, this CAREER proposal will
provide these students with the knowledge and tools necessary to create
actionable changes within the opportunities presented.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.