* 2237773
* Structure and Hydration of the Explorer-Juan de Fuca-Gorda Plate System at the Onset of Subduction Beneath Cascadia
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Hanchao Jian, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 12/31/2024
* USD 479,989.00

Earthquakes, tsunamis, and explosive volcanism are geohazards associated with
subduction zones. Understanding the variability along the subduction zone is
important for what controls geohazards in this populated region of North
America. This project will analyze marine seismic profiles along the Cascadia
margin from offshore Vancouver Island to southern Oregon. Measurements and
analyses will constrain variability in subducting sediment thickness, amount of
water in the downgoing plate, and topography of the sediment-basement interface.
This project will contribute to the education of two graduate students by
providing them support, data and training in geophysical
imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In 2021, a suite of modern and extensive
controlled-source seismic datasets was collected along profiles spanning most of
the length of the Cascadia margin. The datasets along ten of the profiles
consist of co-located ultralong-streamer multichannel seismic reflection and
wide-angle seismic reflection/refraction data recorded in ocean bottom
seismometers (OBSs). The project will use these datasets to model the seismic
properties and structure of the sediments, crust and mantle of the incoming and
down-going plates as well as those of the accretionary prism. Fracturing and
alteration of crustal and mantle rocks give rise to detectable changes in
seismic velocities, and seismic methods provide an important remote sensing tool
for assessing plate hydration. The researchers will produce models of the P-wave
and S-wave seismic velocity structure along each OBS transect using state-of-
the-art wide-angle seismic data processing and imaging methods, including
downward-continuation of ultra-long streamer data, super-virtual refraction
interferometry, and joint travel-time refraction/reflection tomography of
streamer and OBS data. The seismic velocity models will be used together with
effective medium theory to constrain crust and mantle porosity, and the amount
and distribution of fluid and chemically-bound water of the incoming and down-
going plate. The findings from this project will be of great interest to
researchers investigating Cascadia subduction zone processes, from the
deformation front to sub-arc depths. The project results will also be a key
component for updating and improving the U.S. Geological Surveyâ€™s margin-scale
3-D seismic velocity model for Cascadia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.