* 2237238
* CAREER: SaTC: Rethinking Trusted Execution Environments for Embedded and IoT Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2028
* Ziming Zhao, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 01/31/2028
* USD 108,136.00

Networked embedded and Internet of things (IoT) systems are essential to
everyday life and predicted to reach one trillion systems by 2035. These systems
power a variety of embedded and IoT devices, such as sensors, medical devices,
wearables, smart family gadgets, industrial computing units, autonomous
vehicles, and infotainment systems. While the benefits of these systems are
unparalleled, they are susceptible to cyberattacks, which are occurring at
unprecedented levels and often have severe consequences ranging from loss of
life to homeland security breaches. To ensure our IoT infrastructure and
ecosystem are built on a trustworthy and secure foundation, this project's
novelties are to expand knowledge in pursuit of trustworthy and deployable
solutions encompassing the hardware and software layers of computer systems. The
project's broader significance and importance, beyond securing the IoT
infrastructure, are to train the next generation of cybersecurity researchers,
educators, and practitioners with deep theoretical understandings and practical
skills in this field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Trusted Execution Environments (TEE),
an enabling technology for the confidential computing paradigm, are offered in
Central Processing Units (CPUs) as a foundational primitive for security to keep
code and data loaded inside computer systems protected. The hardware and
software layers of existing TEEs nevertheless have been criticized for lack of
transparency and presence of vulnerabilities. This project studies a systematic
research approach to increase the trustworthiness and deployability of TEEs and
TEE-based security solutions for embedded and IoT devices. Specifically, the
project advances the frontiers of knowledge in (1) designing trustworthy TEE
hardware paradigms with a minimal Trusting Computing Base (TCB); (2) discovering
and fixing confused deputy vulnerabilities of TEE software; and (3) developing
new security solutions that utilize TEEs and other hardware units for better
protection and superior performance. The education thrust advances the state of
knowledge in IoT software and system security education pedagogy and
platform.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.