* 2237696
* CAREER: Data-Driven Control of High-Rate Dynamic Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Austin Downey, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 01/31/2028
* USD 123,616.00

This NSF CPS CAREER project studies the hardware/software co-design of sub-
millisecond machine learning control for high-rate dynamic systems with non-
stationary inputs that change the system’s state (i.e., damage). Such systems
include combustion processes in jet engines, vehicle structures during crashes,
and active blast mitigation structures. The novelty of the approach taken in
this project is to co-design the control systems with the computing hardware
they will run on to constrain system latency to within 1 millisecond. The
developed solutions will be able to learn a system’s dynamics at the data rates
required by high-rate dynamic systems. Machine learning models will learn the
dynamics of the non-linear system online, which will then be used to model the
dynamics of the system to the appropriate prediction horizon. The project is
developing an automated programming methodology that enables the deployment of
these real-time controllers onto compact and power-efficient computing devices.
It follows that this research will impact society and the mission of the NSF by
enabling a better understanding of dynamic systems operating in high-rate
environments while enabling intelligent decision-making capabilities at speeds
never before reached. The project will leverage existing and valuable resources
at the University of South Carolina to involve several high school and
undergraduate students in the project; with emphasis on providing research
experiences to underrepresented, first-generation, and low-income students. This
project will also train Ph.D. students in real-time machine learning and
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, this research is addressing the
fundamental question of how programmable hardware can be used to enable machine
learning and control for systems that demand ultra-low latency. This is being
done by formulating a framework for real-time machine learning control that co-
designs hardware and software and provides a path to deployment on field
programmable gate arrays (FPGAs). The project is: 1) Training a novel long
short-term memory (LSTM) model on-chip with a custom online trainer that maps
sensor signal and actuator input for a high-rate system to system state in real-
time. 2) Developing approaches to share FPGA signal processing and memory
resource for the parallel utilization of multiple LSTM forward-pass cores while
maintaining deterministic timing. 3) Studying trade-offs between accuracy,
performance, and resource requirements for real-time machine learning control at
the microsecond timescale. Validation of the developed approach is being
performed using a hardware-in-the-loop testing methodology with fast-acting
actuators to control the outer mold line of a structural panel in simulated
hypersonic flight.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.