* 2237512
* CAREER: Selective activation of catalytic RNA to control energy flow in microbial consortia
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* James Chappell, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 03/31/2028
* USD 251,665.00

Microbial communities are found almost everywhere and underlie processes
critical to agriculture, waste treatment, the longevity of materials, and human
health. Genetic manipulation of these communities can be used to understand how
they form and to introduce new functions to increase the agricultural
productivity of soil, improve human health, recover energy from waste materials
to achieve a circular economy, and more. To that end, this project creates a new
method for genetically programming microbial communities that will open the door
for new applications in biotechnology and medicine. This project also carries
out an integrated research and education plan that focuses on community
colleges. While community colleges educate a large and diverse student body,
they often lack access to high-impact research experiences. Through a series of
research-focused activities, this project aims to increase the number of
community college students pursuing degrees and careers in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the last decade,
great progress has been made in developing frameworks to genetically program
model microbes grown in the laboratory. To program the native microbial
communities found in soils, rivers, guts, minerals, and built materials,
analogous frameworks will be required. This project addresses the broad
challenge of genetically engineering microbial communities that are composed of
diverse non-model species and often found in complex matrices (e.g., soil,
biofilms, materials). Engineered RNA systems will be used to study how different
genetic programs spread throughout microbial communities and to implement
spatiotemporal control such that genetic programs are only activated in specific
community members. These methods will be combined and applied to create genetic
programs that enhance the ability of microbial communities to harvest energy
directly from waste materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.