* 2237610
* CAREER: Reaction Development and Advancing Spectroscopic Analysis for Selective Labeling and Radiolabeling of Small Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Joseph Clark, Marquette University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 06/30/2028
* USD 390,892.00

With support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Joseph Clark of Marquette University is studying processes for the preparation
of small molecules incorporating tritium (and/or deuterium) atomic labels and
complementary analytical techniques to characterize and probe these materials.
Tritium is widely used as a radioactive tracer element in biological and
chemical research and molecules labeled with this rare isotope of hydrogen are
useful during the development of pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals, and other kinds
of important substances. The findings of the funded research are anticipated to
permit the incorporation of tritium (/deuterium) into small molecules with a
high level of precision, such that the quantity and location of the hydrogen
isotope of choice can be finely controlled. The broader impacts of the funded
project extend to the benefits accrued to society as Dr. Clark and his research
team members engage in a variety of educational and outreach activities.
Foremost among these efforts is a holistic undergraduate career development and
training program that combines undergraduate summer research experiences with a
collaborative pharmaceutical industry and academic workshop jointly facilitated
by the University of Puerto Rico Cayey and Marquette University. The program is
designed to provide students with critical training to prepare them for
successful careers in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
and it places an emphasis on attracting participation from individuals belonging
to groups traditionally underrepresented in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tritium is an ideal tracer nuclide because of its
sufficiently long half-life (12.3 years) and the ability to prepare tritiated
compounds with high specific activity for a variety of applications in chemical
and biological research. For example, tritium-labeled small molecules are often
used in radioligand binding assays and also for absorption, distribution,
metabolism, and excretion (ADME) studies of drug candidates. Despite the many
important roles for tritium-containing molecules, there are a limited number of
effective synthetic methods for the selective incorporation of precise
quantities of tritium into organic compounds. Furthermore, spectroscopic
techniques to characterize and quantify tritiated small molecules, especially
enantioisotopomers that are chiral by virtue of isotopic substitution, are
either underdeveloped or do not currently exist. To address the first challenge,
a suite of copper-catalyzed transfer tritiation and hydrotritiation reactions
are being investigated that permit the regio- and stereo-controlled
incorporation of tritium-atom labels into various types of alkene and alkyne
substrates (including: allenes, 1,3-dienes, and enynes). The development of
enantioselective variants of these transformations is also being pursued to
allow for access to enantioisotopomers that are chiral by virtue of tritium
substitution and/or by virtue of deuterium and tritium substitution. To support
reaction development, and in regard to the second challenge identified above,
molecular rotational resonance (MRR) spectroscopy is being established as a
general analytical technique to quantify enantiomeric excess of
enantioisotopomeric materials and to determine their absolute configurations. It
is anticipated that the findings from this research will expand access to
selectively tritiated small molecules as useful tools for understanding how
metabolites and/or pharmaceutical agents are processed in biological
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.