* 2237213
* CAREER: Building and controlling the reactivity of a cobalt-porphyrin cofactor
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Andrew Buller, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 02/29/2028
* USD 221,111.00

Enzymes are proteins that drive biological reactions. Most work in concert with
small molecules that contribute electronic functions or molecular pieces needed
for the reaction. These small molecules, referred to as cofactors, often contain
one or more metal atoms in their structure. These metals are most often iron,
zinc, copper, magnesium, and manganese. An important class of cofactors are
called porphyrins. The heme molecule, found in hemoglobin, is a porphyrin that
contains an iron atom in its center. This project will involve the production of
a cobalt analog of heme. This cobalt-protoporphyrin (CoPPIX) cofactor is
expected to drive reactions that have not been previously observed to occur in
biological systems. The project will also support the development of a freshman
undergraduate research experience course focused on experimental design and
analysis. The enzymatic breakdown of plastic will be the model system studied in
the combined instruction/lab course. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A grand challenge in
biocatalysis is to merge traditional synthetic catalysts with biological
scaffolds. The resulting enzymes could hypothetically accomplish highly
selective versions of known reactions and even enable new transformations.
Swapping the identity of a metal cofactor is a highly productive route to
generating new reactivity. However, the process of generating artificial
metalloenzymes is laborious. The central goal of this project is to expand the
reaction scope of biochemistry using a new, fully genetically encoded metallo-
cofactor. This effort will attempt to develop a robust, generalizable route to
producing cobalt-substituted porphyrin (CoPPIX) in vivo. Once accomplished, one
would explore how the chemistry of this cofactor can be controlled to facilitate
new-to-nature hydrogen-atom transfer chemistry. This lab has already shown that
E. coli BL21 can be coopted to biosynthesize CoPPIX and insert this cofactor
into proteins. Three complementary tasks are proposed: improve CoPPIX production
through ferrochetalase engineering, explore the reactivity of a putative cobalt-
hydride (Co-H) intermediate, and tune the chemoselectivity of enzymes bearing
the CoPPIX cofactor to perform new biocatalytic transformations using directed
molecular evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly
supported by the Cellular and Biochemical Engineering (CBE) Program in ENG/CBET
and by the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) and Chemical Catalysis (CAT)
Programs in MPS/CHE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.