* 2237311
* CAREER: Tuning Interfacial Ion Assembly to Engineer Electrochemical Reactions for a Sustainable Future
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2027
* Matthew Gebbie, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Read
* 12/31/2027
* USD 492,413.00

Electrochemical devices play a critical role in lowering carbon emissions in the
energy and chemical sectors. These devices are typically composed of two
electrodes joined by an electrolyte. While significant research has focused on
the effect and evolution of electrodes during device operation, a detailed
understanding of the role of electrolytes remains unresolved. Carbon dioxide
(CO2) reduction reactions are energy-intensive and must compete with undesirable
parasitic reactions which reduce both energy and carbon efficiency. There is a
pressing need for new ways to tune electrolytes for the selective conversion of
CO2 to carbon monoxide (CO), a key specialty chemical that can be used to make a
wide range of chemical products. This project aims to explore how ion self-
assembly in electrolytes at interfaces could revolutionize the performance of
CO2 electrocatalysis into chemical feedstocks to mitigate the carbon footprint
of chemical production. The project addresses how the self-assembly of organic
ions promotes electrocatalytic reactions and connects these insights to reaction
mechanisms and interfacial properties. This research will provide the
fundamental basis for molecular level design of electrolytes that will advance
technologies needed to address key sustainability challenges, such as CO2
recycling. Further, this project aims to catalyze growth of a diverse domestic
STEM workforce by launching educational programs, including an Electrocatalysis
Workshop for high school teachers and a public Water Splitting Challenge.
Educational activities aim to foster an inclusive workforce in electrochemistry,
with an emphasis on including participants from underrepresented
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to understand
how collective ion assembly influences electrochemical properties and electron
transfer at interfaces. CO2 reduction in ionic liquid electrolytes will be used
as a model system, since ionic liquids provide opportunities to tune interfacial
properties and catalytic reactivity via molecular assembly. The driving
hypothesis is that electrocatalytic reactivity is dictated by electric field
strengths immediately adjacent to electrode surfaces in a region where ions
assemble, called the electric double layer. Further, this project aims to study
how electric field strengths can be enhanced by modulating collective ion
assembly, which will accelerate reactions involving polar intermediates, such as
CO2 reduction. The key objectives are: (1) understand how collective ion
assembly influences CO2 reduction, (2) reveal how ion assembly governs
electrochemical properties of interfaces, and (3) study how ion aggregation can
confine co-ions at interfaces to tune reactivity. The research will bridge
catalysis science with a unique set of surface forces and spectroscopy tools to
determine how structural, chemical, and electrochemical properties intersect to
govern electrocatalytic reactions. By systematically studying how ion molecular
structures influence assembly and electrochemical reactivity, this project
promises to develop mechanistic insights into how interfacial microenvironments
can be influenced at the molecular level to address growing challenges in
sustainable energy and chemical manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.