* 2237080
* CAREER: Piezoelectric Mechanocatalytic Destruction of PFAS in Solid Matrices at Ambient Conditions: An Integrated Research and Education Plan
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Yang Yang, Clarkson University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 04/30/2028
* USD 435,591.00

Per-and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are synthetic chemicals that have been
manufactured and used in numerous consumer products and industrial applications
since the 1940s. PFAS are among the most stable chemicals ever produced. During
the last two decades, increasing detection of PFAS in various environmental
media has raised significant concerns about their persistence, stability, and
adverse impact including toxicity to living organisms and humans. With the
gradual phase-out of PFAS from consumer and industrial products, stocks of
obsolete PFAS chemicals are becoming solid wastes. In addition, large quantities
of PFAS solid wastes are increasingly being generated including wastewater
sludge, contaminated soils, and spent granular activated carbon (GAC) and ion
exchange (IX) media used to remove PFAS from contaminated drinking water
sources. Currently, thermal processes such as incineration and pyrolysis have
emerged as the most effective for treating and destroying PFAS laden solid
wastes at industrial and commercial scales. However, PFAS thermal treatment
processes require high temperatures (150-900 Â°C) and often generate gaseous
streams containing toxic intermediates and products of incomplete combustion
(PICs) that require additional treatment to mitigate their releases into the
environment. The overarching goal of this CAREER project is to lay the
foundation for the development and validation of a novel piezoelectric material
(PZM)-assisted ball milling (BM) process capable of treating and destroying PFAS
solid wastes at room temperature and ambient pressure. To advance this goal, the
Principal Investigator proposes to explore the activation of mixtures of
catalytic piezoelectric materials (PZMs) and PFAS chemicals/solid wastes using a
BM reactor to generate high electric potentials to decompose and mineralize PFAS
into benign inorganic products. The successful completion of this project will
benefit society through the generation of new fundamental knowledge and the
design and synthesis of reactive PZMs to advance the development of more
effective and sustainable technologies for the treatment and destruction of PFAS
solid wastes. Additional benefits to society will be achieved through student
education and training including the mentoring of one graduate student and one
undergraduate student at Clarkson University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PFAS solid
wastes are pervasive in the environment. They include obsolete PFAS chemicals,
manufacturing wastes, contaminated soils, municipal solid wastes, and spent
granular activated (GAC) and ion exchange (IX) media used to remove PFAS from
contaminated drinking water sources. The overarching goal of this CAREER project
is to advance the development of an innovative mechanochemical process that
could treat and convert PFAS solid wastes to benign products at ambient
temperature and pressure. The core guiding hypothesis of the proposed research
is that the collisions between steel balls and catalytic piezoelectric materials
(PZMs) in a ball milling (BM) reactor loaded with PFAS solid compounds/wastes
can generate transient high electric potentials to degrade and destroy the PFAS.
The specific objectives of the research are to (1) optimize the BM collision
energy required to carry out the PFAS mechanochemical degradation process, (2)
maximize the reactivity and catalytic activity of the PZMs via rationale design
of crystal structure and heterojunctions, (3) use advanced in-situ and ex-situ
characterization tools to probe and unravel the mechanisms and pathways of PFAS
degradation, and (4) evaluate the cost-effectiveness of a PZM assisted BM
process in the treatment and destruction of PFAS solid wastes. The successful
completion of this project has the potential for transformative impact through
the generation of new fundamental knowledge to advance the design and
demonstration of a PZM-assisted ball milling (BM) process and reactor for the
treatment and remediation of PFAS solid wastes at room and ambient pressure. To
implement the educational and training goals of this CAREER project, the
Principal Investigator (PI) proposes to leverage established programs at
Clarkson University to (i) engage and mentor undergraduate students to work on
the project research activities, (ii) promote K-12 STEM literacy, and (iii)
provide PFAS related workforce training. To promote STEM literacy for K-12
students, the PI proposes to develop and deliver science courses and hands-on
laboratory exercises based on the project research activities. In addition, the
PI plans to collaborate with the accredited PFAS analysis center at Clarkson
University to prepare training materials and host virtual seminars in PFAS
analysis and treatment for the environmental remediation
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.