* 2237510
* CAREER:Shape Memory Polymers as Biomaterial
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Melanie Ecker, University of North Texas
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 01/31/2028
* USD 105,701.00

Non-technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;You may have heard about heat shrink
tubing. These shrinkable plastic tubes are typically used to insulate
unprotected wires to protect them against abrasion and other environmental
impacts, such as dust and moisture. These tubes are made of so-called shape
memory polymers and can change their shape after applying a specific stimulus,
such as temperature. What if these materials could be used to seal body parts
and organs (such as the intestines or vasculature) after surgery or injury?
Unfortunately, the conditions for the shrinking of conventional heat shrink
tubing are not suitable for biomedical applications, as those conditions far
exceed body temperature and would damage human tissues and injure the patient.
However, a heat shrink tube that responds to bodily conditions would enable
various medical applications and advance health care. This is why this NSF grant
aims to translate heat shrink tubing to the biomedical field to seal biological
tissues. To realize the biomedical version of this technology, a shape memory
polymer that (1) is biocompatible, (2) shrinks within minutes under
physiological conditions without the need for excessive application of heat, and
(3) is biodegradable will be developed and investigated. This project also
includes educational activities designed to raise excitement, awareness, and
interest in the emerging field of smart polymeric biomaterials. This excitement
will be achieved by encouraging underrepresented minorities and women to pursue
careers in biomedical engineering through a gender- and ethnicity-matched
mentor-mentee program. To excite non-scientists about polymer research, a
'science slam' event at local venues will be implemented. Students and faculty
members from UNT will present their research in lay terms and in a funny way at
these events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: &lt;br/&gt;This CAREER
project aims to elucidate the underlying mechanism of the plasticization-induced
shape memory effect of thiol-ene based polymers. The model application for this
material will be a heat shrink tubing that can shrink at bodily conditions (37Â°
C and simulated body fluids) and can be used to seal colonic anastomosis. The
specific three aims are to (1) Systematically investigate the effect of
crosslink-density and chain extender length on the plasticization-induced shape
memory effect of thiol-ene based polymers. Mechanical and thermomechanical
measurements inside simulated body fluids will be used to assess shape memory
properties and structure-property relationships. (2) Understand the relationship
between material thickness, degree of shape-programming, and radial recovery
forces of tube-shaped SMPs to determine optimal design parameters for sufficient
shape recovery using the heat shrink tube model. (3) Demonstrate the
functionality of a biomedical heat shrink tube that utilizes the plasticization-
induced shape recovery through an ex vivo colon anastomosis model and quantify
mechanical and sealing properties. The proposed research will advance science by
filling the gap in the structure-property relationship of thiol-ene based SMPs
that utilize plasticization for their shape recovery, which is essential for
designing future devices. In addition, this innovative biomaterial will allow
the broader research community to develop novel biomedical devices tailored to
specific tissues and applications. Educational and outreach activities will be
implemented to raise excitement, awareness, and interest in the emerging field
of smart polymeric biomaterials. These will include a gender- and ethnicity-
matched mentor-mentee program, training students from underrepresented groups in
the PI's laboratory, incorporating research discoveries into coursework, and
communicating research to the general public at local science slam
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.