* 2237313
* CAREER: Nudging and Leveraging the Onset of Buckling in Architected Materials for Performance Gains
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* David Restrepo, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 12/31/2027
* USD 641,398.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award supports research that
combines ideas drawn from complex algebra, applied mathematics, engineering
mechanics, and applied physics to advance the fundamental understanding and
controlling of the onset of micro-buckling and post micro-buckling behavior of
architected materials. The mechanics and materials communities have turned their
interest to using material architecture centered on unit cell designs to enable
exotic material properties and functionalities, giving rise to the field known
as architected materials. The unusual sets of properties and functionalities
observed in architected materials are often obtained by deliberatively
exploiting elastic micro-buckling, i.e., instability in the shape of the cell
walls and edges forming the material due to loading. This research project will
create a pathway for fine-tuning the micro-buckling instabilities in architected
materials to harness tailored mechanical behaviors. The research outcomes have
the potential to impact applications in medicine, transportation, aerospace,
construction, and personnel protection. The award will also support an extensive
education plan to broaden the participation of Latinx and Hispanics students in
the STEM enterprise through curriculum improvements, outreach activities at a
local museum for children, dissemination of research through YouTube videos, and
recruitment, mentoring and training of undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this CAREER research program is
to generate a new understanding of how the onset of elastic micro-buckling in
periodic architected materials can be modified, controlled, and designed to
achieve desired post micro-buckling behavior and thus, custom and tunable
effective mechanical behaviors. The key intellectual contributions of this
research are: (1) a novel computational framework based on hypercomplex finite
element method to quantify and rank the influence of design parameters and their
interactions; (2) a new method based on moment-based fast uncertainty
quantification that predicts the variability due to uncertainties emanating from
fabrication and loading conditions; and (3) the concept of the physical “nudge”
as a mechanism to transition between the available buckling states and, thus, to
control the onset of micro-buckling in architected materials. The nudge could be
initiated through material actuation, structural design, or any other suitable
measure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.