* 2237924
* CAREER: Improving Persistence of Underserved Students in Psychological Science Using an AI-Based, Personalized Career Exploration Platform
* EDU,EES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Yuko Okado, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Tori Rhoulac Smith
* 08/31/2028
* USD 403,280.00

The Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program is a National Science
Foundation-wide activity that offers awards in support of early-career faculty
who have the potential to serve as academic role models in research and
education, to lead advances in the mission of their department or organization,
and to build a foundation for a lifetime of leadership in integrating education
and research. This CAREER project aims to broaden participation in the science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) workforce by examining how
artificial intelligence (AI) can be harnessed to improve persistence in STEM.
Specifically, the project uses an online intervention to facilitate students’
career exploration using conversational virtual agents (“virtual mentors”)
recorded by real-life STEM professionals. Students choose and engage with
virtual mentors to learn about their career paths, experiences, and advice. The
study models processes that promote STEM persistence over time for students who
have historically been underserved in STEM fields of study. Based on
interactions with virtual mentors, students receive personalized follow-up and
resources for career development. This longitudinal research study is conducted
at California State University, Fullerton, a large public Hispanic-Serving
Institution, with a focus on students majoring in the psychological sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is co-funded by the Directorate for STEM
Education Core Research (ECR) program, which supports work that advances
fundamental research on STEM learning and learning environments, broadening
participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development, and the HSI Program,
which aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at
Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs). The study uses a prospective,
longitudinal, mixed-methods approach, collecting both quantitative and
qualitative data across a period of four years and gathering insights from
existing literature on STEM persistence and learning sciences. The project
establishes a framework for modeling psychological and behavioral processes that
predict observed STEM persistence over time and develops a personalized, online
intervention for career exploration using AI. Models of STEM persistence and a
tailored, AI-based intervention for diverse student bodies will result from this
study. Findings will be widely disseminated to encourage adoption and adaptation
of future AI applications in other STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.