* 2237177
* CAREER: Phoretic Transport of Membrane-Bound Biological Colloids in Complex Environments
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Sangwoo Shin, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 08/31/2028
* USD 397,364.00

Molecular solutes such as salts and sugars present in biological systems are
rarely at equilibrium as their distribution, concentration, and composition
change continuously via various biochemical processes that are important in
sustaining life. This award aims to investigate how the non-uniform solute
conditions, particularly under confinement, give rise to the motion of
biological colloids. Understanding the dynamics of biological colloids can
provide valuable insights into fundamental biotransport processes, such as
chemotaxis, vesicle trafficking, and capillary exchange, and in developing novel
strategies for biomedical and environmental applications, including drug
delivery and wastewater treatment, which have a profound societal and economic
impact. Various educational activities are directly integrated into the proposed
research program. The educational plan specifically targets upper-level
undergraduate and entry-level graduate students to foster an adaptive workforce
and prepare for their success in higher education and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this award is to investigate the
transport of semi-permeable, deformable vesicles driven by chemical-gradient-
induced phoretic processes in confined systems. The proposed research program
will elucidate how the interaction of various migration processes and the
mechanical environment surrounding the vesicles impact their dynamics. The
experimental investigation of the phoretic migration of vesicles includes using
a hydrogel-based microfluidic platform to characterize the individual and
coupled vesicle mobility under confinement, and three-dimensional microscopy to
visualize the vesicle deformation and the internal/external flow field upon
migration. The proposed research will provide quantitative insights into the
vesicle phoretic transport lacking in the literature, which will help establish
an analytical framework for vesicle phoresis that accounts for the deformable
interface under confinement. Several research tasks are integrated with an
educational effort directed toward engineering students to motivate the study of
soft matter physics. By providing research opportunities, the proposed
educational activities will encourage undergraduate STEM students, particularly
underrepresented students, to pursue higher degree education. These activities
will also promote diversity and inclusion in STEM fields and help to address the
underrepresentation of certain groups in engineering
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.