* 2237522
* CAREER: Theories of Gapless Quantum Matter Beyond Quasiparticles
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Debanjan Chowdhury, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 03/31/2028
* USD 222,433.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports an integrated
research, outreach, and education program in theoretical condensed matter
physics. At sufficiently low temperature some materials can exhibit
superconductivity, a state of matter where electrons self-organize into a
cooperative state which can conduct electricity without dissipation. The search
for superconductivity at high temperatures is driven by the potential of
superconductors to transform the future of quantum technologies and human
society, with applications in energy storage and transmission, medical
diagnostics, and quantum computing. However, the microscopic reasons for
superconductivity at high temperature remain mysterious. The research will be
focused on a class of unconventional metals, which are the “parent” states for
high temperature superconductors. Unlike simple metals such as copper, whose
properties can be effectively understood by considering the electrons one at a
time, these unconventional metals are best described as a collective quantum
fluid where the electrons are strongly entangled over long distances with one
another. This research will develop the required technical framework to describe
these entangled electronic liquids. This will pave the way for identifying the
key microscopic mechanisms responsible for the origin of superconductivity at
high temperatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and his group will develop new
theoretical methods building on recent theoretical developments across different
subfields. The PI will develop exact theoretical methods that have a predictive
power that can be tested against experiments on real materials in the
laboratory. The resulting outcome will impact the fundamental understanding of
the collective quantum mechanical properties of trillions of entangled
electrons, and potentially help guide the future search for new materials
displaying exotic properties. The methods and results will be disseminated to
the wider community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In parallel, the PI will initiate and
participate in a variety of educational and outreach activities. Although
quantum physics has impact on the development of new technologies that become
part of everyone’s daily lives, it has a reputation for being inaccessible. The
PI will start a new podcast series, which will host informal discussions with a
diverse lineup of well-known researchers, to get students and the general public
excited about the physics of quantum materials. The PI will also organize
workshops for high school science teachers to co-develop engaging lesson plans.
The PI will mentor undergraduate and graduate students in original research, and
write pedagogical articles aimed at training them in the new scientific
developments aligned with the research
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award
supports an integrated research, outreach, and education program in theoretical
condensed matter physics. The goal of the research will be to address some of
the key facets of the long-standing mystery of high-temperature
superconductivity. Specifically, the focus will be on the unusual gapless
metallic phases out of which superconductivity emerges in quantum materials.
Experiments suggest that the quantum motion of electrons is frustrated and
entangled over long distances in strongly correlated metals, and the microscopic
degrees of freedom, namely electrons and phonons, are strongly intertwined with
each other. This research activity will develop novel, non-perturbative
theoretical approaches to solve the problem of electronic liquids entangled with
other collective degrees of freedom, to expose universal aspects of gapless
quantum many-body systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will formulate new
approaches for studying interacting gapless phases that do not rely on the
existence of well-defined, electron-like (“quasiparticle”) excitations. To
address their non-trivial dynamics, the PI will develop novel theoretical
techniques that are based on technical advances in the study of frustrated
magnets, thermalization in chaotic quantum many-body systems, and numerically
exact algorithms that do not suffer from the fermion “sign problem”. The PI will
build on the following conjectures: (i) interacting frustrated liquids offer a
non-trivial starting point for including the effects of quantum fluctuations and
describing previously unexplored gapless phases; and (ii) the conventional
theory for electrical transport in metals can break down over a wide range of
intermediate temperatures for sufficiently “chaotic” models with generic
interactions. The PI will also exploit recent breakthroughs in the highly
controllable moiré systems, focusing on the problem of narrow electronic bands
coupled to low-energy phonons using numerically exact methods. Analyzing these
questions will offer an important conceptual framework for tying together a vast
amount of existing experimental data on high-temperature superconductors, and
help direct the search for new materials displaying similar
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI’s educational and outreach activities are
integrated synergistically with the research. The PI will start a new podcast
series with a diverse lineup of well-known researchers to increase awareness
about the excitement in the field amongst the general public and students. The
PI will mentor undergraduate and graduate students in original research, and
write pedagogical articles aimed at training them at the new scientific
developments aligned with the research activities. Leveraging existing
infrastructure available at Cornell University through the STEM teacher program,
the PI will organize a series of workshops for high school science teachers to
co-develop engaging lesson plans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.