* 2237545
* CAREER: A Comprehensive Assessment of Over-Ocean Tropical Cyclone Weakening
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2028
* Kimberly Wood, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 07/31/2028
* USD 308,259.00

The expanding population along U.S. coastlines who are at risk from hurricanes
makes it essential to accurately predict the future behavior of these storms
with sufficient lead time to enact appropriate, cost-effective actions that
protect life and property. Much work has investigated hurricane intensification,
but comparatively little effort has been invested in studying hurricanes that
weaken while still over the ocean despite public perception of expected impacts
being tied to hurricane category, such as Hurricane Florence in 2018. This
project will explore the nature of hurricanes that weaken away from land, as
well as characteristics of the near-storm environment, to quantify how over-
ocean weakening varies across all tropical basins. The research will then
investigate hurricanes that weaken on approach to land in order to evaluate how
nearby land modifies these weakening pathways and facilitate advances in
forecasting such events. Open-source programming tools developed by this project
will be shared to ensure scientific transparency and expand accessibility to
more users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vertical wind shear can weaken a tropical
cyclone, yet a range of shear magnitudes is associated with tropical cyclone
weakening. Enhanced atmospheric moisture supports deep convection, but the
location of this enhanced moisture relative to the storm center appears to
affect the storm’s intensity. To interrogate the physical processes responsible
for tropical cyclone weakening in these varied environments, this study will
assess the spatial distribution of near-storm environmental characteristics and
the relative timing of changes in those characteristics within a storm-relative
framework for over-ocean weakening events in all tropical basins. The latest
global reanalysis will be investigated for environmental fields, and spatial
assessment of convection and its evolution over time—revealed by geostationary
infrared imagery—will highlight the tropical cyclone’s response to its
environment. Beyond advancing fundamental understanding of these storms, this
project will craft a tropical cyclone analysis toolkit comprised of open-source
Python tools to accelerate time-to-science for the broader research community.
Toolkit examples will be developed and tested in the classroom to support
teaching of tropical cyclone dynamics and programming practices, leading to
modules that can be incorporated into existing curricula across
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by NSF
Physical and Dynamic Meteorological program (PDM), and the Established Program
to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.