* 2237306
* CAREER: Resource Efficient Systems for Machine Learning on Structured Data
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Shivaram Venkataraman, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 06/30/2028
* USD 260,727.00

Many scientific and enterprise datasets include relationships among data items,
which can be represented as graphs. Applying machine learning methods on such
graph datasets can yield benefits across several domains, including social
networks, drug discovery, and search engines. However, existing software for
applying machine learning methods on large graph datasets is slow, complex, and
expensive. This NSF CAREER proposal aims to address these challenges by
developing software that will make it faster, easier, and less expensive to
analyze large graph datasets. The proposed research includes three thrusts that
focus on different stages of machine learning workflows. The first thrust aims
to develop software that will make it faster and easier to train machine
learning models on large graphs using many machines. The second thrust focuses
on how to efficiently handle scenarios where graphs are updated with additional
data. The third thrust considers how to make prediction less expensive when
using machine learning models trained on large graph datasets.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the proposed research include
improved analysis capabilities for data scientists working in many areas.
Furthermore, all software developed as a part of this project will be made
freely available to the wider community and will include documentation and
tutorials to help users from computer science and other academic disciplines to
get started. Additionally, the proposal plans to develop a new undergraduate
course that teaches students how to use software frameworks to process large
datasets. The assignments in the course will use software tools developed as a
part of this project. The project also includes plans to broaden participation
in computer science by organizing a yearly workshop that promotes research
opportunities for undergraduate students from underrepresented groups, as well
as discussion sessions that can help students who are getting started with
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.