* 2237902
* CAREER: Investigating young children's opportunities to learn mathematics in early childhood classrooms
* EDU,DRL
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Nicholas Johnson, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 02/29/2028
* USD 396,308.00

The nation is embarking upon a new era in early childhood education.
Unprecedented policy and funding initiatives at state and federal levels are
underway to expand access to publicly funded preschool. These efforts are driven
by considerable evidence that high quality early learning opportunities have
far-reaching academic, social, and economic effects. Research has shown early
mathematics learning, in particular, to be predictive of later life and learning
outcomes. However, classroom studies raise concerns that some children’s early
schooling experiences are characterized by exclusion from opportunities to
learn, invisibility in the classroom community, and negative relational
interactions with peers or teachers (Battey, 2013; Parks, 2020; Shalaby, 2017;
Wood et al., 2018). Realizing the potential of preschool to address historical
inequities demands a deeper, more nuanced understanding of the varied ways
opportunities to learn play out for individual children within and across
classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to illuminate the
variability in opportunities for mathematics learning in early childhood through
capturing the experiences of individual children over time. A qualitative,
longitudinal investigation will follow 15 young children (from preschool to
kindergarten), from three different school sites within a district that serves a
large proportion of children from racially, linguistically, and economically
minoritized populations, across three years of early schooling. The goal is to
understand how these children navigate opportunities to participate in
mathematical activity, their perspectives of what knowing and doing mathematics
entails, and the resources they draw upon to engage in mathematical practices.
Data collected will include video recordings of children’s participation in
specific instructional activities (e.g., Counting Collections), field notes from
classroom observations, artifacts such as mathematical tasks and children’s
written representations, and interviews with children and their classroom
teachers. Findings from the project will (1) advance the field’s understanding
of the nuances of and conditions under which particular approaches to
mathematics teaching and learning may (or may not) promote more equitable
participation, (2) provide insights into relationships between in-the-moment
interactions with teachers and peers, and children’s long-term experiences
within the institution of school, and (3) document young children’s emerging
participation in mathematical practices such as communicating about their
mathematical ideas, using tools and representations, and engaging with one
another’s contributions. The project will provide case studies, depictions of
instructional practice, and longitudinal records of learning over time to inform
policy and practice in the teaching and learning of early math. Such insights
are a critical step if public education is to fulfill its promise as a vehicle
for social change and the betterment of society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award
is funded by the Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) which seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.