* 2237230
* CAREER: Aquatic Therapy Assist-Tool Using a Real-Time Underwater Physiological and Musculokinetic Monitoring in Personalized Stroke Rehabilitation
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2028
* Yeonsik Noh, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 05/31/2028
* USD 462,732.00

Aquatic therapy is a type of physical therapy that takes place in water and is
widely used to help stroke patients recover. Water has benefits that make it
easier and less painful for patients to perform rehabilitation exercises. In
aquatic therapy and rehabilitation, it is essential for therapists to understand
how the therapy affects each patient's performance to create a personalized
program that will be most effective for them. However, current research has not
focused enough on this aspect, and instead mainly compares patients' progress
before and after therapy. Therapists rely on their observations, intuitions,
experience, and expertise in their practice since there is no technology
available for them to accurately measure and analyze their patients' physical
and muscle movements when they exercise in water. This means that therapists are
not able to adjust their instructions in real-time to ensure that their patients
are doing the exercises correctly and getting the most benefit from them.
Continuous monitoring and analysis of the patients' performance during aquatic
therapy can provide valuable insights into how the therapy is affecting their
physical abilities. This can lead to the development of an optimized training
program that is tailored to each individual's needs, resulting in more efficient
and effective rehabilitation. This project aims to understand how the human body
works underwater and how it responds to different movements and exercises in
aquatic therapy. This knowledge will be used to develop more personalized and
effective aquatic rehabilitation programs, particularly for people with
neurological disorders and diseases. This research has the potential to lead to
new and improved ways of treating these conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will design an assist-tool for therapists to investigate physiological
and motor improvements during aquatic therapy using a wearable system designed
for the water environment and utilizing hydrophobic bio-signal sensors, and to
allow them to create new evaluation metrics for individual physical assessment
and personalized aquatic therapy in stroke rehabilitation based on
transformative approach. This project will (1) design and evaluate an ergonomic
wearable system for underwater physiological and musculokinetic monitoring, (2)
investigate evaluation metrics for aquatic therapy in stroke rehabilitation, and
(3) develop a systematic personalized aquatic therapy assist-tool based on the
outcomes. The project will evaluate the proposed wearable system and evaluation
metrics in terms of wearability, functionality, usability, and effectiveness
with clinical aquatic therapists. Along with three research aims,
interdisciplinary research framework for personalized healthcare and
rehabilitation will be integrated into the educational goal of broadening the
participation of pre-college, undergraduate, and graduate students in healthcare
engineering, fostering an interdisciplinary research group and inclusive
training, and integrating the research into multidisciplinary course
development. Eventually, this project will yield a paradigm shift in aquatic
therapy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.