* 2237813
* CAREER: Hypothesis Testing Mantle Structure with Probabilistic Tomography
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2028
* Scott Burdick, Wayne State University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2028
* USD 276,669.00

Seismic tomography, which uses waves produced by earthquakes to create 3D models
of deep Earth structure, is an indispensable tool for understanding the Earth's
mantle. Tomographic models are used to address questions about Earth’s tectonic
past, geodynamics, and the processes underlying natural hazards, in addition to
helping locate earthquakes and enforce test ban treaties. However, due to
difficulty in estimating complex model uncertainties, these questions are met
largely with qualitative analysis. In order to move towards quantitative
hypothesis testing of mantle structure, this CAREER project will apply a
probabilistic framework to estimate the full range of Earth models that agree
with seismic data and other constraints. These models of seismic properties will
be constructed using large earthquake datasets, first for the mantle beneath
Alaska, then the entire globe, and novel analyses will be applied to answer
geologic and geodynamic questions. A new undergraduate team research course will
apply the principles espoused by this project to environmental problems in
Detroit, MI. Students at different experience levels will form teams to identify
targets, define testable hypotheses, and design geophysical surveys to assess
them. Research results will also be incorporated into two planetarium shows, one
on the geologic history of Michigan and one on natural hazards, to be presented
regularly at the Wayne State Planetarium to K-12 schools, undergraduate classes,
and the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to create new mantle
models with fully quantified uncertainty and forward a framework to compare
model probabilities to predictions made by geology and geodynamics. Research
activities will be motivated by four major questions: 1) How well do body wave
data constrain mantle velocity variations? 2) To what extent do hypotheses posed
by plate reconstructions and sinking rates agree with seismic structure? 3)
Which mantle convection models comport with the scale and distribution of
heterogeneity? 4) Which data sources, seismic phases, and prior information best
resolve mantle properties? These questions will be addressed by employing
Transdimensional Bayesian Inference (TBI) methods to create global and regional
ensembles of mantle P- and S-wave velocity models and transition zone thickness
and amplitude. Ensembles will be evaluated using novel analyses, resulting in
constraints on global slab properties, estimates of the existence and geometry
of plumes, and insights on plate reconstructions. Assessment of the upper mantle
will be bolstered by a new TBI method for transition zone topography using
machine learning-picked precursor phases. Research activities will produce
efficient GPU-accelerated software for 3D TBI tomography, new methods for
picking transition zone-reflected phases and inferring phase transition
topography, and approaches for incorporating TBI results as prior information.
Practices for interrogating, visualizing, and sharing high-dimensional ensembles
and posterior distributions will be defined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is co-funded by the Directorate for Geosciences to support AI/ML advancement in
the geosciences, and by the Division of Earth Sciences program in Education and
Human Resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.