* 2237757
* CAREER: CAS: Organometallic Chemistry of Catalytically Relevant Copper(III) Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Wei Liu, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 03/31/2028
* USD 308,472.00

In this CAREER project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp;
Mechanisms B Program of the Chemistry Division, Wei Liu of the Department of
Chemistry at University of Cincinnati is studying the fundamental reactivity of
copper complexes for synthesizing important organic molecules. Compared to the
precious metal analogues, copper catalysts are less expensive, less toxic, and
have higher abundancy in the earth’s crust. However, the catalytic performance
of copper complexes lags largely behind that of their precious metal
counterparts, largely owing to limited understanding of the fundamental
reactivity of copper complexes. The goal of this research is to study the
reactivity of copper complexes that are plausible intermediates in catalytic Cu-
mediated bond construction reactions. Investigations of the structure and
reactivity of these complexes is directed at providing a deeper mechanistic
understanding of known copper-catalyzed bond-forming reactions, enabling the
development of improved copper catalysts, and inspiring the development of new
copper-catalyzed transformations. Dr. Liu’s education plan focuses on increasing
public awareness of the importance of organic chemistry in daily life and on the
retention of underrepresented minorities in science through outreach programs at
the Cincinnati Museum Center, research-based educational experiences, and online
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High-valent organo-Cu(III) compounds have long
been proposed as key intermediates in many Cu-catalyzed transformations.
However, most reported examples of isolated Cu(III) species are stabilized by
rigid macrocyclic chelating or perfluorinated ligands, and few of these examples
provide experimental evidence for elemental reactions in Cu catalysis. In this
project, the Liu research team will investigate the synthetic accessibility of
reactive organo-Cu(III) compounds, study the elementary reactions of well-
defined Cu(III) species, explore the structure of catalytically relevant Cu(III)
complexes, and work to exploit their reactivity to discover new Cu-catalyzed
transformations. An improved fundamental understanding of the reactivity of
Cu(III) compounds, including homolytic dissociation, reductive elimination, and
oxidative addition, would not only provide insights into existing reactions that
involve Cu(III) intermediates but also inspire the development of novel Cu-
catalyzed transformations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.