* 2237366
* CAREER: Assessing how humans have altered floodplain organic carbon stocks
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Katherine Lininger, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 02/29/2028
* USD 499,120.00

This project evaluates how much organic carbon is stored in river floodplains in
soil, vegetation, and downed wood across large spatial extents. It assesses how
human activities such as levees, dams, and land use change have changed carbon
storage in floodplains. Floodplains store large amounts of carbon, but there are
no large scale estimates of how much carbon floodplains store or how human
activities have changed carbon storage in the conterminous United States. The
negative impacts of climate change on the environment and humans, motivating an
interest in removing carbon from the atmosphere. Floodplains could store more
carbon, but the potential for increasing carbon storage through changing how
floodplains are managed is unclear. This project provides information to
managers to inform floodplain management decisions. This project develops course
activities for middle and high school students and trains graduate students in
communicating science to policy makers and management agencies through
interactions with non-profit organizations.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
provides a comprehensive estimate of floodplain organic carbon storage across
the conterminous United States to determine the impact of human activities on
floodplain carbon storage. Recent work has indicated that floodplains likely
store more carbon in floodplain soil, vegetation, and downed wood relative to
areas outside of floodplains, but there is a lack of information on where and
how much carbon is stored in floodplains. This project (1) compares floodplain
carbon storage in human modified and unmodified floodplains through extensive
fieldwork, (2) uses field-based estimates of floodplain carbon storage to
determine whether it is accurate to use publicly available geospatial datasets
to estimate floodplain carbon storage, (3) determines how much carbon is stored
in floodplains and the potential storage if human modifications (for example,
levees, dams, and land use change) were reduced, and (4) creates course modules
for high school, undergraduate, and graduate students and disseminates outreach
materials for non-profit organizations. The project builds a science of
floodplain carbon storage to apply new data and analysis to floodplain
management. It also helps determine the locations within watersheds where
maximum floodplain carbon storage occurs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.