* 2237851
* CAREER: Using virtual reality to advance research and learning and promote positive skill transfer in complex environments with applications in enhanced flight training
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Nicoletta Fala, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Cindy Bethel
* 08/31/2028
* USD 106,874.00

Virtual reality (VR) can simulate immersive scenarios that are unsafe or even
impossible in the physical world. Immersion is especially important for pilots,
who rely on simulation to train for routine operations, but also for
emergencies. While dedicated, high-fidelity, and approved flight simulators are
already used as part of flight training, their cost and space requirements
prohibit their wider use. VR headsets connected to a computer simulator setup
can enhance training both at home and within a flight training program. Despite
the popularity of air travel and the need for pilots in the aviation industry,
becoming a pilot is a dream that most abandon after childhood, either in pursuit
of other passions or because of its prohibitive initial investment in cost and
time, resulting in a nationwide pilot shortage. This project will study skill
transfer from VR-based simulation to the real world by evaluating the physical,
functional, and cognitive characteristics of simulation which impact a trainee’s
ability to learn efficiently and effectively, as applied to the flight training
environment. This project will make flight more accessible as a career and field
of study through the use of virtual reality flight simulators. Additionally, it
will broaden participation in aviation-careers and interests through outreach
activities at local airports and by providing future pilots with online modules
to help them initiate their training. Flight simulation performance-based and
emergency response competitions will allow those already in training to test
their skills and educate them on using flight simulation for their own practice.
This award will enhance flight training, resulting in reduced flight training
accidents and decreased time to certification, thus improving our ability to
respond to the pilot shortage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study
skill transfer from virtual reality to the physical world by evaluating the
physical, functional, and cognitive fidelity characteristics of simulation that
impact a trainee pilot’s ability to learn efficiently and effectively. Two
experiments will measure skill transfer. The first will train novice pilots
completely in virtual reality and evaluate their abilities in the aircraft. The
second will follow a group of pilots who are pursuing an instrument certificate
throughout their training and complement their training with simulation
scenarios on both traditional simulators and a virtual reality flight simulator.
Complementing flight training with simulation will investigate the impact of
virtual reality interventions on skill acquisition and mental workload
management. The data collected through both experiments will be used to evaluate
and validate the use of virtual reality in both research and training as an
alternative to physical simulators. This work will collect flight data through
on-board flight data recorders and simulation software, physiological data
through eye tracking and heart rate monitoring, and psychometric data through
mobile surveys. Scoring algorithms will detect and evaluate human performance on
a series of maneuvers. This project will advance our understanding of how humans
learn in complex virtual reality environments such as flight training,
validating virtual reality systems as a training device option, and therefore
reducing the cost and time of highly advanced training in fields, which require
the use of multiple skills simultaneously. The research will identify which
types of skills transfer, use data-driven metrics to measure skill acquisition
and transfer, validate the use of eye tracking and hear rate metrics in virtual
reality, and develop a framework to assess modern simulators based on how they
address learning outcomes, informing policy and regulation. The integration of
education and research in this proposal is focused on a three-level approach:
(i) creating interest through outreach activities; (ii) empowering actions
through online training modules and the use of VR-based flight simulation; (iii)
advancing training through self-practice and semi-annual competitive flight
simulation events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.