* 2237129
* CAREER: Oligomeric Stoichiometry of Superoxide Dismutase 1 and Neuronal Antioxidant Defense
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2028
* Tai-Yen Chen, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 03/31/2028
* USD 510,011.00

High levels of metabolic activity require neurons to be competent in handling
oxidative stress. This project seeks to understand how neurons modulate the
assembly of Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD1), the frontline antioxidant
protein, when they encounter environmental oxidative reagents. The results of
this project will inform how oxidative stress changes SOD1 structures for
neuronal antioxidant defense. In addition, the PI will initiate a new
educational program, 'Quantitative Biophysical Comprehension' (QBiC), to teach
students how to quantify the structural state of a protein using bio-imaging
experiments. Particular emphasis will be placed on working with University of
Houston student chapters to effectively broaden the participation of women and
underrepresented minorities in STEM. QBiC will provide interdisciplinary
training, modernize the chemistry curriculum and contribute to the NSF goal of
developing a strong STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modulation of SOD1
oligomeric states plays a critical role in its function and is thus essential to
neuronal antioxidant defense; however, its molecular mechanisms are poorly
understood due to the lack of proper analytical tools to quantify protein
oligomerization in cells. In the first part of this research program, the PI
will develop a quantitative single-molecule approach to quantify SOD1
oligomerizations in the nucleus, cytosol, and mitochondria. An in-cell redox
sensor will be employed to quantify the subcellular oxidative status, and mass
spectrometry will be used to quantify changes in SOD1 posttranslational
modifications under various environmental stressors. The success of this work
will answer for the first time how SOD1 interactions and oligomeric distribution
are finely tuned in neurons in response to environmental
stimuli.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.