* 2237639
* CAREER: Programmable Cell-Matrix Interactions for Regenerative Engineering
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Jonathan Brunger, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 03/31/2028
* USD 460,958.00

Regenerative engineering brings together concepts from materials science and
biology with the goal of repairing and regenerating tissues. Often, regenerative
engineers use biomaterials to instruct cell behaviors. However, the ability of
biomaterials to guide cell behaviors is limited by natural cell signaling
pathways, restricting the potential to control cellular responses to complex
signals that regulate regeneration and reduce inflammation. The goal of this
Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project is to design cells with
desirable signaling pathways to understand how cells and materials can work
together for improved tissue regeneration. The research outcomes will help to
define how cells and natural and synthetic biomaterials can respond to their
environment to repair tissue. This could lead to future strategies to engineer
cells to express their own therapeutics at effective doses for chronic
inflammatory diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis. This project provides
direct support for training next-generation scientists and high school students
in synthetic biology and engineering. Trainees will gain hands-on research
experience while also developing educational materials for other students and
public outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within the field of regenerative
engineering, a deep appreciation for the interplay between biomaterial features
and cell functions has led investigators to produce designer biomaterials that
interface with native signaling pathways to instruct cell behaviors. Such
efforts are intrinsically limited, because they rely on natural signaling
channels to govern key cellular responses to numerous inputs that regulate cell
functions, such as proliferation, differentiation, and inflammation resolution.
The goal of this CAREER project is to advance regenerative engineering by using
synthetic biology to establish a programmable channel of communication that
allows for privileged communication between a cell, the native or artificial
matrix on which it resides, and soluble factors in its microenvironment. The
specific aims of this project are focused on developing a versatile platform to
enable customized cellular responses to native soluble factors perceived in the
context of either biomaterial scaffolds or via distinct features of targeted
tissues, such as rheumatic articular joint structures. The project will explore
how artificial signaling networks will allow designer interactions between
engineered cells, artificial or native matrices, and soluble signaling
mediators. Success in this proposal will enable predictable cell behaviors
coordinated by bespoke biomaterials or native tissues, which will contribute to
the development of reliable tissue engineering and regenerative medicine
strategies to treat diverse disorders. This proposal also tightly integrates
research with education and outreach. It provides direct support for training
graduate students and for engaging high school students to gain hands-on
research experiences while also assisting in the development of educational
materials for extracurricular scholastic and general public outreach
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.