* 2237784
* CAREER: CAS: Copolymerization of Vinyl Monomers with Isocyanides for Degradable Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Erin Stache, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 01/31/2028
* USD 293,797.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry
program in the Division of Chemistry, Erin Stache of Cornell University is
developing degradable polymers from monomers that are building blocks commonly
found in commodity plastics. Polymerization processes will be designed to
incorporate degradable functionality along the main polymer backbone. This
polymer chain is designed to incorporate functionalities that allow for chain
cleavage in the presence of light, rendering the commodity polymers
photodegradable. The research team will also investigate the mechanistic and
kinetic features of the developed polymerizations to understand further and
optimize the reaction conditions and expand the monomer types that can be used
in these processes. From the sustainability point of view, the design principles
associated with this project have the potential to provide a promising and
viable solution to the current challenges related to the widespread usage of
non-degradable commodity plastics. The education and outreach activities will
focus on educating the public across age demographics on the nature of the
recycling industry and the science behind polymers and their structure.
Additionally, training workshops will be developed to encourage the public to
make an impact in their household and community. The efforts to further bring
plastics knowledge prowess to general society will be enhanced through social
media outreach using various platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
focus on developing controlled polymerization of isocyanides and vinyl monomers
to install degradable functionality into the backbone of commodity polymers. In
the first objective, kinetic and mechanistic aspects of cobalt-mediated radical
copolymerization of isocyanides and acrylates will be systematically
investigated. Strong emphasis will be placed on understanding (a) cross-
propagation of activated acrylates with isocyanides to form imidoyl radicals and
(b) intermolecular addition of the imidoyl radical to acrylates prior to alpha-
or beta-scission that could result in the chain termination and/or transfer. The
second objective will study the properties of isocyanide/acrylate copolymers,
hydrolysis to afford the corresponding poly(acrylates-co-ketones), backbone
elaboration, and degradation behavior of isocyanide and ketone copolymers.
Lastly, the ambiphilic nature of isocyanides in a cationic copolymerization of
vinyl monomers to access new copolymers will be exploited. Investigation of the
mechanistic aspects of copolymerization of isocyanides with vinyl monomers could
lead to a development of new and more versatile controlled radical
polymerization methods. Additionally, this research has the potential to offer a
facile route to a novel class of degradable polymers and to provide important
insight into the percentage of imine or ketone functionality incorporation
needed to both allow for photodegradation upon appropriate exposure and yet
otherwise maintain desirable polymer properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.