* 2237380
* CAREER: Understanding the Role of Citizen Engagement and Multidirectional Information Exchange in Community Resilience to Wildfires
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2028
* Ji Yun Lee, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 04/30/2028
* USD 520,000.00

The objective of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project is to
advance a fundamental understanding of the role of citizen engagement and
multidirectional information exchange in enhancing community resilience to
wildfires. In recent decades, wildfires have become an increasing threat to
humans, the built environment, and ecosystems due to climate change, increased
human activities at the wildland-urban interface, and changes in land use. While
federal, state, and local governments have developed and implemented risk
management strategies to reduce the frequency and negative impact of large
wildfires, these strategies are often based on static, outdated, and coarse-
scale estimates of wildfire risk. Moreover, they do not often engage citizens
whose actions are crucial for reducing damage at the property level and whose
protective efforts affect the risk levels of their neighbors and the surrounding
environment. A lack of sustained citizen engagement and limited information
flows in hazard-prone communities presents a barrier to informed, optimal
decision-making by both government officials and individuals. This CAREER
project aims to integrate fire science, risk assessment principles, and
decision-making processes to establish the foundation for a new approach to
wildfire risk assessment and management that evolves over time and captures
relevant changes occurring at multiple spatial-temporal scales. This integrated
approach centers around a dynamic, interactive, next-generation Community
Wildfire Protection Plan (CWPP) platform that facilitates active citizen
engagement and multidirectional information exchange. The project provides
students, practitioners, policymakers, and the public with opportunities to
advance their understanding of wildfire risks and contribute to mitigating its
negative impacts through new academic courses, training sessions, and an online
exhibition. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project stimulates a paradigm
shift from traditional, static wildfire risk assessment and management plans to
a dynamic, interactive platform that (a) allows citizens to engage with their
local governments and neighbors in mitigation decision processes and (b) enables
both governments and citizens to make joint risk-informed decisions about
wildfire mitigation through multidirectional information exchanges. This project
first builds an evolutionary game-theoretic model to characterize decision-
making between governments and citizens in interdependent wildfire risk
contexts. It then develops a risk assessment model that employs ongoing data
collection and processing over time. Finally, this project integrates these
models and tools into a prototype CWPP platform to demonstrate its technical
feasibility and cost-effectiveness while soliciting user feedback. By fostering
collaboration between local governments and citizens, the project has the
potential to aid the transition of the responsibility for disaster risk
reduction from emergency personnel to that of the entire
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.