* 2237492
* CAREER: Low-Temperature Plasma Assisted Combustion of Oxygenated Fuels for Cleaner and Sustainable Mobility
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Nicholas Tsolas, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 06/30/2028
* USD 459,780.00

Concurrent development of electric vehicles, along with next-generation engines
using renewable biofuels has shown to be an effective strategy to meet the
energy demands and improve the future sustainability of the transportation
sector. However, achieving reliable combustion with fuels that exhibit a large
selection of oxygenated components, at highly fuel-lean conditions, across the
operational domain of the engine has proven a technological challenge. Low-
temperature plasmas (LTP) are seen as an enabling technology to overcome this
barrier, due to their demonstrated ability to enhance combustion, provide fast-
gas heating and facilitate flame kernel growth. But there remains a knowledge
gap on the interaction between plasmachemical effects and the basic combustion
phenomenon to effectively couple the utilization of LTP and biofuels. Leveraging
unique experimental platforms and modeling tools tailored for plasma-assisted
combustion (PAC) research, this project aims to uncover these chemical
fundamentals that could demonstrate enhanced chemical reactivity, improved
energy extraction and ignition, with reduced pollutant formation. The results
from this project will be shared openly with both academia and industry to
support LTP innovation and have an immediate impact on combustion engineering
for vehicular, aerospace and energy-related applications, with overarching
benefits towards economic globalization and developing economies. To integrate
LTP combustion research and education, this project will: (1) leverage game-
based learning to progressively engage the undergraduate/graduate curriculum to
introduce new knowledge; (2) engage with a K-12 outreach program to broaden the
participation of underrepresented STEM students; and (3) disseminate research
findings to the general public by developing a new animation video with emphasis
on the importance of energy sustainability, while educating on its social,
political and economic implications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;LTP-based
technologies are essential to advance next-generation internal combustion
engines toward renewable biofuels and dilute-burn strategies. This project
addresses the lack of fundamental understanding of plasmachemical effects on
combustion reactivity and ignition characteristics, and adds a new emphasis on
oxygenated fuels. This work also provides a new demonstration of the merits of
LTP to improve combustion engineering. These contributions will be achieved
through a study of LTP plasmachemical effects on the low-temperature combustion
(LTC) reaction kinetics of oxygenated fuels and ignition characteristics, and
subsequent implications on pollutant formation and dilute-burn reactivity.
Outcomes will be demonstrated through plasma-coupled experimental facilities and
numerical models to measure key chemical species and combustion metrics, and
simulate important reactions to elucidate an understanding of: (1) the
alteration of LTC chemical reactivity by LTP for a range of oxygenated fuels
based on oxygen functionality; (2) subsequent alteration of LTC reactivity in
the presence of residual gas components and pollutant formation kinetics; (3)
the alteration of ignition and heat-release characteristics of oxygenated fuels
toward fuel-lean and dilute-burn conditions; and (4) development of a PAC-
specific kinetic mechanism for predictive simulation tools. This contribution is
significant because it is expected to constitute a progression of research that
is currently lacking to demonstrate the ability to alter the chemical reactivity
of high-octane oxygenated fuels through LTP. Ultimately, this research will
support LTP as a technology to enable reactivity control for advanced
compression-ignition engines and drive future designs toward renewable biofuels
to achieve a sustainable future for mobility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.