* 2237437
* CAREER: Does long-term topography preserve details of the seismic cycle? Seeing through, and exploiting, the diverse forcings influencing actively deforming landscapes.
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Adam Forte, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 05/31/2028
* USD 475,451.00

The shape of topography in tectonically active regions reflects a balance
between the uplift of rocks from tectonic forces and the removal of rock and
sediment by erosive forces, the latter of which are mediated by the local
details of the climate and the types of rocks exposed. If the climatic and rock
type details are constrained, then aspects of topography, like the shape of
rivers, can serve as proxies for details of the tectonic forces and reveal, for
example, the location and relative activity of faults. While providing critical
insight into active tectonics, these approaches tend to idealize rock uplift
along faults as a steady process. However, in reality rock uplift and the growth
of topography usually occurs through more punctuated processes, specifically
long periods of slow distributed deformation between earthquakes and then sudden
and violent deformation during earthquakes, which combined over millennia,
result in the integrated and idealized average rock uplift. The extent to which
details of this “seismic cycle” are preserved in topography is unclear, but
unlocking potential records stored in topography would be transformative as it
could provide insight into specifics critical for hazard assessments, like
average time between earthquakes and the relative extents of earthquake
ruptures, through relatively quick, easy, and cheap analyses from globally
available topography data. This project explores the preservation potential of
aspects of the seismic cycle through a two-pronged approach. First, a large and
comprehensive suite of simulations of landscapes developing through successive
earthquake events and with varying climate and lithology details are being used
to develop a set of fingerprints for relating landscape form to earthquake
details. Secondly, these fingerprints are being applied to regions with
independently established histories of fault and earthquake activity to vet and
refine the results from the simulations. The broad goal of this research is
providing a critical set of tools for better understanding earthquake hazards,
both domestically and abroad in regions that lack comprehensive seismic hazard
assessments and improve the safety and security of populations living in regions
of potential hazard. In addition to the research goals of this project, a set of
unique educational tools to provide resources for understanding the ways in
which topography more generally reflects the shaping tectonic and climatic
forces is being developed. The results of this effort include a
LandscapeLibrary, a large set of landscape simulations developed under a wide
array of controlled conditions, which will be made available to the public
through an interactive web interface. Additionally, a series of educational
exercises which use the LandscapeLibrary are being developed for a range of
education levels from secondary to graduate level, providing a far-reaching
educational resource that will contribute to development of the STEM workforce
and promote general understanding of the critical context for the surface of the
Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamental details of the tectonic history of
actively deforming regions are encoded in their fluvial topography, but
interpreting these histories requires full consideration of the array of forcing
mechanisms contributing to their form. For example, significant prior work
focused on the influence of spatially or temporally variable precipitation,
variations in lithologic resistance to erosion, or autogenic processes within
catchments, amongst others in complicating, the interpretation of tectonics from
topography and the extent to which these additional forcings can be factored out
and a meaningful tectonic signal can still be reliably extracted from fluvial
topography. The tectonic signals interpreted from this topography typically are
first-order characteristics of fault systems, e.g., the location and relative
activity of major structures, their subsurface geometries, or temporal changes
in their average slip rates, but which largely treat the deformation on faults,
and resulting patterns in rock uplift driving topographic development,
simplistically as rigid block motion. However, fault motion typically occurs
seismically and with significant spatial variability in surface deformation
within a single seismic cycle, and indeed, likely between seismic cycles driven
by interseismic creep on non-locked portions of fault and strain accumulation on
locked portions of faults which is released coseismically. The extent to which
the seismic cycle influences the development of topography is fundamentally
unknown, but a general assumption is that it can be safely ignored, and that
topography reflects average slip rates and associated rates of rock uplift.
However, some work has questioned this assumption, specifically whether a signal
of incomplete recovery of interseismic strain by earthquakes may leave a signal
in topography. More broadly, it remains unclear whether topography can record
any details of the seismic cycle, but it is hypothesized in this project that it
may, specifically because of interactions between the seismic cycle and other
forcing mechanisms, such as spatially and temporally variable precipitation.
This project is testing this hypothesis with an integrated modeling study
coupled with a large-scale topographic analysis effort. Specifically, the
project seeks to 1) use coupled surface processes and deformation models that
simulate interseismic and coseismic deformation to identify topographic
signatures of the seismic cycle and 2) assess whether these signals are
recognizable in natural landscapes with independent constraint on at least parts
of their seismic cycles. The project will provide crucial insight into the
connections between the long-term topography developed in active deforming
regions and short-term earthquake processes, which is a long-standing goal
within both the tectonics and earth surface processes communities. This project
follows recent efforts that attempt to use the topographic characteristics of
simulated landscapes to extract more quantitative information from topography
directly, e.g., estimation of slip rate magnitudes, but promises to extend our
view to details of the seismic cycle and fault behavior. These details of the
seismic cycle are a fundamental input for seismic hazard analysis, which is of
great societal relevance, but extracting this critical information is often
challenging, laborious, and expensive. As such, being able to assess even broad
information about the seismic cycle of a fault system from something as
ubiquitous and globally accessible as topography would be incredibly beneficial
- and is a potential outcome from the proposed work. This effort will occur in
tandem with the development of a large body of precomputed synthetic landscapes
developed under diverse forcing conditions to build the LandscapeLibrary and an
interface for easy access and visualization of this library. This resource, and
educational materials developed with it, are designed to help provide an easy
visual representation of landscape evolution for a variety of classroom
purposes. The LandscapeLibrary will provide an invaluable resource for other
geoscientist educators around the world who wish to provide their students an
intuitive view of the diverse forcing on landscape evolution. Finally, this
project will support one PhD student and a postdoctoral
researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.