* 2237761
* CAREER: Interplay of sliding ferroelectricity, spin and charge orderings in layered quantum materials
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Jun Xiao, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 03/31/2028
* USD 114,106.00

Non-technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on understanding of
properties of a new class of quantum materials with unique properties, known as
two-dimensional layered materials. By modeling, characterizing, and engineering
the novel physics, this research aims to understand the materials properties and
achieve their control. These materials can establish a new platform for energy-
efficient and high-speed memory and logic devices, and compact and programmable
quantum simulators to address the growing information and energy demands.
Integrated with the research, the project aims to promote participation in STEM,
focusing on undergraduates and K-12 teachers from groups historically
underrepresented in STEM and from rural areas in Wisconsin. The PI partners with
the Materials Research Science and Engineering Centers (MRSEC) education group
and Engineering EXPO at the University of Wisconsin-Madison to organize “2D
ferroelectrics for energy-efficient future” education and outreach program
including nanomaterials research, STEM education activities development for high
school classrooms, and professional development
seminars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Two-
dimensional (2D) layered materials are promising quantum material platforms with
many important electronic properties, such as magnetism, strong electron
correlation, superconductivity, and ferroelectricity. However, the interplay of
ferroelectricity and other quantum properties is significantly unexplored
because most current 2D quantum materials are nonpolar. Such scarcity hinders
many exciting research subjects such as 2D multiferroics, dipolar Hubbard model,
reconfigurable charge orderings, and superconducting diode effects. Recent
discoveries of “sliding ferroelectricity” from polar stacking of nonpolar layers
indicate it is possible to design ferroelectrics out of the vast majority of 2D
materials with parent nonpolar compounds. The ferroelectricity can be switched
via interlayer sliding, where the ultralow van der Waals sliding barrier is much
smaller than that of any other ferroelectrics. The PI’s approach is to design
and assemble various nonpolar 2D magnetic monolayers into polar stacking
structures, where spin and charge orderings are hypothesized to be sensitive to
ferroelectricity-driven stacking evolution. To fully understand the new quantum
orderings and coupling physics, the research team use an in-house multimodal
optical, electrical, and magnetic characterization platform to enable
simultaneous access to ferroelectricity, magnetism, and electron correlation at
various spatial, temporal, and energy scales. Furthermore, the PI will quantify
and dynamic control of coupling strength by electrostatic doping and ultrafast
light engineering. The research will advance the understanding of many-body
interplay in two-dimensional quantum materials and pave the way for device
applications using developed polar and Moiré 2D magnets in low-power
electronics, ultrahigh-speed spintronics, and reconfigurable quantum
simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.