* 2237211
* CAREER: Modulating Optoelectronic Properties and Functionality of Hybrid Organic-Inorganic Semiconductors by Controlling Lattice Strain with Molecular Interactions at Surfaces
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Adam Printz, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 03/31/2028
* USD 395,420.00

As climate change accelerates, increased reliance on renewable energy sources is
necessary. One particularly promising renewable energy technology is metal
halide perovskite (MHP)-based photovoltaics, which can provide lightweight, low-
cost power sources for commercial and residential, disaster relief, military,
and space applications. MHPs exhibit similar efficiencies to more established
technologies such as silicon photovoltaics, but with lower production cost and
waste. However, MHPs have intrinsic mechanical and chemical instabilities that
currently prevent commercial viability. This project will be focused on
addressing these instabilities through developing an understanding of how
stresses that form in the MHPs during fabrication influence performance and
stability, and how these effects can be mitigated through directed growth or
stress modulation by using organic ligands (or additives). The fundamental
scientific knowledge produced by this project will benefit society by
elucidating the relationship between lattice strain, stability, and performance
in solution-processable organic-inorganic hybrid materials, which can be used to
reduce the material use and cost, improving access to renewable energy. In
parallel, we will develop and present “research readiness” seminars for
marginalized students via established University of Arizona programs. In these
seminars, we will also launch a new video outreach pilot program—Scientists Like
Me—designed to increase self-concept as a researcher in these communities.
Finally, we will build upon these interrelated efforts to inform curriculum
development for a cornerstone course for the first of its kind Renewable Energy
Science and Engineering minor—which will accelerate the dissemination of this
knowledge to our communities and help train a more diverse workforce for
renewable energy.&lt;br/&gt;This project will utilize organic molecules to
control lattice strain in metal halide perovskites to modulate the
optoelectronic behavior of these systems. In particular, we will focus on three
interrelated questions: (1) How do lattice strain gradients influence defect
migration and localization? (2) How does the molecular structure of additives in
perovskite inks affect nucleation, growth, and orientation of crystallites? and
(3) How can the molecular structure of additives influence lattice strains in
perovskites? Successfully answering these questions will be a significant step
towards realizing scalable production of stable high-performance solution-
processable devices, enabling low-cost and transformative applications such as
renewable energy, energy-efficient lighting and displays, and portable and
wearable sensors for health care. We will synergistically use benchtop and
computational experiments to inform research pathways and build towards a goal
of understanding how molecular additives and their interactions at MHP surfaces
can influence stability and performance through strain modulation. Furthermore,
we will develop broad design rules for additive selection based on specific
chemistries and stoichiometries of a range of perovskite compositions. The need
for these broad design rules has become increasingly important given the ever-
expanding library of metal halide perovskite compositions, each with their own
complex and varied surface chemistries. Finally, we will implement a new
strategy to improve the stability and performance of perovskite devices by
informed design and selection of molecular additives to modulate the film
stresses to control defect migration, charge transport, and band
gap.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.