* 2237149
* CAREER: Data Preparation for Trusted and Fair Data Science
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Romila Pradhan, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 06/30/2028
* USD 466,411.00

Machine learning is becoming the standard choice for data science applications
that involve automated decision-making for a variety of application domains.
Designed carefully, learning-enabled systems have the potential to eliminate
some undesirable aspects of human decision-making, including biased judgments.
However, these systems are known to reinforce systemic biases and discrimination
reflected in the data they are trained on. Discriminatory outcomes are harmful
because they violate human rights and impede societal trust in machine learning.
This project will develop novel technologies to realize the potential of robust,
fair, and explainable data-driven decision- making systems. Toward this goal,
the project centers on data preparation and debugging techniques to ensure that
the underlying training data and data handling processes are devoid of
unexpected errors. The project will demonstrate the importance of data quality
in enabling trust in data-driven decision-making systems in practical
domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance understanding in the
field of responsible data science, particularly on how data quality issues and
data preparation steps impact fairness and bias of downstream machine learning
models and data science pipelines. The technical aims of this project are
divided into three thrusts that are complemented by intermediate evaluation
plans. The first thrust develops tools to detect the causes of bias in the
outcomes of machine learning models and pipelines and suggests potential data
fixes to mitigate those biases. The second thrust develops approaches to assess
the validity or suitability of data for learning fair and trustworthy machine
learning models. The third thrust develops a framework to involve the different
human roles and their expertise for bias mitigation. Together, these techniques
will enhance our understanding of how data quality and data preparation
influence decision-making and will spotlight data as a tool for understanding
and debugging undesired behavior of data science applications. Findings from
this project will inform future research on designing more robust and fair data
science applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.