* 2237470
* CAREER: Multiscale Simulation and Machine Learning for Smart Polymer Design
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2027
* Michael Webb, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvio May
* 12/31/2027
* USD 361,129.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymers are very long chain-like
molecules that consist of repeating subunits. Depending on their underlying
chemistry and architecture, certain polymers are known to be “stimuli-
responsive” in the sense that they can drastically alter their characteristics
based on environmental conditions. Consequently, such polymers could be used to
create “smart,” adaptive materials that alter function in response to triggers
like temperature, acidity, and stress. However, while it is innately known that
the nature and extent of stimuli-response depends on chemical structure,
predicting whether any given polymer is suitable for a given application is
elusive. This CAREER award focuses on developing predictive tools to facilitate
the understanding and design of stimuli-responsive polymers. In particular, the
research team aims to improve upon the accuracy of current molecular modeling
strategies by implementing “environment-aware” simulation algorithms.
Furthermore, the research team will harness the power of machine learning to
guide structure formation of polymers based on stimuli-response. The knowledge
and methods generated via these activities will set the stage for future
campaigns in polymer design across diverse applications, such as smart sensing,
diagnostics, drug-delivery, coatings, clothing, and purification.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major goals and methods of the research, which derive
from the power of modern computation, will also supplement numerous education
and training activities. Research activities will be coupled to “Princeton’s
Laboratory Learning Program” for high school students with targeted outreach
efforts to catalyze interest in using computation for engineering, across youth
and by underrepresented groups. Moreover, the principal investigator will
enhance and/or develop two engineering electives predicated on machine learning
and materials design, emphasizing domain-relevant examples and applications to
accelerate understanding and utilization. In the same vein, the team will also
develop “handbook”-style guides that illuminate common pitfalls and best
practices for molecular modeling that are ubiquitously encountered but seldom
formally taught. All developed educational products will be made publicly
accessible to extend the reach and utility of these materials. In the long-term,
these efforts will snowball into more expansive projects that more firmly
integrate molecular modeling and machine learning into traditional engineering
curricula and prepare graduates to meet the ever-increasing demands of the
technical workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research for this CAREER award will substantially
advance capabilities to design “smart” functional materials based on stimuli-
responsive polymers. Stimuli-responsive polymers are macromolecules that adapt
their functionality in response to exposure to certain triggers/stimuli and can
thus be exploited for numerous applications, such as sensing, robotics, drug-
delivery, and separations. The prospect of tailoring the chemistry and
architecture of a stimuli-responsive polymer to elicit a specific, desired
functional response is highly enticing; however, there are no existing robust,
predictive frameworks to inform their design in a high-dimensional parameter
space. The research team will resolve key technical bottlenecks that currently
inhibit computationally guided design of stimuli-responsive polymers. In
particular, major projects include (i) multiscale modeling of thermo-sensitive
polymers with expressive coarse-grained potential energy functions, (ii)
modeling polymer dynamics in inhomogeneous environments within implicit-solvent
frameworks, and (iii) leveraging machine learning to control emergent structural
properties of polymeric materials. In aggregate, these activities will provide a
foundation for modern computational techniques to be exploited during design of
novel smart nanomaterials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Educational and training
activities as part of this CAREER award will address an urgent need to cultivate
trainees for the next-generation workforce. Skills in molecular modeling and
machine learning are increasingly relevant in both academic and industrial
settings, yet these are rarely integrated directly into curricula for physical
scientists and engineers. Consequently, trainees often learn such skills outside
of traditional pedagogical environments and in contexts that are divorced from
their intended domain of application; this delays integration into and
innovation by the workforce. The principal investigator will lead activities
that bridge technical gaps, including (i) development of two engineering
electives related to machine learning and materials design, (ii) creation of
educational aids on practical considerations for molecular modeling, and (iii)
expanded participation in training programs for high school students that
highlight the visibility and utility of computation in engineering. These
activities will provide near-term enhancements in important technical training
for young professionals and more firmly ingrain modeling/data science into
future engineering curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.