* 2237433
* CAREER: Understanding multiscale sintering kinetics and microstructural evolution in binder-based metal additive manufacturing
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Jerard Gordon, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 12/31/2027
* USD 123,760.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The process of using heat to turn
powder into a porous solid without fully melting said powder is a manufacturing
approach known as “solid-state sintering” (SSS). This technology forms the
backbone of many important industrial processes for metal and ceramic materials
such as powder metallurgy (P/M), metal injection molding (MIM), and field-
assisted sintering (FAST). Overall, SSS platforms are advantageous because they
do not require high temperatures to fully melt metal or ceramic powders which
mean less energy is required to manufacture parts by sintering than by other
standard processing methods. However, long-standing challenges still exist for
sintering which include issues such as porosity, shrinkage and other changes in
final shape that aren’t easily predicted due to events that occur at the scale
of micro- and nanometers which aren’t well understood. This research project is
revealing fundamental sintering mechanisms across multiple length scales by
directly imaging powder surfaces and the internal structure of powders
undergoing sintering in real-time using high powered x-ray experiments and high
magnification electron microscopes. These state-of-the-art approaches are
providing new knowledge on the way defects form and how internal structures
change. Binder jet 3D printing (BJ3DP) is used as an example process since BJ3DP
is of significant interest to the automotive industry but research findings
contribute to new design strategies for a variety of SSS applications. This
project also facilitates the training of undergraduate and graduate students in
advanced manufacturing to address the current and growing skills gap in the U.S.
This is being accomplished by exposing students to state-of-the-art
characterization tools, engaging them in manufacturing research and involving
them in professional development opportunities with industrial partners in the
automotive industry. Additionally, this project is broadening participation
through the recruitment and mentoring of graduate students hailing from
underrepresented populations and hand-on community outreach events for students
in grades K-12 in collaboration with the University of Michigan Museum of
Natural History.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solid-state sintering (SSS) facilitates the efficient
production of metal and ceramic materials, however, long-standing challenges
remain due to a lack of fundamental insight of the dominant mechanisms
facilitating internal microstructural development. Since the overall driving
force for sintering (reduction of interfacial surface energy) can be facilitated
by at least six different and potentially competing mechanisms, a robust
understanding of SSS has been largely stymied by the absence of in-situ data.
This research is employing novel in-situ x-ray computed tomography (XCT) and
high energy diffraction microscopy (HEDM) to directly image 3D particle and
internal microstructural evolution with micron-scale resolution during SSS in
novel binder jet 3D printing (BJ3DP). Binder jet is used as an exemplar due to
its strong potential for implementation in the automotive industry. Results are
being combined with electron microscopy to understand the primary diffusion
mechanisms at work during SSS, and how they are influenced by process,
feedstock, and/or material factors. Findings are being used to test fundamental
hypotheses on densification and grain-growth in BJ3DP and serve as calibration
data for physics-based models. Overall, this new knowledge is enabling enhanced
prediction of microstructure evolution applicable to a variety of SSS processes
with strong industrial relevance such as powder metallurgy, metal injection
molding, and field-assisted sintering. Integrated educational modules are being
employed to reduce the currently growing manufacturing skills gap in the U.S.
through research experiences for undergraduate and graduate students and
professional development opportunities for students with the automotive
industry. Educational and outreach activities include actively recruiting and
training underrepresented minorities and women and providing accessible, hands-
on activities for students in K-12 in collaboration with the U-M Natural History
Museum to inspire interest in advanced manufacturing and
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.