* 2237977
* CAREER: Manipulating Photon Energy by Perovskite-Sensitized Solid-State Upconversion
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Lea Nienhaus, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 05/31/2028
* USD 256,859.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solar energy is crucial to
continue to meet the energy demands of today’s society. One pathway toward
increasing the performance of solar cells is to increase the portion of sunlight
that can be used to generate electricity. Much of the sun’s light is wasted
because it consists of low-energy photons which are not absorbed by the
semiconductors used to make solar cells. Low energy photons can be made usable
by transforming them into higher energy photons through a process called
upconversion. For example, two low-energy infrared photons can be converted into
a higher-energy visible photon. This project will use a combination of organic
molecules known to enable the upconversion process and metal halide perovskites,
which are currently being investigated for use in solar cells. The perovskite
will be used to absorb the low energy light and excite the organic molecules.
Upon successful upconversion, higher energy light can then be absorbed for use
in a solar cell. A combination of optical techniques and microscopy will lead to
a detailed understanding of the underlying processes. Beyond the scientific
impact of this project, a goal is to guide students to further pursue a
scientific career and inspire their independent research, critical thinking, and
creative problem-solving capabilities by strong mentorship in undergraduate
research and education. This activity aims to inspire a new generation of
scientists. To close the growing rift between scientists and the non-scientific
community, a strong foundation linking the PI’s institution with the local
community will be built by outreach lectures and science communication (‘Kitchen
Chemistry’ or ‘Kitchen Spectroscopy’) via local TV and social media
outlets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Efficient interconversion of solar energy to
chemical or electrical energy is the key to meeting the future energy demands of
our society. Improved photon utilization through an upconversion process
involving triplet generation at the perovskite/organic semiconductor interface
is a very promising approach to increase the photoexcited state lifetime and
therefore, overall device efficiencies. The principal investigator will explore
perovskite-sensitized solid-state upconversion via triplet-triplet annihilation
to unravel the role of microscale and nanoscale molecular arrangement in OSCs. A
combination of optical spectroscopy and scanning probe microscopy will be
employed to elucidate the local optoelectronic properties originating from
specific molecular arrangements of polyacenes on perovskite substrates. Control
over orbital coupling by molecular placement will allow the involved steps to be
systematically evaluated. The main goal is to understand why commonly utilized
annihilators which exhibit high efficiencies in solution (e.g.,
diphenylanthracene) do not yield transferable results in the solid state, and
how aggregation effects can be harnessed or avoided to improve solid-state
upconversion yields. To achieve this goal, new perovskite/triplet acceptor pairs
will be developed to investigate why promising solution-based triplet
annihilators perform poorly in the solid state. The effect of local
intermolecular interactions on the upconversion process will be studied on the
microscale and the nanoscale using optical scanning probe microscopy and time-
resolved optical spectroscopy. The combination of characterization methods
spanning from the ensemble to the atomic scale will reveal the local structure-
property relationships governing the bulk optoelectronic properties of hybrid
perovskite/OSC-based TTA upconversion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.