* 2237886
* CAREER: Towards Data-Driven and Field-Validated Microgrid Modeling and Analysis Techniques
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Mahmoud Kabalan, University of St. Thomas
* Continuing Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 06/30/2028
* USD 417,466.00

This NSF CAREER project aims to increase the reliability, security, and
resiliency of the electric power grid via the use of microgrids. Microgrids are
local electric energy systems that can operate with the grid and separate from
the grid during emergencies. Microgrids can improve grid resiliency and
sustainability, and accelerate disaster recovery. The project will bring
transformative change to how microgrids are designed and operated by addressing
the gap between theoretical studies and real-world applications. To achieve this
goal, state-of-the-art data-driven and machine learning algorithms will be
employed. The intellectual merits of the project include developing a new
approach to accurately model real-world conditions, using machine learning to
reduce model complexity, and creating and field-validating a microgrid stability
prediction tool. The broader impacts of the project include an improved method
to design and operate microgrids which would reduce implementation costs. By
reducing costs, microgrids can be deployed faster in both developing and
developed nations. This would quicken the electrification of historically
marginalized communities and improve grid resiliency, robustness, and
sustainability. The newly created knowledge would be disseminated through hands-
on courses and workshops on power engineering. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stability
prediction for microgrids require accurate mathematical modeling of the physical
system to capture important dynamics and subtleties. Current modeling practices
do not account for two critical real-world phenomena, namely, controller
saturation and protection action, both of which have drastic effects on system
stability. The first technical contribution of this project will address this
gap by developing an approach to concurrently model those two phenomena.
Additionally, microgrid stability studies are approached through linear or
nonlinear techniques. Stability techniques can become too complex due to model
order and number of nonlinearities. The second technical contribution will
leverage advances in Scientific Machine Learning (SciML) to reduce a systemâ€™s
model order by creating surrogates. The third technical contribution will be a
microgrid stability prediction tool using SciML that will predict transient
stability under different operating conditions and design factors. Data from an
industry-grade microgrid and real-world equipment will be used to tune and
confirm the accuracy of those surrogates and tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.