* 2237831
* CAREER:  Achieving Quality Information Extraction from Scientific Documents with Heterogeneous Weak Supervisions
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Qi Li, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Sorin Draghici
* 06/30/2028
* USD 499,948.00

The volume and breadth of the scientific literature is growing at an astonishing
pace, making it challenging for researchers to keep up. Information extraction
systems that can automatically extract structured information from this
unstructured text are in high demand. Benefits from automated information
extraction (IE) are multi-fold: it is easier to search and organize scientific
documents, it results in efficiency gains for curators, and it reduces curation
costs, among others. Although supervised deep learning-based IE methods achieve
curation-level performance on some applications, large training datasets with
accurate annotations are necessary to achieve these results. The goal of this
project is to develop an adaptable and flexible information extraction framework
that learns from existing resources and does not rely on costly and time-
consuming expert annotations, and bridges the performance gap in real
applications addressing extraction quality concerns and unique requirements of
IE tasks in the scientific literature. Success in this project will benefit many
domains by providing mechanisms for processing massive unlabeled textual
datasets, speeding up literature understanding and the curation process, and
promoting new scientific discoveries. The investigator will engage in
departmental Broadening Participation in Computing (BPC) activities and create
educational materials based on results from this project for outreach programs
to local k-12 schools and communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
focused on three complementary research thrusts, each of which addresses one key
obstacle of information extraction on scientific documents: 1) advancing IE
models to work with heterogeneous supervisions such as distant supervision and
indirect supervision while taking advantage of all existing resources, 2)
developing new semi-open information extraction tasks to extract detailed
context and uncertainties at the document level, and 3) developing a novel
learn-from-mistake paradigm that integrates first-order logic rules and new
annotations from domain users to refine the IE models and results. The proposed
research will address a variety of problems drawn from different information
extraction settings, which will lead to new principles, methods, and
technologies for machine learning, data mining, and natural language processing.
The research thrusts will be applied to extract information from STEM textbooks
to construct concept networks for education purposes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.