* 2237674
* CAREER: Correlated excited states of point defects in insulators
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Cyrus Dreyer, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 12/31/2027
* USD 230,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational
research and education activities that aim to understand the properties of
localized imperfections in materials, called "point defects", such as atoms
missing from their usual locations or impurities within the material. Such point
defects are ubiquitous in all materials and can have profound effects on their
properties even if present in minute quantities. In the context of electronic
devices, point defects may be detrimental, e.g., lowering the efficiency of
solar cells; or functional, e.g., allowing the properties of materials to be
tuned. Defects themselves can even be used as tiny quantum bits for next
generation quantum computers. The small and dilute nature of point defects makes
them a challenge for experimental characterization, thus computational
simulations are vital. However, conventional computational methods have limited
accuracy for key defect properties including their response to external stimuli
like light or electrical pulses. More advanced theories with significantly
better accuracy exist but require too much computational power to be applied to
point defects. This project seeks to develop and utilize computational tools
that overcome these issues via “embedding,” i.e., by combining the conventional
methods with the advanced theories to obtain both computational efficiency and
accuracy. These new techniques will allow the PI and his team to develop
unprecedented understanding of complex defects excited by external stimuli. The
PI will apply these embedding methods to explore a variety of defects and host
materials that are promising for the next generation electrical devices
including quantum computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports the
development of computational physics education at all levels. At the graduate
level, a course specifically aimed at teaching state-of-the-art methods in
computational condensed-matter physics will be developed; at the undergrad
level, the computational physics class required for physics majors will be
altered to make it more interactive and project-based; and at the high-school
level, outreach will be conducted to improve computational
literacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports research and educational activities that aim to understand the physics
of excited electronic states of point defects. The PI will develop quantum
embedding techniques for combining density-functional theory and many-body
methods to accurately capture electron correlations and excitations in defects
relevant for electronic devices and quantum technologies. Projects aimed at
methodological improvements will develop more accurate and robust treatments of
Coulomb interactions between defect orbitals, hybridization between the defect
and bulk states, and the double-counting intrinsic to combining density-
functional theory with many-body methods. Comparisons with other many-body
methods based on quantum Monte Carlo will be performed to benchmark the various
approximations involved in the embedding procedure. In addition, the PI will
focus on problems involving interplay between the defect and the crystal lattice
to determine the role of correlated excited states in optical and nonradiative
processes at defects. The specific defect/host systems targeted will include
carbon-based defects in hexagonal BN, transition metals in group-III nitrides,
and rare earths in transition-metal dichalcogenides, all of which are of
fundamental as well as technological interest for conventional and quantum
electronic devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports the
development of computational physics education at all levels. At the graduate
level, a course specifically aimed at teaching state-of-the-art methods in
computational condensed-matter physics will be developed; at the undergrad
level, the computational physics class required for physics majors will be
altered to make it more interactive and project-based; and at the high-school
level, outreach will be conducted to improve computational
literacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.