* 2237552
* CAREER: Internet-wide censorship detection, diagnosis, and circumvention beyond nation-state censorship
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Roya Ensafi, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 06/30/2028
* USD 116,392.00

The number of democracies in the world has decreased recently for the first time
since World War II. The newly authoritarian regimes engage heavily in Internet
censorship, and private institutions, major platforms, and Internet service
providers are following suit. These new threat actors far outnumber the large
totalitarian states traditionally studied in censorship research and they
operate differently, with different capabilities and limitations. This requires
a new science of censorship detection, diagnosis, and circumvention. The
project’s novelties are effective techniques and tools for combating censorship
by the new, more nimble threat actors. The project’s broader significance and
importance are to safeguard users and contribute to a more secure and democratic
technology future by upholding Internet freedom and human
rights.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project enhances global censorship
observatories through the design and validation of new measurement methodologies
that are suitable for detecting the blocking activities of governments and non-
governmental actors alike. Moreover, the project introduces scalable techniques
for detecting Deep Packet Inspection (DPI) middleboxes and tracking their use
for censorship and provides accurate threat models for modern DPI capabilities
by simulating an adversarial network in partnership with a mid-sized Internet
Service Provider (ISP). Finally, the project investigates quantitative and
qualitative factors behind circumvention tool (CT) adoption, such as technical,
operational, and usability issues, and helps ensure that CTs meet users’
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.