* 2237963
* CAREER: Identifying and Exploiting Multi-Agent Symmetries
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Qi Zhang, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 04/30/2028
* USD 267,673.00

It is widely believed by scientists that our universe follows certain symmetry
patterns and principles, which lead to profound implications such as
conservation laws. Artificial intelligence (AI) can and has already benefited
tremendously from exploiting these symmetries. This project seeks to identify
and exploit symmetries that are prevalent in cooperative AI tasks, where a group
of multiple autonomous sequential decision makers, or agents, plan and learn to
maximize their combined benefit. As an example, consider the application of
adaptive traffic signal control, where each intersection can be modeled as an
agent controlling its traffic signal in a way that adapts to real-time traffic
conditions to reduce congestion. There exist certain symmetries when the
topology of the road network is regular, e.g., as a 4-connected grid, and the
road condition is uniform. When done properly, such multi-agent symmetries can
be identified and exploited to greatly improve the efficiency and effectiveness
of the current solutions to cooperative AI. This project also integrates the
proposed research into an array of education initiatives, playing key roles in
the curriculum development and undergraduate research experiences at the PI's
university, as well as outreach activities that bridge academia with industry
practitioners and community stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
will establish a unified framework and develop a set of interdependent methods
that formulate, identify, and exploit multi-agent symmetries for cooperative AI
tasks. The research first adopts a mathematically rigorous language to formulate
the notion of multi-agent symmetry into the framework of symmetric Markov game,
revealing its core property which can be exploited by planning and learning
methods. Then, the research plan concretizes how to exploit several most common
types of multi-agent symmetries, including permutation symmetries, Euclidean
symmetries, and hierarchies of multi-agent symmetries of mixed types. Next, the
research plan discusses issues that are critical for practice, including
identifying and exploiting approximate multi-agent symmetries and dealing with
partial observability. Finally, the research features several real-world
applications, including adaptive traffic signal control, automated circuit
design, and material design, to evaluate and showcase the proposed methodology.
This project is jointly funded by Robust Intelligence and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.