* 2237485
* CAREER: Secure Timing Architecture for Untrusted Edge Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Fatima Anwar, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Jones
* 08/31/2028
* USD 221,309.00

A reliable notion of time has always been critical for the security of national
and industrial infrastructure, such as smart grids and industrial control
systems. With the emergence of human-in-the-loop systems at the network edge,
such as virtual reality, autonomous vehicles, mobile health, and smart financial
systems, the integrity of timing primitives is more important than ever for user
security and safety. Although there have been advances in isolated domains such
as trusted clock sources in shielded hardware systems, secure time
synchronization protocols, and resilient high-resolution timers, realizing
secure time architectures for widespread adoption in zero-trust edge
environments is hindered by two key challenges. First, trusted processors do not
provide secure and precise access to their timekeeping source. Second, there is
no universal time transfer technique that is resilient to delay attacks in the
network, and hence, existing approaches are not suitable for adoption over
heterogeneous and large-scale edge deployments. The proposed work is the first
effort to provide an end-to-end, secure time architecture for edge systems with
diverse clocks, for timestamping and time transfer. This project is also the
first to study active and passive sensing mechanisms for secure time
coordination. The proposed work also investigates challenges to secure time-
sensitive networking in 5G networks, distinguished by support for emerging time-
critical applications at large scales. This project will advance the state-of-
the-art in secure timing with new clock sources, time transfer channels, and
network protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed cross-stack approach
reimagines core concepts in timing -a fundamental primitive used by all
networked systems- and will create a foundation for designing safe, secure, and
efficient systems. The diverse and secure clock sources will enable researchers
and industry partners to support emerging applications with strict timing
requirements over real-world edge deployments. The project also creates
opportunities for education and outreach: The project will incorporate research
on time security into new and existing graduate and advanced undergraduate
classes at the PIs' home institution as part of the Cybersecurity Institute. It
will emphasize increasing participation among a diverse student population in
computing via N2Women professional programming, institutional diversity efforts,
and local community outreach to Girl Scout troops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.