* 2237814
* CAREER: Scalable Consensus Protocol Design with Accountability and Privacy under Practical Failure Models
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2028
* Kartik Ravidas Nayak, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 04/30/2028
* USD 113,312.00

In many fields, such as commerce and finance, a small number of organizations
are trusted to maintain the integrity of data and transactions. If these
organizations fail, the core integrity property is lost. Blockchains systems
form the critical infrastructure and technology for decentralizing trust to
multiple parties such that integrity is maintained even if some of them are
malicious. Due to the value of the information stored, these systems need the
ability to tolerate a significant fraction of malicious parties, ensure these
parties do not have an incentive to misbehave, and hold parties accountable and
recover in case of an attack. Moreover, for scalability, these systems need to
have low communication complexity, good latency, and support private
transactions. Unfortunately, existing blockchain systems do not meet all of
these requirements. This project makes novel scientific advances by bridging the
gap between theoretical foundations and the practical aspects of blockchain
consensus by considering several properties such as accountability, practical
failure models, and privacy. The project's broader significance and importance
include: (i) improved designs for public blockchains such as Ethereum and Zcash,
industry-based permissioned blockchains such as VMware Concord, and applications
such as decentralized finance and Central Banking Digital Currencies, (ii) a
comprehensive education, dissemination, and outreach plan resulting in (a) new
graduate and undergraduate courses with open-source materials, (b) the mentoring
of graduate, undergraduate, and high school students â€“ especially from
underrepresented minorities in computing, and (c) organizing events that
facilitate interdisciplinary collaboration on
blockchains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project exploits and reveals synergies
between distributed computing, theory, privacy, game theory, and computer
systems. It answers fundamental research questions on 1) defining and studying
mechanisms for fault detection and recovery and how they act as a feedback loop
to the security and efficiency of the system, 2) designing secure and efficient
self-stabilizing synchronous protocols tolerating minority corruption, 3)
analyzing consensus in the presence of rational parties, and 4) understanding
the limits of and designing randomized privacy mechanisms for privacy-preserving
proof-of-stake protocols.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.