* 2237430
* CAREER: Aerosol transport in well-defined periodic porous metamaterials
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Catherine Fromen, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 01/31/2028
* USD 486,271.00

Tiny solid or liquid droplets suspended in air called ‘aerosols’ are all around
us and have major impacts to our health and environment. Aerosols of certain
properties can deposit in the human airway, with potential detrimental outcomes,
such as the spread of airborne diseases such as COVID-19, or positive outcomes,
such as inhalers that deliver medicines or vaccines. In these examples, the lung
effectively acts as a porous filter, collecting some fraction of inhaled
aerosols as they travel through the complex airway structure. The movement of
aerosols through porous structures such as the lung is very difficult to predict
and depends on the background airflow, the local porous structure, and the
individual aerosol properties. This Faculty Early Career Development Program
(CAREER) award seeks to understand how aerosols travel through porous structures
with similar porosities to the human lung using model porous materials with a
regular and well-defined structure. Leveraging this understanding of aerosol
movement in regular porous structures could ultimately lead to development of
better inhalable medicines or protection against environmental exposures. This
award will also involve a set of educational activities related to the
scientific work that seek to diversify the scientific pipeline, support public
engagement with scientific communication, and mentor socially aware research
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this award is to build
fundamental understanding of aerosol transport through well-defined porous
lattices, using both experimental and computational multiphase approaches.
Aerosol transport within lattices will be studied to establish predictive
fundamental relationships within uniform lattices, as well as deposition within
asymmetric and patterned lattices, under cyclic flow profiles, and within
tapered pipes. Knowledge of deposition within varied lattice designs will then
be implemented to approximate spatial deposition in an innovative dynamic lung
model, using lattice structures to provide meaningful spatial approximations of
inhaled aerosols that map to anatomic regions of the human lung. This award also
aims to integrate educational activities to empower scientific communicators and
strengthen multilayered student communities for student success and STEM
engagement. This award represents a synergistic research methodology to enhance
the mechanistic understanding of aerosol dynamics within periodic, well-defined
porous structures while growing a sustainable and integrated approach to
educational STEM impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.