* 2237139
* CAREER: K-stability and moduli spaces of higher dimensional varieties
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2028
* Yuchen Liu, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2028
* USD 178,637.00

Algebraic varieties are geometric shapes arising from solutions to polynomial
equations. A central problem in the study of algebraic varieties, known as the
moduli problem, is to find a classifying space of algebraic varieties. One
prominent strategy to solve the moduli problem is to study canonical geometric
structures on algebraic varieties, known as Einstein metrics. This project is to
study the moduli problem for algebraic varieties with the help of Einstein
metrics. The problems are foundational and have deep connections to other areas
of mathematics, such as commutative algebra, differential geometry, and
mathematical physics. The project includes research and learning opportunities
for students and early-career researchers in algebraic geometry, through
seminars, workshops, summer schools, and other
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the PI will investigate
K-stability and K-moduli spaces of Fano varieties, connections to other well-
studied moduli spaces, and related problems for singularities. Firstly, the PI
will construct compact moduli spaces of K-unstable Fano varieties through
Kaehler-Ricci solitons. Secondly, the PI will study explicit moduli spaces of
Fano threefolds and log Fano pairs via the framework of wall crossings, and
establish connections to moduli spaces of curves and K3 surfaces. Thirdly, The
PI will construct moduli spaces of log Calabi-Yau pairs connecting K-moduli
spaces and KSBA moduli spaces. Finally, the PI will study boundedness and moduli
problems for singularities using the theory of normalized
volumes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.