* 2237369
* CAREER: Revealing the interaction mechanisms of PICK1 using multiscale modeling
* MPS,CHE
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2028
* Yi He, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 10/31/2028
* USD 296,144.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) Program in the
Division of Chemistry (CHE), and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), Yi He of the University of New Mexico will
investigate the interaction mechanisms between Protein Interacting with C
Kinase-1 (PICK1) and its binding partners to identify the key residues and
physical forces that drive these processes. PICK1 is a signaling protein that
helps transport cellular proteins and has been linked to various diseases
including Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, and addiction to cocaine. This project aims
to use computational techniques and experimental validation to investigate the
key steps involved in biological processes related to PICK1, with the goal of
understanding how physical interactions and specific components of PICK1
influence its biological functions. The computational strategy developed in this
project can also be used to explore the atomic-level interactions and the
dynamics/interactions of other large flexible proteins and their complexes. This
project will provide K-12 and PUI (primarily undergraduate institution) students
with research experience through computational workshops and summer research
sessions. The goal is to increase student retention rates in New Mexico and
promote STEM education, especially for underrepresented minorities and women in
rural areas. The research outcomes of this project will be used to create
Virtual Reality based outreach programs to raise awareness of Substance Use
Disorders (SUD) among younger generations and contribute to the development of
the Chemistry &amp; Chemical Biology curriculum at the University of New
Mexico.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project aims to utilize a novel
computational solution to investigate 1) the interaction mechanisms of PICK1
with its binding partners, 2) the inter-domain dynamics associated with the
biological functions of the PICK1 dimer, and 3) the key residues and physical
interactions that regulate the biological function related structural and
mechanical properties of PICK1. This goal is to ultimately be achieved by the
application of advanced physics-based atomistic and coarse-grained simulations,
which can now reach relevant timescales for large proteins such as PICK1. This
approach is expected provide high-resolution simulation data to facilitate our
detailed understanding of the structural and dynamic properties of PICK1 that
ultimately control the interaction mechanisms of PICK1. In summary, this project
seeks to use advanced multiscale computational chemistry methods to provide
fundamental insights into the functional mechanism of PICK1 and contribute to
the broader understanding of signal transduction mediated by such signaling
proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.