* 2237502
* CAREER: Biomarker perspectives on the sensitivity of western North American precipitation to climate change
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Tripti Bhattacharya, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 04/30/2028
* USD 26,935.00

Understanding the future of water resources in the western US is key for
predicting future impacts of climate change in the region. Climate models
disagree about future precipitation changes in the region. Much of this
disagreement is from uncertainty about the future position of the jet stream
over the eastern Pacific Ocean. This project seeks to reduce this uncertainty by
reconstructing the past position of the jet stream using hydrogen isotopes from
leaf waxes. These isotopes will be measured in ocean and lake sediment cores
from the region. The project focuses on two past warm climate periods that are
similar to future climate projections: the Pliocene (3 million years ago) and
the last Interglacial (125,000 years ago). Changes in leaf wax hydrogen isotope
values are thought to constrain the position of the jet stream during both these
intervals. These data will be paired with climate model simulations to
investigate the link between sea surface temperatures and jet stream position.
Ultimately, this helps identify the model configurations most likely to predict
future changes in jet stream position and precipitation in the western US. The
research program is integrated into an educational program called SUSTAIN. This
program supports first-generation students from under-represented backgrounds in
pursuing a STEM degree. This work will support independent research projects and
the development of a mentoring network. Project personnel will develop seminars
on careers in environmental fields, helping recruit and retain the next
generation of diverse climate scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Models disagree
about the pattern and magnitude of future rainfall change in western North
America, hindering climate adaptation in this drought-prone region. The project
generates new paleoclimatic constraints on the sensitivity of this region’s
rainfall to climate change. The project will reconstruct atmospheric circulation
over western North America during two warm climate intervals, the last
Interglacial and the mid-Pliocene. Both these intervals featured reorganizations
of tropical and midlatitude sea surface temperatures that serve as ‘natural
experiments’ to investigate the response of western North American rainfall to
large-scale ocean temperature gradients. The project integrates modern climate
observations, leaf wax hydrogen and carbon isotope measurements, and model
simulations to develop a new rigorous, interpretation of latitudinal gradients
of leaf wax hydrogen isotopes and how they can be used as direct constraints on
changes in the position of atmospheric circulation features like the subtropical
jet. The project then applies these insights to reconstruct changes in jet
position during the last Interglacial and mid-Pliocene. New leaf wax isotopic
data, in conjunction with isotope-enabled model simulations, will be used to
identify the model configurations that provide the most reliable long-term
projections of this vulnerable region’s precipitation and water resources. The
educational and outreach components of the project augment the SUSTAIN program
at Syracuse University by creating internships, formal and informal mentoring
networks, essential training in laboratory and coding skills, and professional
development seminars for undergraduates from under-represented
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.