* 2237345
* CAREER: Photocatalytic Transfer Hydrogenation of CO2 Using  Transition Metal Cluster Arrays
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Christopher Hendon, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 05/31/2028
* USD 339,265.00

With support from the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Christopher H. Hendon of the University of Oregon is studying photocatalytic
carbon dioxide (CO2) reduction mediated by transition metal clusters. Carbon
dioxide reduction is an important chemical reaction because it can reduce
atmospheric CO2 levels, while also forming valuable products like formic acid
and formaldehyde. CO2 conversion is a difficult chemical transformation because
the desired products (e.g. formic acid and formaldehyde) are formed in
competition with one another, differing in the number of protons and electrons
required to form them. To overcome this problem, Dr. Hendon will use
computational modeling to study photocatalytic reduction of CO2 with inorganic
clusters, which will provide precise numbers of protons and electrons for the
reaction. The research will examine how these metal clusters can be used to
starve hydrogenation reactions of reactants (H•) to select for target products,
and demonstrate that the ligands that support the metal clusters allow for
energetic tuning of the metal sites. If successful, this work has the potential
to guide experimentalists to achieve more selective conditions for CO2 reduction
to the desired product. Moreover, this computational work may prove useful in
other problematic hydrogenations, plagued by selectivity issues, including the
regioselective reduction of alkenes and alkynes. This work will synergize with
Dr. Hendon’s existing program in electrocatalysis of beverage extracts, a
successful program that teaches fundamental chemistry and physics through the
lens of coffee. This award will support the development of a formal curriculum
for non-traditional students, that will be made open-source and community-
maintained.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the the all-important CO2 reduction
reaction can be promoted through conventional hydrogenation with H2, selectivity
can be achieved by using other H-sources. One promising route involves transfer
hydrogenation, whereby hydrogen commutes from one species to another. This
proposal seeks to demonstrate that selective CO2 transfer hydrogenation
(reduction) can be achieved using atomically precise inorganic clusters in
metal-organic frameworks (MOFs). In this award, Dr. Hendon will use
computational chemistry to examine a family of heterogeneous polynuclear
transition metal catalysts and will study the general mechanism in which
hydrogen is extracted from donors (e.g. alcohols, water, etc.) and transferred
to acceptors (e.g. CO2). The reaction mechanism likely depends on differences in
pKa of the donor/catalyst/acceptor, as well as their redox potentials. From
these studies, the Hendon group will search for target MOF clusters with
improved chemical selectivity with tunable numbers of available hydrogen atoms
through cluster modulation. Together, these studies aspire to yield a general
design principle for selection of donor, acceptor, and MOF-based catalysts,
based on electron energy alignments. Through collaboration with experimentalists
the work aims to generate a family of CO2 reduction photocatalysts that source
their H• from abundant donors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.