* 2237715
* CAREER: Modeling the Loosening of Bolted Joints due to Nonlinear Dynamics of Structural Assemblies
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Keegan Moore, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2028
* USD 727,410.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) grant will fund research
that clarifies how loss of integrity of bolted joints affects the resilience and
progression to failure of safety- and reliability-critical mechanical
structures, with application to vehicles, industrial equipment, biomedical
implants, space telescopes, and playground equipment, thereby promoting the
progress of science, and advancing the national prosperity and welfare. Loose
bolts and screws are a common problem in US infrastructure. Structural failures
often have catastrophic consequences, for example, resulting in vehicle crashes
or train derailments that lead to casualties, economic loss, and environmental
damage. Little is known about how a structure’s dynamics influences the
loosening of bolted joints over long periods of operation. Models calibrated
using data from the time of assembly fail to enable optimized preventative
maintenance over a structure’s lifetime. This project overcomes these challenges
by developing predictive modeling approaches that capture the coupling between
structural dynamics and the integrity of bolted joints over timespans consistent
with the structure’s service life, leading to improved health monitoring of
aging infrastructure, toughened designs against the impacts of extreme weather,
and more reliable energy generation from renewable sources. The project advances
STEM learning and enhances diversity through a “Teach for Discovery” approach
that engages students’ natural curiosity through game-based learning and virtual
reality experiences. Advise from, and outreach to, industry and national labs
ensures that the research activities are informed by industry needs and that
results are accessible and effectively assessed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research aims to develop the foundations of a modeling and validation framework
for predicting the long-term nonlinear dynamics of assembled structures with
loosening bolted joints. It achieves this aim partly by combining new
experimental and modeling techniques to map the strains around a tightened bolt
head to the underlying contact conditions inside the interface as the joint
evolves dynamically, for example, to test the hypothesis that the rate of
loosening is independent of the relative displacement across the interface.
Models relating bolt tension to joint stiffness and damping and differential
equations governing the evolution of the tensions are then derived from
experimental measurements. Finally, the theory of nonlinear normal modes is
expanded to incorporate bolt tension as a dependent variable and used to
characterize the influence of internal resonances on the progression of local
damage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.