* 2237795
* CAREER: Time-resolved decoding of explore/exploit computations in the human brain
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Jeremy Hogeveen, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Fritz
* 05/31/2028
* USD 667,000.00

The exploration-exploitation tradeoff is a dilemma we frequently face in
choosing between options. This tradeoff happens all the time in everyday life -
do we ‘exploit’ what we already know, or ‘explore’ something new and unfamiliar?
Do we choose to go to our favorite restaurant (exploitation) or try out a new
restaurant (exploration)? Other examples include deciding where to go for
vacation, which friends to talk to at a party, or what foods to order at the
restaurant. While exploring new places, new friends, new foods is key to
figuring out what we like and can lead to the formation of new preferences, it
comes at the cost of foregoing the immediate value of familiar options. This
project seeks to understand how the decision to explore or exploit takes shape
in the human brain. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to understand the neural
basis of decision making, two non-invasive, complementary neuroimaging
techniques can be used to analyze brain activity while people make the decision
to explore or exploit. One approach (fMRI or functional magnetic resonance
imaging) has superb spatial resolution, and can tell where brain activity is
localized during decision-making. Another approach (MEG or magnoencephalography)
has excellent temporal resolution and can pinpoint precisely when brain signals
occur while people make explore-exploit decisions. Relatively little is known
about the timing of these decisions in the brain. Utilizing these neuroimaging
techniques, experiments measure the spatiotemporal patterns of brain activity in
situations where people are trying to gain as many profits as possible, as well
as in contrasting situations where people are trying to avoid losses. This will
allow an experimental test of the hypothesis that the brain circuits involved
when people are trying to maximize profits through explore-exploit decisions are
distinct from the circuits involved when they are trying to minimize losses.
Using computational modeling, the project will also study the accuracy of
decoding exploration and exploitation decisions from MEG brain data under
different conditions and at different points in a decision trial. Additional
research will use a technique (TMS or transcranial magnetic stimulation) for
safely stimulating the brain to provide a ‘cause-and-effect’ test of predictions
about how the brain controls explore-exploit decisions. How the human brain
chooses between familiarity and novelty during decision-making is a long-
standing mystery in human brain and decision sciences, and this research project
is likely to greatly increase our knowledge of the neural mechanisms underlying
decision making. These studies will also have significant societal implications
in educational and clinical settings and in a broad array of contexts where
insights from neuroscience may encourage and help people to make better choices.
The scientific research in this project will be accompanied by an outreach
program to an under-represented community to teach computer programming and STEM
skills to high school students, and introduce them to the excitement of
neuroscience research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by
the Cognitive Neuroscience Program in SBE, and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.