* 2237379
* CAREER: SHF: Enhancing Serverless Efficiency Through Microarchitectural Checkpointing
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Jonathan Balkind, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 08/31/2028
* USD 132,279.00

Cloud data centers are a vital piece of technology infrastructure today.
Applications and websites rely deeply on their efficient operation to serve
millions to billions of users. To improve the useful utilization of cloud
servers and ease application development, cloud platforms have recently
developed a new design paradigm known as serverless computing. New serverless
applications are made of very small pieces of code, which often run for just
milliseconds, in contrast to traditional applications. This research project
investigates the implications of this change on microprocessors which have been
historically designed for long-running applications. The project explores how to
modify the cores of the microprocessor to improve their energy efficiency when
running such serverless applications. Improving the efficiency of serverless
computing in cloud data centers will enable cost savings and a reduced
environmental footprint across economic sectors while lowering the barrier to
entry for new entrants with novel applications. In addition, this project
integrates an education plan featuring a new change of major pipeline and
participation in equitable and inclusive teaching practices workshops to broadly
enhance the diversity of the growing cloud computing and computer science
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the impacts of
emerging, short-lived applications like serverless computing on the prediction
structures embedded into microprocessors designed with long-lived applications
in mind. Serverless applications waste significant energy and time running on
today's server processors, but they have been adopted to improve overall server
utilization and developer productivity. Saving the contents, or
microarchitectural checkpointing, of structures like branch predictors and
caches thus has the potential to drastically improve the efficiency of
serverless and supercharge traditional applications by eliminating
microarchitectural training time. This project investigates which structures are
best to checkpoint, implements checkpointing mechanisms into commercially-
adopted, open-source processors, designs the user and operating system software
interfaces to the programmer, and proposes new security protections needed to
make the checkpointing adoptable. This full-stack prototyping process,
exploiting real-world, open-source software and hardware, will demonstrate the
significant efficiency benefits realizable with microarchitectural
checkpointing. This will enable more efficient data centers for serverless edge
and cloud computing that are proliferating as well as traditional, long-running
applications, all of which underpin the cloud services that society relies
on.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.