* 2237007
* CAREER: The Consequences of Efforts to Control Human Reproduction for Science and Medicine
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* stef shuster, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 07/31/2028
* USD 125,007.00

This CAREER project examines how historical efforts to control human
reproduction shaped the ways scientists and medical communities understand
reproductive health in contemporary times. In the 19th and early 20th Centuries,
scientific and medical communities worked alongside the state to “improve” the
nation’s hereditary pool, including through forced sterilization of marginalized
populations. This project investigates how these endeavors influenced the
developing medicine of reproduction in the late 20th Century and how it
continues to influence scientific knowledge and reproductive health. The study
enhances undergraduate science education by introducing students to lasting
issues in reproductive health and inequality. The project produces a digital
archive that advances public understanding of the history of medicine, science,
and health inequalities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses a combination
of archival methods and interviews to understand how efforts to control genetics
in the population affected scientific and medical understandings and current
experiences with reproduction. The research includes content analysis of
scientific articles on reproductive health published from 1950 to 2000 and
archived correspondence with health providers and scientists. The project also
collects and analyzes oral histories with 50 people about their experiences in
reproductive health and creates a new public digital archive to house these
histories. Addressing these research questions offers vital contributions to the
social study of medicine, science and technology studies, and broader
understandings of the social and historical factors that contribute to health
inequalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.