* 2237945
* CAREER: Enhancing ambient capacitive sensing through improved resolution and multi-modal sensor fusion
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2028
* Alexander Nelson, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 05/31/2028
* USD 285,103.00

One important part of recovering from strokes and managing other nervous system
conditions is neurorehabilitation to help people recover from physical
impairments to their posture and mobility. During rehabilitation sessions,
therapists carefully monitor motions and give feedback to improve motor function
and control. Being able to continue this monitoring and feedback outside of
rehabilitation sessions could be a valuable addition to therapy; however,
existing technologies for continuous body pose and motion estimation have many
limitations. This proposal’s goal is to develop new techniques for pose and
motion estimation based on capacitive sensor arrays (CSAs), a common technology
used in devices such as smartphones. These new techniques will examine how both
sensors in the environment and flexible, body-worn sensors can be used to better
estimate pose and motion. The work will include developing new ways to configure
and deploy CSAs, process the signals they send back, and combine multiple types
of sensors. The project will focus on upper body pose and motion detection,
particularly people’s arms, but the insights and methods are likely to apply to
a wide range of medical applications and more generally provide new ways to
interact with computers. In particular, the outcomes of the work may both help
therapists develop new training procedures and support remote physical therapy
that would make it more accessible to people who live in non-urban
areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to demonstrate the feasibility of
embedded and wearable CSAs and e-field sensors to provide accurate, continuous
pose estimation beyond the state of the art. To do this, the team will address
existing open challenges of non-touch wearable CSAs; namely 1) improving sensor
resolution, 2) reducing error due to variable positioning, and 3) compensating
for electrode shift. Specifically, sensor resolution in wearable systems will be
improved by creating tailored capacitive arrays for pose estimation, augmenting
the resolution of the sensors and improving noise filtering through deep
transfer learning, and compensating for errors by augmenting the data with
additional sensing mechanisms. These contributions will be evaluated through
task-based remote neurorehabilitation training for people with upper limb
impairments, which is currently lacking support for long-term and in-the-wild
motor assessment. If successful, the work promises to increase the duration,
quality, and accessibility of neurorehabilitation for the nearly 800,000
individuals experiencing strokes each year in the U.S.
alone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by Human Centered
Computing (HCC) and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.