* 2237623
* CAREER: Performance-Based Fire Design for Cold-Formed Steel Structures
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Thomas Gernay, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 06/30/2028
* USD 579,035.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will derive an advanced
science-based framework for assessing the fire performance of cold-formed steel
structures. This framework will enable more accurate modeling of the effect of
fire on cold-formed steel structures that will support improved design methods
for advancing national prosperity and welfare through better safety, resource
efficiency, and resilience against fire. Lightweight cold-formed steel
structural systems, with high strength-to-weight ratio and rapid construction
speed, are widely used in nonresidential construction in the United States.
Cold-formed steel structures are traditionally protected from fire based on
prescriptive provisions derived from standardized testing. However, the reliance
on prescriptive provisions is costly and impedes innovation toward more
sustainable and affordable buildings. This research project will develop
experimental and computational capabilities for the fire analysis of cold-formed
steel structures that will advance understanding of the fundamental relationship
between the thermal exposure and the stability and strength of these thin-walled
members, to enable better structural fire designs. The research will be
complemented by an educational and outreach program to engage a broad audience
on the role of structural fire engineers in building resilient communities
against extreme hazards. The program will include curriculum development,
outreach activities, and educational videos developed in collaboration with the
Maryland Institute College of Art. Data generated from this project will be made
publicly available in the National Science Foundation-supported Natural Hazards
Engineering Research Infrastructure Data Depot (https://www.DesignSafe-CI.org).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of the research is to enable
performance-based fire design for cold-formed steel structures by developing the
capability to quantify the fire behavior of the thin-walled framing members.
This behavior is largely governed by the interaction between buckling failure
modes and elevated temperatures. Thus, this project will include: (i) testing of
cold-formed steel studs and joists using an innovative experimental method
allowing a range of transient high temperature conditions, (ii) development of
thermal-mechanical computational modeling strategies and creation of high-
fidelity numerical benchmarks, and (iii) development of analysis-based methods
for assessing the fire performance of cold-formed steel structures. The provided
data and methods will answer fundamental questions about the complex fire-
thermal-structural interaction in these thin-walled members. The research thus
has the potential to improve understanding of the mechanics of stability-
critical structures in fire and advance simulation capability for cold-formed
steel structures under physically based design fires. Beyond cold-formed steel
structures, the research will create a leap toward integration of structural
fire within the design procedure alongside other loading cases, which supports
consistent performance-based and risk-informed design, structural optimization,
and multi-hazard resilience assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.