* 2237574
* CAREER: Large-Scale Exploration and Interpretation of Consumer-Oriented Legal Documents
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Shomir Wilson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 07/31/2028
* USD 198,614.00

People face large volumes of text in their everyday lives, and they must choose
what to read and what to leave unread. To function in our information society,
consumers must read and accept terms of service agreements, financial
agreements, health care agreements, rental agreements, privacy policies, and
other varieties of "fine print" to receive essential goods and services. These
consumer-oriented legal documents (COLDs, for brevity) specify requirements,
penalties, boundaries of acceptable use, options for recourse if something goes
wrong, privacy practices, intellectual property stipulations, and many other
important topics. People tend to accept COLDs without reading or understanding
them, and the lack of understanding disempowers individuals and affects them
unequally. This project will answer three related questions: (1) What recurring
information structures and types of knowledge exist in COLDs?; (2) What are the
capabilities and limitations of text mining applied to automating extraction of
information from COLDs?; and (3) To what extent do the contents of COLDs
intersect with the interests and needs of consumers? Toward answering these
questions, the project will develop natural language processing methods that
support user engagement with typically unengaging but important text.
Additionally, this project will introduce first-year undergraduates to research
and encourage them to pursue STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
advance knowledge by focusing on the following goals. First, the project will
discover the availability and characteristics of common types of COLDs by
creating large-scale corpora of them from online sources. These corpora will
enable studying issues in availability, accessibility, navigation, and
readability. Second, the project will develop methods for automated extraction
of two particularly salient features of COLD text: choice points (statements in
text that describe actions a reader can take potentially for their benefit) and
outlier statements (statements that deviate from what is typical for the
relevant type of COLD, differentiating a COLD from its peers and motivating
acute attention). Third, the project will build browser extensions to explore
how choice points and outlier statements affect people's engagement with COLDs'
contents. To support further research, the project also will produce and
disseminate an array of corpora, language models, and other tools for
researchers in natural language processing and public
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.