* 2237469
* CMMT: Slave-boson approach for electronically correlated metal oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2026
* Sohrab Ismail-Beigi, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 11/30/2026
* USD 319,605.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research aimed at
developing and applying accurate and computationally efficient methods that can
model the properties of materials in which electrons interact strongly with each
other. The ability to systematically modify the properties of materials
underlies technological progress, with several well-known examples such as the
engineering of silicon-based semiconductors to create electronic devices or the
mass production of energy-efficient light-emitting semiconducting diodes used
daily for illumination. In these semiconducting materials, the electronic
motions that are responsible for the key materials properties are relatively
easy to understand and predict because the electrons interact rather weakly with
each other. However, there are many other interesting and potentially useful
properties such as magnetism, high-temperature superconductivity, or strong
thermoelectric response that occur in materials where electrons interact
strongly. Understanding and calculating the properties of such materials is of
interest for basic science and potential applications, but it is difficult to do
so due to the strong interactions among the electrons. In this project, the PI
and his team will develop and apply new computational methods to overcome this
challenge. They will benchmark their predictions for well-known materials and
predict properties of new materials that can then be verified by experiments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methods developed in this project will be distributed
to the broader scientific community via publications, conference presentations,
and open-source public software releases via an existing open-source database.
The award supports the training of graduate students and a postdoctoral research
associate in computational materials physics. For outreach, the research team
will engage with several K-12 students participating in the New Haven Science
Fair by initially helping them improve their experimental designs for their
Science Fair projects, and later by helping via further mentoring and judging in
the Science Fair itself.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports research aimed at developing
and applying theoretical and computational methods that describe the physical
properties of solid-state metal oxide materials where the strong interactions
between the electrons in the materials lead to complex and potentially useful
behaviors such as magnetism, high-temperature superconductivity, and large
thermoelectric responses. Understanding and predicting the properties of
materials where electrons interact strongly is a difficult grand challenge and a
long-standing subject of interest for the physics, chemistry, and materials
science communities. In this project, the research team will employ the slave-
boson framework, in which the difficult interacting electron problem is
approached by using auxiliary (also called subsidiary or slave) boson particles
to help model the electronic interactions in a computationally tractable manner.
The methodologies used in this project include many-body theory, quantum
mechanics for fermionic and bosonic systems, and numerical algorithms for
solution of large quantum mechanical problems. One key research thrust involves
the development of an interacting cluster approach that goes beyond the
conventional single interacting site technique to increase the accuracy of the
slave-boson method. The methodologies will be benchmarked on well-understood
materials to assess their strengths and weaknesses compared to competing
methods. The methods will also be used to understand and predict the properties
of cutting-edge materials in the form of metal oxide superlattices and thin
films that can be fabricated and measured by experiments in the near
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The methods developed in this project will be
distributed to the broader scientific community via publications, conference
presentations, and open-source public software releases via an existing open-
source database. The award supports the training of graduate students and a
postdoctoral research associate in computational materials physics. For
outreach, the research team will engage with several K-12 students participating
in the New Haven Science Fair by initially helping them improve their
experimental designs for their Science Fair projects, and later by helping via
further mentoring and judging in the Science Fair
itself.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.