* 2237593
* CAREER: Improving educators' trust in and effective uses of predictive learning analytics to support students
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Rene Kizilcec, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie Teasley
* 03/31/2028
* USD 320,006.00

Predictive learning analytics (PLA) that have a focus on identifying students at
risk of failing are gaining traction with leaders at all levels of education.
The effective adoption and use of PLA in the US education system can promote
educational attainment, STEM workforce development, and national development by
supporting lower-resourced educational institutions and members of underserved
communities. Prior research has focused on enhancing the technical
implementation of these AI-based systems, but studies of why deployments of
existing technologies have failed identify issues that are not technical but
social, psychological, or cultural in nature. For example, educators’ trust in
and effective use of PLA are instrumental for realizing their potential
benefits, motivating this work to study how changes in the framing, level of
transparency, and training can improve educators’ use of PLA. The project will
involve 3,600 US educators across several large-scale studies and advance an
understanding of what influences educators’ trust and effective use of PLA, as
well as AI-based education technology more broadly. These insights will guide
the development of an evidence-based curriculum about PLA for educators to
foster awareness, trust, and effective use. The PLA training materials will be
made available online and via posts on social media channels. This project
develops concrete and scalable interventions to help design technologies that
affect the academic progress of learners of all
ages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building on the Technology Acceptance Model and
Academic Resistance Models, the project will investigate how educators respond
to procedural justice framings and algorithmic transparency for AI-based
education technology, especially during expectancy violation and high levels of
uncertainty. Three studies will be conducted as online randomized controlled
trials, replicated for robustness, that present educators with a simulated PLA
to assess their perceptions, attitudes, and behavioral intentions. How different
presentations of PLA influence educators’ usage intentions will be investigated
by using an online noise audit, which quantifies how much the same information
about students leads educators to the same conclusions about how to intervene.
The cumulative insights of the project will be applied in a field experiment on
a university campus to examine if evidence-based improvements to an existing at-
risk identification process can encourage faculty to reach out to students and
better support them. The project will contribute to significant advances in our
causal understanding of ways to foster all educators’ trust and effective use of
a learning analytics system. The award is funded in part by the EDU Core
Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education
research that generates foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are
made in critical areas that are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and
STEM learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development. This project is also funded by the Innovative Technology
Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects
that build understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and processes
contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.