* 2237966
* CAREER: Rethinking Virtualization in Cloud-Native Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Hui Lu, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 04/30/2028
* USD 186,845.00

Cloud-native technologies offer advanced and effective means to develop and
manage today’s ubiquitous cloud applications. For example, monolithic cloud
applications are being replaced with graphs of smaller, simpler “microservices”
for reduced development complexity and increased code velocity. Further, such
microservices are managed by cloud-native systems automatically, liberating
cloud users from onerous operations of their in-cloud applications.
Unfortunately, systems software that underpins cloud-native systems, such as
virtualization, faces critical challenges to meeting the stringent needs of
emerging microservices-based cloud applications, such as strong-yet-lightweight
isolation, fast inter-microservice communication, and fine-grained elasticity
control. This CAREER project proposes to conduct a holistic study of
virtualization techniques to 1) identify critical bottlenecks in resource
isolation, I/O communication, and service elasticity; 2) propose new system
virtualization solutions to address these bottlenecks; and 3) validate the
proposed solutions with real-world prototypes. The knowledge developed in this
project will advance the key aspects of systems software in cloud-native
systems, thus benefiting all cloud applications that are integral to society
running on these systems. The research outcomes will have influences on the
design and implementation of production cloud-native systems via university-
enterprise collaborations and technology transfer and be integrated into core
computer science courses. This project will provide training in the computer
systems domain to graduate students, undergraduate students, and high school
students, via diverse outreach plans of summer camps, high school
student/instructor mentorship, and the inclusion of underrepresented minority
and women engineers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the CAREER
project is to investigate and develop virtualization techniques for highly
secure, efficient, and elastic cloud-native systems. First, the project will
develop a strong-yet-lightweight isolation architecture for efficiently and
securely sandboxing distributed microservices. It will move monolithic kernel
functions to more isolated and lightweight userspace kernel microservices to
provide system services to (and sandbox) all microservices of a cloud-native
application. Second, the project will build fast userspace (network and storage)
data planes tailored for interactive microservices. It will retrofit kernel I/O
stacks to preserve high-quality kernel functionality meanwhile augmenting
existing I/O stacks to address critical inter-layer data
communication/processing bottlenecks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.