* 2237884
* CAREER: Hidden Topological Polar Phases Created by Ultrafast Acoustic Excitation
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Jiamian Hu, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 06/30/2028
* USD 220,036.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports integrated
research, educational, and outreach activities to advance the fundamental
understanding of novel phases with complex polarization patterns in
ferroelectrics. Ferroelectrics are materials that have orderly polarization
(composed of pairs of equal and oppositely charged poles separated by a tiny
distance) that can be manipulated by external fields. One of the exciting
research areas in ferroelectrics is creating unconventional patterns of
polarization, such as a polar vortex, where the swirling polarization can induce
exotic fundamental phenomena and provide new opportunities for potential device
applications such as ultrahigh-density vortex-based memory. However, such
complex polar phases have so far been observed in only a few ferroelectric
materials and mostly form spontaneously during materials synthesis. In this
project, the PI and his research team will computationally demonstrate a
radically new approach towards an on-demand creation of complex polar phases in
ferroelectric materials. This new approach combines heterostructure design
(integrating ferroelectric thin films with dissimilar materials) and the
excitation by picosecond (one trillionth of a second) ultrasonic pulses. A new
computer model will be developed to identify the materials, film thickness,
duration and amplitude of the ultrasonic pulse, and other relevant parameters
needed for the new complex polar phase creation, thereby providing guidance for
both heterostructure synthesis and ultrafast control
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activities are integrated with
educational and outreach activities which aim to develop, implement, assess, and
disseminate a series of classroom modules focused on material structures seen at
the micro level (called microstructures) for middle school and high school
science education. The classroom modules will involve synergistic activities of
microstructure modeling, 3D printing, and mechanical properties testing. The
modules will be collaboratively developed by two secondary-school teachers, an
education software company, a graduate student, and the PI. The modules will be
tested in middle and high schools covering diverse student population, improved
based on assessment results, and broadly disseminated to secondary schools in
Wisconsin by organizing a teachers’ workshop and presentations at an educational
conference, such that the modules can be used to engage and inspire hundreds and
potentially thousands of secondary school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports integrated research, educational, and outreach activities to advance
the fundamental understanding of the formation of topological polar phases
(e.g., vortices, skyrmions, merons) in ferroelectrics. Due to the strong
gradient of polarization, topological polar phases can induce exotic fundamental
phenomena and open new modalities for potential device applications. However,
topological polar phases have so far been observed in only a few ferroelectric
heterostructures and mostly form under equilibrium conditions. Ultrafast
excitation is one promising approach to create long-lived nonequilibrium hidden
phases of matter with emergent functionalities. The main objective of this
research is to computationally create hidden topological polar phases in
ferroelectric heterostructures by ultrafast acoustic excitation. To achieve
this, the PI and his research team will develop a new mesoscale model that can
accurately and rapidly predict the coupled dynamics of strain, polarization, and
electromagnetic waves that will emerge in ferroelectric heterostructures after
the injection of an ultrafast acoustic pulse. The model will then be utilized to
predict and understand the formation of the initial polar phases under
equilibrium condition and the final hidden polar phases upon ultrafast acoustic
excitation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activities are integrated with
educational and outreach activities which aim to develop, implement, assess, and
disseminate a series of classroom modules focused on materials microstructures
for middle school and high school science education. The classroom modules will
involve synergistic activities of microstructure modeling, 3D printing, and
mechanical properties testing. The modules will be collaboratively developed by
two secondary-school teachers, an education software company, a graduate
student, and the PI. The modules will be tested in middle and high schools
covering diverse student population, improved based on assessment results, and
broadly disseminated to secondary schools in Wisconsin by organizing a teachers’
workshop and presentations at an educational conference, such that the modules
can be used to engage and inspire hundreds and potentially thousands of
secondary school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.