* 2237994
* CAREER: Days before eruption: Tracking magma ascent pathways with a water-in-feldspar crystal clock
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Megan Newcombe, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 06/30/2028
* USD 277,109.00

Scientists monitor seismicity at volcanoes to assess volcanic hazard and to
forecast eruptions. It is difficult to forecast eruptions, in part because we do
not fully understand the origin of volcano seismicity. Three eruptions of Mount
Spurr (in Alaska) were preceded by interesting seismic signals. Investigators on
this project will investigate the origin of these seismic signals by studying
the migration pathways of magma in the days before the eruptions. The proposed
work will track magma migration through the crust using gradients of water in
crystals from the erupted volcanic ash. Results of this work will be shared with
local high school students at an annual Volcano Summer School. At this summer
school, students and future K-12 science teachers will learn about volcanoes and
volcanic hazards. Classroom exercises created for this summer school will be
shared with current and future K-12 science teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water
in feldspar has potential as a barometer and chronometer for tracking the
migration and stalling of water-rich magmas in the hours to weeks prior to
eruption. However, limited data is available for assessing the partitioning and
diffusion behavior of water in feldspar. The proposed work would contribute new
experiments that would explore water partitioning and diffusion in plagioclase
feldspar as a function of water concentration, major and trace element
composition, and oxygen fugacity. Water concentration gradients across
plagioclase from three geophysically monitored eruptions of Mt. Spurr would then
be used to assess the ascent paths of magmas in the hours to days before their
eruption. These petrologic constraints on magma migration will be compared to
the geophysical record of volcanic unrest, enabling us to test competing
hypotheses regarding the staging of magma in the days before these significant
eruptions. The proposed work provides a complete educational pathway from high
school to graduate school: high school students (from local schools with &gt;90%
minority enrollment) and future STEM teachers will participate in an annual
Volcano Summer School at University of Maryland (UMD); undergraduate researchers
will lead the acquisition and interpretation of geochemical data from samples of
the 1992 eruptions of Crater Peak; and a graduate student will lead the
experimental research. Results of the proposed work will be integrated into UMD
classes and the Volcano Summer School in the form of data-driven exercises.
These exercises will be shared online and with future STEM educators via the
participation of undergraduate students from UMD’s “Terrapin Teachers” program
as paid teaching assistants at the Volcano Summer
School.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.