* 2237487
* CAREER: Novel Approaches to Hyperbranched Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2028
* Michael Schulz, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 04/30/2028
* USD 435,000.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program
in the Division of Chemistry, Michael D. Schulz of Virginia Polytechnic
Institute and State University is developing self-condensing ring opening
metathesis polymerization (ROMP) to prepare hyperbranched polymers. Highly and
hyperbranched polymers are tree-like 3D macromolecules that have very different
viscosity characteristics when compared to linear polymers. As a result,
hyperbranched polymers have been applied in various applications ranging from
their use as additives to coatings and as sensors, as high loading supports in
combinatorial chemistry, and as homogeneous catalysts. In this research,
inimers—small molecules that can act as both an initiator and a monomer—will
first be synthesized. Structural modifications will also be conducted to
optimize polymerization activity. Successfully prepared inimers will then be
used in self-condensing polymerization to prepare several hyperbranched polymers
with interesting structural and mechanical properties. This research has the
potential to lay the foundation for the synthesis of new class of plastics with
controlled macromolecular structures. The project will also serve as an
excellent vehicle for training students in polymer chemistry and catalysis. A
chemistry-themed educational outreach with demonstrations at the Science Museum
of West Virginia will focus on polymers in the modern world and how their
properties are dependent on chemical structure. A travelling kit will also be
developed for visits to rural communities that are under-resourced in science
education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus on controlled synthesis
of hyperbranched polymers using ruthenium-catalyzed self-condensing ring opening
metathesis polymerization (ROMP). The central approach will involve the
preparation of latent-initiating olefin metathesis catalysts with modified
benzylidene ligands that will be coupled to a ROMP monomer, producing an olefin
metathesis inimer. The synthesized inimers will be systematically investigated
to examine the effects of structural modification on latency control,
activation, and polymerization properties. Successful candidates will then be
used to prepare hyperbranched polymers. A strong focus will be on investigating
the interplay among polymerization conditions, polymerization kinetics,
hyperbranched structures, and strategies for end-group modification. Lastly,
structure-property relationships in the synthesized polymers will be
systematically investigated. This project has the potential to produce a
powerful strategy to synthesize hyperbranched ROMP polymers with controlled
branching, repeat-unit functionality, and end-groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.