* 2237095
* CAREER: Facilitating Intergroup Communication and Cooperation
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Hirokazu Shirado, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 02/29/2028
* USD 85,253.00

This project promotes theoretical both understanding and technology development
on the topic of facilitating communication and cooperation between distinct
groups. Effective intergroup communication provides a number of benefits to
society, including stronger civic engagement, better cooperation, and increased
resources for the whole. However, groups face challenges trusting each other in
collective action; in-group versus out-group effects are known to lead to
negative stereotyping and exclusion of other groups, reducing the chances of
beneficial communication and cooperation at both the individual and the social
level. This project aims to leverage an emerging understanding of communication
behavior, along with techniques from network science, economics, and natural
language processing, to increase the chance that people successfully bridge
these differences and form stronger cooperative and civic
ties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve its goals, the project will develop models
of intergroup communication and the influence of cooperation in social networks
to inform interventions that improve communication and cooperation in online
contexts. The investigators will first develop an experimental system to examine
communication and connection patterns for cooperation under circumstances where
there is group identity in human networks. Then, the team will iteratively
design algorithms that use natural language processing and conversational AI
techniques, along with network science and user modeling methods, to suggest
conversation partners, topics, and styles that may help people make connections
across groups more effectively. These will be tested with a combination of
laboratory and field studies to measure the effectiveness of the developed
interventions with robust causality and external validity. Together, the project
will improve understanding of how technology might help a diverse society such
as ours operate more effectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.