* 2237243
* CAREER: Effective Continuum Modeling of Mechanism-Based Metamaterials
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Paul Plucinsky, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 06/30/2028
* USD 503,167.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will support fundamental
research on the mechanical response of a wide range of morphing metamaterials
that take inspiration from popular artforms like origami and kirigami. Morphing
metamaterials are cell-based patterns of stiff panels, connected at flexible
hinges or folds, designed to achieve large overall shape-change at little
overall stress. They are promising materials for many applications, including
for locomotion in soft robotics and for deployment of medical devices and
satellites. However, their mechanical behavior arises from a multiscale coupling
that is challenging to model: collective cellwise elastic interactions, large
panel rotations, and localized distortion at the hinges or folds. This study
aims to develop modeling tools capable of efficiently navigating the design
space of these materials and predicting their response under a broad range of
loads and stimuli. The award also integrates research into educational and
outreach efforts that embrace the diversity of the Los Angeles community. The
outreach effort includes summer research opportunities for undergraduate
students from Cal State LA, a minority serving regional university, and for
local high school students through USC Viterbi’s Summer High School Intensive in
Next Generation Engineering (SHINE) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project seeks to lay a theoretical foundation to effective continuum modeling of
mechanism-based morphing metamaterials. The key objective is to replace the
complex micro-motions of the metamaterials building blocks by an effective
(cell-averaged) continuum deformation and auxiliary fields, with the goal of
coarse graining the material’s collective elastic interactions at the
engineering scale. Far from being a constitutive choice, this study will employ
rigorous asymptotic analysis methods, calculus of variations, and geometric
rigidity to demonstrate that effective continuum theories underlie the mechanics
of a host of morphing metamaterials. This theoretical development will enable
practical continuum constitutive models that link the geometric design of the
metamaterial directly to models of generalized elastic continua that are
efficient to simulate and predictive. The knowledge gained will lead to broadly
applicable tools to explore the design-property relationship of morphing
metamaterials, as well as novel insight into their behavior under
loads.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.