* 2237017
* CAREER: How do mixotroph phenotypic plasticity and adaptive evolution constrain climate feedbacks?
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Holly Moeller, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 04/30/2028
* USD 100,986.00

In the ocean, plankton that do photosynthesis remove carbon dioxide from the
atmosphere, while plankton that respire carbon from captured prey return carbon
dioxide to the atmosphere. One special type of plankton called mixotrophs
combine both forms of metabolism, functioning as both plant and animal
simultaneously. Because the extent to which mixotrophs rely on each process
depends on environmental conditions, it can be difficult to predict their net
impact on the carbon cycle. This is especially true in changing environments.
For example, as Earth’s surface ocean temperatures increase, mixotrophs may
respond both plastically (through reversible modifications of their
physiological state) and through rapid evolution. This project combines
mathematical models and laboratory experiments to test the hypothesis that more
phenotypically plastic mixotrophs will not evolve as rapidly because their
inherent metabolic flexibility will reduce the strength of natural selection.
The project also supports training and outreach designed to broaden
participation and expand math literacy. Project personnel will train K-12
teachers, provide educational programs for museum visitors, and conduct
undergraduate teaching at the intersection of mathematics and biology.
Undergraduate trainees will also lead independent research projects and develop
science education modules that allow high school students to quantify the
effects of temperature on biology. Postdoctoral and undergraduate researchers
receive training and professional development as part of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To link mixotroph phenotypic plasticity and
evolution to climate feedbacks, researchers are integrating experiments with
mathematical models. A number of mixotroph genotypes from the genus Ochromonas
will be phenotyped, and a subset will be experimentally evolved to test their
capacity for adaptive evolution. Researchers are measuring rates of
photosynthesis and phagotrophy in evolved lineages to quantify impacts on the
carbon cycle, and genome and transcriptome sequencing are being used to identify
the molecular basis of adaptation. A series of mathematical models will be
developed to understand the mechanistic bases of plasticity and evolution, and
to connect these mechanisms to their climate impacts. First, researchers use a
model of cellular investments to contrast empirical results with predictions of
mixotrophs’ optimal plastic and evolved strategies. Validated model modules is
being incorporated into upper ocean global ecosystem models to understand how
these strategies change mixotroph abundance and contributions to the carbon
cycle under future climate scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funds for this award
are provided by the Biological Oceanography and Ocean Education
Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.