* 2237097
* CAREER: Co-Designing Hands-Free Cognitive Aids with Fast-Paced Medical Teams
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Zhan Zhang, Pace University New York Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 05/31/2028
* USD 119,878.00

Humans have limited capacity for processing information and recognizing critical
events, which can lead to errors when this capacity is exceeded. In safety-
critical areas such as medicine, such errors can lead to serious consequences,
especially in the many cases where these errors might be preventable. A common
cause of medical errors is when health workers lack situational awareness --
knowing what is going on within an environment and predicting what is likely to
happen next -- and make mistakes based on this lack of awareness. This project
looks to reduce these mistakes through developing novel computing and
interaction techniques that support situational awareness for physically and
cognitively preoccupied health workers who are part of emergency medical
services (EMS) teams that provide urgent medical care in the field. The research
team will work closely with EMS providers to understand their cognitive needs
and develop hands-free, minimally distracting cognitive aids that support their
situational awareness and decision-making in fast-paced crisis response
situations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this research is to
determine how to support fast-response medical teams’ awareness of context-
specific information and activities while accounting for their limited capacity
in processing information and ability to interact with handheld computing
devices while doing their job. The project is structured around three main aims.
The first is to deeply understand the cognitive needs of care providers during
time-critical medical events; this will be accomplished by analyzing simulation
videos, eye-tracking data, and artifacts, along with observational field studies
and interviews with EMS workers. The second is to design and develop hands-free
cognitive aids for fast-response medical teams, through a series of
participatory design workshops and usability evaluation activities grounded in
socio-technical models of health information technology implementation. The
third is to conduct summative assessment of a functional prototype through
deploying it in training simulations, measuring task performance and patient
outcomes along with effects on workers’ situational awareness and cognitive
load. Together, the research will produce scientific knowledge and design
implications related to situational awareness, hands-free technologies, and
human computer interaction. The project will also promote interdisciplinary
education and research through involving a diverse group of high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students, while providing the basis for developing a
rich outreach program to medical workers and health technology industry
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.