* 2237616
* CAREER: Advancing Efficient Global Optimization of Extremely Expensive Functions under Uncertainty using Structure-Exploiting Bayesian Methods
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Joel Paulson, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 01/31/2028
* USD 410,524.00

Mathematical optimization is the process of maximizing a performance or quality
indicator by identifying the best possible value among the set of all feasible
options. Optimization problems arise in virtually all human endeavors related to
decision making including engineering, economics, sustainability, healthcare,
and manufacturing. Instances of such optimization problems are particularly
challenging to solve whenever evaluating performance and/or testing for
feasibility requires an expensive simulation or experiment whose results may be
corrupted by random errors. Bayesian optimization (BO) is a class of machine
learning-based optimization algorithms that has recently been shown to achieve
state-of-the-art performance in several important applications from this problem
class such as in deep machine learning, validation of expensive simulators, and
material and drug design. However, traditional BO methods treat the mathematical
functions that model performance and feasibility as black boxes with unknown
structure, which sets a fundamental limit on their computational efficiency.
This observation is the key motivation for this research project, which looks to
overcome these efficiency barriers via the development of new algorithms that
exploit known problem structures within the Bayesian framework. These novel
capabilities will be applied to three unsolved problems currently impacting
society: (1) identifying unknown mechanisms in cellular decision-making
processes for biomanufacturing; (2) discovery of new sustainable and economical
lithium-ion battery electrode materials; and (3) real-time energy minimization
in industrial heating, ventilation, and air conditioning (HVAC) systems. In
addition, the project looks to tightly integrate research and educational
activities through the development of interactive workshops and games related to
decision science, which will be made accessible to the public. Through
collaboration with local educators, planned outreach activities also will
provide K-12 students from underrepresented communities with opportunities to
learn about decision science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed optimization
methodology is inspired by the principle of grey-box modeling, which states that
one should avoid learning what is already known when applying machine learning
methods. The investigator conjectures a significant reduction in experimental
and/or computational effort can be obtained in practice over traditional
Bayesian optimization (BO) methods by properly leveraging prior (or domain)
knowledge, which is almost always available in practice. Since prior knowledge
can come in many diverse forms, the proposed research will focus on some of the
most common and important examples. The three specific research aims are: (1)
optimizing with hybrid physics-based and data-driven models given noisy and
incomplete datasets; (2) optimizing with constrained multi-fidelity models that
fuse data from a collection of heterogeneous sources of variable accuracy and
cost; and (3) scaling to high-dimensional and sparse data problems through the
incorporation of non-myopic and graph-structured formulations. The proposed
research aims to promote convergence of statistics, machine learning,
optimization, and process systems engineering. More broadly, the improved
methods developed as a part of this research project will allow practitioners to
solve a wide range of grey-box optimization problems with greater speed and
accuracy. Planned outreach activities include educating K-12 students about
decision-making under uncertainty via interactive workshops and games,
incorporating new data-driven optimization material into the chemical
engineering curriculum, and organizing cross-disciplinary professional workshops
on the potential significance and impacts of cutting-edge BO
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.