* 2237440
* CAREER: Program Analysis with Precise Abstractions
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Qirun Zhang, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 06/30/2028
* USD 242,161.00

Program analysis techniques reason about program behavior and have been widely
used in software testing, bug finding, and quality assurance. In general, the
problem of static program analysis is undecidable. Practical program analyses
typically over-approximate program semantics via imprecise abstractions. This
project will devise precise program abstractions based on graph theory to make
program analysis techniques more reliable and usable. The project's novelties
are (1) providing a unified theory of precise abstractions that can be used to
design more principled analysis techniques with formal guarantees and (2)
enabling more scalable program analysis frameworks for tackling practical
analysis problems in emerging areas. The project's impacts are (1) increasing
the capability of building reliable software, (2) leading to more reliable and
usable program analysis frameworks for analyzing software artifacts, and (3)
advocating the fundamental concept of abstraction in
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to explore
theoretical developments and practical techniques centered around the InterDyck
graph abstraction. It focuses on developing a systematic framework to precisely
model program semantics and devise practical algorithms for solving the
reachability problem based on the InterDyck graph abstraction. This project
explores three main directions: (1) understanding the expressiveness and
limitations of the InterDyck graph abstraction; (2) developing efficient demand-
driven and exhaustive analysis algorithms for InterDyck-reachability; and (3)
promoting an integrated educational approach to teach program analysis based on
graph abstractions. If successful, the project will significantly enhance our
ability to reason about software, which is vital for the software reliability
upon which our society depends. Furthermore, the integrated research and
education activities will facilitate the construction of reliable
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.