* 2237710
* CAREER: Measuring real-time energy and fitness costs of metabolic and behavioral strategies employed by songbirds during inclement weather
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Jamie Cornelius, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 06/30/2028
* USD 678,895.00

Harsh weather can be difficult for animals to survive, especially when it is
unpredictable or extreme. During storms animals may seek shelter to save energy
and improve survival, but this may be difficult or have negative consequences on
their reproductive success if they are also trying to raise young. The decisions
that different individuals make can determine if they and their young survive to
raise the next generation and this will in turn determine if a species can
persist in a particular location. Storms have been increasing in frequency and
intensity in some areas of the world and simultaneously becoming less
predictable in when they occur. This may be particularly challenging to many
animals and, yet, very few studies have attempted to describe how animals make
decisions during storms, what types of metabolic traits might help them to
better survive during storms and how being a parent might change those
decisions. With this grant, researchers at Oregon State University will describe
how songbirds behave during storms in the wild and how those behaviors affect
their health and their ability to raise young. They will also carefully control
different aspects of weather, such as temperature, precipitation and wind, in
the lab to determine how these different factors impact the energy costs of
staying warm. Together this work will allow for a better understanding of why
species ranges may be contracting or expanding as the global climate changes and
will guide more efficient management and conservation goals. The proposed
educational and outreach plan seeks to advance representation of Native
Americans and other underrepresented groups in the biological sciences and to
connect communities across multiple agegroups in the context of natural history
and science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inclement weather may define species
distributional edges and may increasingly impact survival as climate change
exacerbates the frequency and severity of storms. There is wide variation in
individual survival within populations with little understanding of the
behavioral or physiological mechanisms underlying this differential survival.
Despite extensive work describing seasonal flexibility in the metabolic capacity
of endotherms in the lab and the impact of inclement weather on mortality and
reproductive fitness in the field, few have attempted to connect these bodies of
work and relate metabolic capacity to metrics of fitness during inclement
weather. The proposed research examines the impact of variable weather on
metabolism and behavior in a small-bodied songbird, the red crossbill (Loxia
curvirostra), within different seasonal contexts. This research leverages the
crossbill’s specialization on conifer seeds and opportunistic breeding behavior
to 1. Quantify how the duration, type and severity of inclement weather
influences songbird behavioral responses to and metabolic costs of acute
weather; 2. Determine how reproductive investment and foraging performance
change physiological and behavioral coping mechanisms employed during inclement
weather; and 3. Quantify how metabolic traits impact behavioral strategies,
performance and fitness metrics during and outside of inclement weather. These
research goals will be achieved using a combination of biotelemetry,
respirometry and blood physiology in both field and controlled-captive
environments. The proposed experiments integrate ecophysiology, behavior and
natural history to advance our understanding of why some individuals are more
resilient than others in the face of environmental adversity. The PI will
utilize the scholarship and guidance of experts on Native Americans mentorship
to develop an Indigenous Mentoring Plan (IMP) prior to recruit Native Americans
students to the project. IMPs focus on key factors that increase positive
outcomes of mentorship, including: community building, relationship building and
incorporation of indigenous viewpoints and approaches to
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by the Animal Behavior
program in Integrative Organismal Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.