* 2237807
* CAREER: Full-vector Characterization of the recent (0-5 Myr) Geomagnetic field using novel magnetic field recorder
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Courtney Sprain, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2028
* USD 136,925.00

Earth’s magnetic field acts as a shield that protects Earth from dangerous
magnetic storms and cosmic radiation which have the potential to damage
technical infrastructure, strip away Earth’s atmosphere, and ultimately harm
life. Due to its importance to habitability and modern technical infrastructure,
it is critical to understand how Earth’s magnetic field has varied through
Earth’s past, in addition to how it might change in the future. To do this, it
is necessary to characterize the spatial and temporal variations of the magnetic
field using paleomagnetism, in which ancient records of the field are measured
from rocks. Due to a sparsity of paleomagnetic data and gaps in paleomagnetic
education and training, our ability to understand past behavior and predict
future behavior is hampered. This project aims to improve the characterization
of geomagnetic field behavior by filling in important data gaps in the current
paleomagnetic record using a novel recorder of geomagnetic field behavior,
clinkers, or rocks baked and burned by coal seam fires from the Powder River
Basin, USA. This aim will be further enhanced through the development of a new
paleomagnetism general education course and experiential learning research
experience on clinkers as part of the University of Florida’s (UF) Quest
program, and the development of a paleomagnetism-focused workshop for high-
school age 4-H club members as a part of UF Extension Services’ program, 4-H
University. These programs will educate a broad and diverse audience in the
fields of paleomagnetism and Earth Science, while simultaneously attracting new
students to Earth Science degrees, paleomagnetic research, and ultimately the
STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite being a fundamental feature of our
planet, our understanding of Earth’s magnetic field is incomplete. Currently,
there are many gaps in the state of knowledge including: 1) what drives the
magnetic field? 2) what causes magnetic reversals? and 3) how does the magnetic
field vary spatially? These gaps in knowledge are further exacerbated by an
education gap. Paleomagnetism can provide insight into multiple geoscience
disciplines, yet as a topic it typically receives little attention in geoscience
training. This impacts the ability of the geoscience community to understand
paleomagnetic research in addition to the ability to fill in critical gaps in
understanding of the magnetic field. What is needed to fill in these critical
gaps is both more high-quality full-vector (direction and intensity)
paleomagnetic data in addition to a trained workforce to collect and analyze
these data. The aim of this project is to fill these needs by improving the
characterization of recent (0–5 Myr) geomagnetic field behavior using a novel
recorder of geomagnetic field behavior, clinkers. Clinkers, rocks baked and
burned by coal seam fires, are an exciting new candidate for obtaining high-
quality full-vector magnetic records as they occur throughout the world, are
located in regions lacking magnetic data, can be reliably dated, and are
reliable full-vector magnetic recorders. In this project, state-of-the-art
paleomagnetic and geochronologic techniques will be utilized, generating a semi-
continuous, high-resolution, full-vector record of magnetic field variations for
Quaternary to Pliocene (0–5 Myr) age clinker deposits from the Powder River
Basin (PRB), USA. This research is the first step in building a reliable
methodology to expand work on clinker deposits outside of the PRB. The education
and outreach components of this project will train the next generation of
paleomagnetists, broaden the understanding of paleomagnetic research within the
geosciences and the general population, and enhance the participation of
underrepresented groups in the field. This project is an early step in a
continuum of research and education that will lead to an improved global
characterization of the magnetic field. More generally, this project addresses
science priority question one, “How is Earth’s internal field generated?”,
released in the National Academies decadal report for NSF-
EAR.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.