* 2237568
* CAREER: Uncovering the regulation of low fidelity mRNA splicing
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Athma Pai, University of Massachusetts Medical School
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 01/31/2028
* USD 591,414.00

The central dogma of molecular biology involves the synthesis of ribonucleic
acid (RNA) from the genes defined in deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) molecules. Some
of these RNA molecules then act as messengers that shuttle instructional
blueprints to enable proper cellular function. The informational content encoded
by RNA is amplified by the process of splicing, which enables the creation of
dozens of different RNA molecules from a single gene sequence. The process of
splicing is very complex, with one of the largest molecular complexes and many
auxiliary factors working together to coordinate the precise levels and
compositions of messenger RNAs. This intricacy opens the door for noise and
errors in splicing that may comprise a substantial fraction of RNA output in a
cell. While quality control mechanisms to check for and correct such errors have
been identified over the last decade, less is known about how often these errors
occur and why certain erroneous RNAs escape detection and removal. This project
will use novel genomics and computational tools to identify directly and
quantify erroneously spliced RNAs, gaining a better understanding of the
regulation of proper RNA synthesis for cellular function. More broadly, the
project aims to teach the cross-cutting skills of biological data analysis to up
and coming researchers and educators by (1) hosting Worcester area
undergraduates for a combined summer research and outreach experience in
computational biology and (2) facilitating an enrichment program at UMass Chan
Medical School for Worcester Public School science
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For decades, the process of mRNA splicing was
thought to be highly efficient, with little opportunity for deviation outside of
regulated alternative splicing decisions. This idea led to a widespread
perspective that all alternative mRNA isoforms must be regulated and,
potentially, have biological function. Recently, however, researchers have
identified pervasive, non-canonical splice site choice, including those at low-
fidelity spliceosome binding sequences. These discoveries suggest that there is
widespread error and cryptic splice site usage by mRNA splicing mechanisms, with
unexplored roles for stochastic, biological noise in shaping metazoan
transcriptome diversity. This project will use high-throughput sequencing of
nascent RNA to track splicing intermediates through cellular compartments,
creating a catalog of cryptic splice sites and examining genetic and biochemical
features associated with these events. These studies will provide insight into
how and when undesirable splicing products escape or are pruned by mRNA quality
control mechanisms. Leveraging this catalog, a statistical model will be built
to enable a predictive understanding of cryptic splice site usage and employ
gene editing tools to test predictions from this model. The long-term research
goal of this project is to define what constitutes noise in mRNA splicing and
use these studies to redefine the mRNA splicing code.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.