* 2237537
* CAREER: Scale-dependent reduced-order models for turbulent flows
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2027
* Aaron Towne, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 11/30/2027
* USD 415,471.00

Turbulent flows are ubiquitous in science and engineering, and their wide range
of spatial and temporal scales make them simultaneously expensive to simulate
and challenging to model. Effective reduced-order models that can be used in
place of costly simulations are urgently needed to accelerate scientific
discovery, engineering design, and control of turbulent flows. This project will
fill this need by developing a new class of reduced-order models that, by
respecting key aspects of turbulent flow physics, overcome longstanding
limitations of previous methods. These new tools will be applicable to a wide
range of turbulent flows and can be applied by researchers in academia,
government labs, and industry to achieve objectives such as preventing the
adverse health effects of excessive noise exposure by mitigating acoustic
emissions of jet engines and wind turbines and improving our understanding of
climate change by enhancing predictive modeling capabilities of geological
flows. The research program is closely integrated with a comprehensive education
program, the central component of which is a series of professionally produced
videos, each spotlighting a key contributor to the field of fluid dynamics and
the impactful problems they work on. By highlighting a diverse set of
researchers and focusing on not just the science, but also the scientist, the
videos will help empower students from underrepresented populations to envision
themselves as future fluid-dynamics researchers, broadening participation in
STEM and diversifying the workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical goal of
the project is to develop a pair of new models tailored for long- and short-time
prediction of turbulent flows. The critical observation is that typical reduced-
order models based on expansion of the flow state into spatial modes and time-
varying coefficients, such as standard Galerkin models and their modern
alternatives, violate the intimate physical relationship between spatial and
temporal scales of the flow. By working within a nascent space-time modeling
framework, in which the flow state is expanded into modes that depend on both
space and time, and strategically selecting the temporal basis functions, the
proposed approach respects the physical relationship between spatial and
temporal scales. Critical tasks to bring this framework to maturation include
developing optimal spatial bases, sparsifying triadic nonlinear interactions,
and deriving error estimates. To accelerate and streamline their adoption, the
methods developed during this project will be incorporated into the open-source
platform Pressio maintained by Sandia National
Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.