* 2237585
* CAREER: HCC: Designing Visualizations to Support Critical Thinking and Calibrated Trust in Data
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Ya Yang Xiong, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 06/30/2028
* USD 94,327.00

People often use data visualizations to understand, communicate, and make
decisions about important questions in science, education, healthcare, and other
domains. However, data visualization is not neutral; choices about what to
visualize and how to visualize it can impact how a viewer interprets the
visualization, especially when they don’t have access to the underlying data.
This fact raises important questions about how and whether people trust their
interactions with visualized data, and how visualization designers can help
viewers develop appropriately calibrated trust (not overtrusting unreliable
inferences nor undertrusting meaningful relationships) in the visualization.
This project’s goal is to advance research around assessing and designing for
trust calibration in visualizations: creating appropriate measures of trust in
human-data interaction, building models of how visualization design choices can
impact trust, and developing design guidelines for both creators and consumers
of visualizations to help them identify signs of trust and mistrust in
visualized data. The project team will also create visualization tools,
educational materials, and empirical data to help researchers, policymakers, and
members of the general public think about trustworthy computing and
visualization ethics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is structured around
three research objectives. First, referencing theories and research
methodologies from social sciences, the project team will produce a collection
of methods to reliably measure user trust in data visualizations. Second, using
these methods, the team will conduct a systematic series of empirical studies
that identify which visualization design factors can drive critical thinking and
calibrated trust. These factors will include manipulations of the perceived
clarity, complexity, accuracy, and amount of data, using real-world datasets
across multiple domains related to public policy and finance. The use of such
diverse data will allow the team to identify domain-specific versus
generalizable visualization elements that promote critical thinking and
calibrated trust. The third objective is a formal evaluation of these guidelines
through testing prototype visualizations and visualization systems that
facilitate calibrated trust. This will involve field studies and interviews with
researchers, practitioners, and members of the general public to examine the
effectiveness of the trust guidelines and identify ethical practices for
trustworthy visual data communication. The team will also develop
interdisciplinary coursework and initiatives that bring together computer
science, public policy, psychology, and behavioral economics to advance practice
and education around visual data communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.