* 2237390
* CAREER: Characterizing germ granule diversity and its influence on germline development in Drosophila
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Matthew Niepielko, Kean University
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 01/31/2028
* USD 164,735.00

Animal reproduction requires highly specialized cells that can pass on genetic
information to the following generation. These cells, collectively known as the
germline, contain cellular structures called germ granules, which house
different types of biomolecules that are responsible for ensuring germline
function. The overall research goal for this project is to understand how the
contents of germ granules can be changed to influence animal development and
reproduction. The experiments proposed will be performed within the included
Education and Research Integration Plan which establishes New Jersey’s Research
Alliance for Inclusive STEM Education. This new, three-phase program is designed
to elevate research opportunities for underrepresented groups via multi-
institution collaboration between local high schools, Kean University, and
Princeton University. The proposal offers microscopy training and an outreach
plan that uses biological images to promote enthusiasm about science throughout
the community. Together, this project aims to shed light on mechanisms that can
influence animal reproduction, supports the development of a diverse and
competitive scientific workforce, improves education with hands-on research
training and community engagement, and serves as a model for formalizing
partnerships between high schools and research
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Different Drosophila species display
remarkable diversity in the abundance of certain transcripts that reside within
germ granules. This project seeks to identify the mechanisms that control germ
granule diversity and explore how such variations influence germline development
and reproduction. The PI hypothesizes that diversity in germ granule mRNA
content is cooperatively regulated by three mechanisms: differences in mRNA
expression levels, variations in germ granules’ mRNA carrying capacity, and
changes to the efficacy with which mRNAs become incorporated into granules. Aim
1 further characterizes germ granule diversity by quantifying the abundance in
individual granules of mRNA from ten genes and comparing them across ten
Drosophila species using single molecule in situ hybridization and quantitative
imaging. Aim 2 combines biological data with computational modeling to measure
the impact of each mechanism on germ granule mRNA content. The efficacy with
which transcripts populate germ granules can be regulated by cis-acting elements
in the 3′ UTR of each transcript. Using genome editing, Aim 3 investigates
whether evolutionary differences within 3′ UTRs can alter germ granule mRNA
content and germline development. Different classes of granules share similar
components, and discoveries from this project may have broader implications for
other types of biomolecular condensates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-
funded by the Genetic Mechanisms Program in the Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences Division and the Developmental Systems Program in the Integrative
Organismal Systems Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.