* 2237461
* SBP: CAREER: Mechanistic Dehumanization of Asians: Identifying Causes, Consequences, and Countermeasures for a More Inclusive STEM Workforce
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2028
* Franki Kung, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Allen McConnell
* 06/30/2028
* USD 545,825.00

To build a more inclusive society, diverse members in our communities must be
treated fairly and kindly. However, as evidenced by recent events (e.g.,
COVID-19 pandemic), Asian Americans and Asians in the U.S. face biases from
lacking leadership opportunities, receiving little social acceptance and
support, to experiencing racialized verbal and physical attacks. These biases
occur even in places where Asians are well-represented such as STEM schools and
workplaces. Past theory and research have documented several stereotypes that
explain why biases against Asians can occur (e.g., being seen as foreign and
high achieving). The current project expands on past work by exploring a unique
contributor to biases against Asians based on interdisciplinary research on
dehumanization. Specifically, it is proposed that Asians have historically been
viewed in the U.S. as like machines or robotics, indicating that they are
subject to “mechanistic dehumanization.” Integrating this dehumanization
perspective with social and industrial-organizational psychology research, this
project develops a theoretical model to explain how Asians in the U.S. are
impacted by mechanistic dehumanization. It also documents the psychological
processes that can contribute to potential interventions to encourage people to
see the humanity in others.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is organized
around a set of qualitative (e.g., focus groups) and quantitative (e.g.,
surveys, experiments) studies to examine the causes, consequences, and
countermeasures of mechanistic dehumanization of Asians in the context of STEM
workplaces and educational settings. Asian communities in the U.S. are diverse,
and this project focuses on East Asian, South Asian, and Southeast Asian (i.e.,
the major Asian subgroups in the U.S.) targets while including members of
diverse racial and ethnic backgrounds as participants. The project unpacks key
subfactors of mechanistic dehumanization, such as perceived submissiveness and
lack of emotions, and it develops an instrument to scientifically assess this
concept. Using this measure, the project will systematically explore three
objectives. First, it determines the extent to which mechanistic dehumanization
can explain biases against Asians (e.g., lack of social support at school and at
work). Second, it exposes the psychological processes explaining why mechanistic
dehumanization may underlie these biases. Third, it uncovers causes (e.g., group
and cultural differences) that make Asians in the U.S. more vulnerable to
mechanistic dehumanization. The project also develops anti-dehumanization
educational materials to increase awareness of these issues and to improve
equity and inclusion in social, educational, and organizational
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.