* 2237291
* CAREER: Development of a Measurement System to Quantify Natural and Anthropogenic Metal-Containing Nanoparticles in Environmental Samples
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Alexander Gundlach-Graham, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 06/30/2028
* USD 369,318.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Alexander Gundlach-Graham and his research group at Iowa State
University are working to improve the detection and quantification of
anthropogenic nanoparticles and microparticles in environmental samples.
Nanoparticle pollution is a contemporary public health concern. For the
foreseeable future, production and application of engineered nanoparticles and
exposure to incidental nanoparticles produced through human activities are
expected to increase. Thus, the development of analytical tools to accurately
measure, characterize, and monitor these species is critical to understanding
the extent—and predicting the impact—of nanoparticle pollution. The Gundlach-
Graham group will advance the use of trace-element mass spectrometry as a tool
to detect, quantify, and classify anthropogenic nanomaterials at extremely low
concentrations. They will develop novel instrumental approaches and open-source
software tools to improve the throughput and accuracy of particle measurements.
As part of this project, the team will also generate and implement new
educational materials to teach advanced data analysis strategies as part of
analytical chemistry curricula.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Nanoparticles in
environmental samples are difficult to detect because they are small (hundreds
to millions of atoms), dilute in terms of total mass concentration, and are
often present in complex, particle-rich matrices that contain naturally
occurring particulates. The aim of this research is to develop a robust high-
throughput measurement system for the quantification and classification of
metal-containing nanoparticles and microparticles from diverse sample types. To
meet this goal, the Gundlach-Graham group will develop novel calibration
approaches and data-processing strategies for the analysis of nanoparticles by
single-particle inductively coupled plasma time-of-flight mass spectrometry
(spICP-TOFMS). Specifically, the team will advance the use of multi-element
fingerprints to separate natural NPs from anthropogenic NPs, investigate
unsupervised machine learning approaches to identify novel particle classes, and
create open-source software tools for the accurate and robust quantification of
particle types by spICP-TOFMS. These developments are expected to improve the
ability of scientists to track nanoparticulates and to understand the fate and
transport of contaminating particles in the environment. In the educational
component of this proposal, the team will develop computer-based learning
modules to teach basic concepts of computer programming, Monte Carlo simulation,
and data analysis strategies to analytical chemistry students; these resources
will be freely available and published open access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.