* 2237325
* I-Corps: Machine Learning and Bio-Signal Processing for Enhancing Empathy Training
* TIP,TI
* 09/15/2022,02/29/2024
* Pattie Maes, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 02/29/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of learning programs and tools to develop empathetic and inclusive
behaviors. The proposed technology may offer an alternative to current
solutions, such as coaching (typically only accessible to top executives due to
high-cost implications) and didactic training (e.g., often mandatory online
tutorials or workshops, mostly disconnected from employees’ day to day needs).
The goal is to provide a tool to be used during day-to-day work, rather than
only in training or coaching sessions. The proposed technology may have broad
applications, ranging from the early therapeutic support of children with Autism
Spectrum Disorders and their families, enhancing medical staff’s ability to
empathize with patients in the context of telemedicine, managers’ inclusive
leadership behaviors, military leaders’ ability to empathize and resolve
conflicts, and even assisting couples and families with their personal
relationships. The proposed technology may be an effective, user-driven,
ethical, and accessible way to generate insights into the emotional dynamics of
people’s interactions, while generating useful metrics to track and steer
progress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of an artificial intelligence (AI)-based bio-signal analysis system aiming to
help people enhance their ability to empathize. The proposed technology analyzes
a set of bio-signals from people engaging in video calls (e.g., tone of voice,
facial expressions, use of language, breathing rate, etc.) with the help of
machine learning and a recently developed ultrasound signal processing
algorithm. The system then creates a continuous feedback loop making each
interlocutor aware of their own and their conversational partner’s evolving
emotions. The laboratory experiments performed with early prototypes have
provided an initial proof-of-concept - participants have experienced the
emergence of empathy-related and inclusive behaviors including a higher
awareness of their own and other’s emotions (pausing, reflecting, inquiry, and
using pro-social language), as well as a positive learner experience. These
insights form the basis of actionable feedback for users to develop more
inclusive behaviors. The high accuracy of evaluating emotions based on multi-
modal biosignal fusion and distributed AI, and its ability to provide rich
feedback in real-time with the help of custom-made biosignal processing
algorithms provides opportunities for further development and commercial
application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.