* 2237580
* CAREER: Mass Incarceration, Racial Segregation, and Spillover Effects in U.S. Communities
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Jessica Simes, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 06/30/2028
* USD 114,657.00

This project investigates the causes and consequences of mass incarceration
within U.S. communities and neighborhoods. The overarching goal is to study how
residential inequalities drive incarceration rates and disparities, and how
neighborhood exposures to the criminal justice system affect the well-being and
political participation of community members. The first part of the project
evaluates and tests place-based mechanisms, specifically segregation and housing
conditions, that may be driving disparities between demographic groups and
shifts in incarceration over time. This part of the study seeks to understand
how contemporary incarceration rates and disparities emerge from both historical
residential patterns and recent changes in U.S. communities. The second part of
the project examines how multiple, interrelated criminal justice system
exposures, from contact to imprisonment, may accumulate to affect community
well-being and political participation. An open criminal justice data project
establishes a replicable system of data collection, processing, archiving, and
analysis that coincides with an interdisciplinary educational program of
courses, practicums, and symposia. The integrated research and educational aims
of this project expand the participation of underserved students in STEM, share
newly collected data on criminal justice exposures with the public, and provide
useful insights for interventions addressing inequality and mass
incarceration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To better understand rates of and
disparities in criminal justice contact, as well as their influence on community
well-being and democratic membership, this project focuses on the measurement
and influence of place-based mechanismsâ€”specifically, residential segregation
and neighborhood effects. The two studies that comprise this project integrate
data science methodologies, machine learning, spatial analysis, and quasi-
experimental design to test theories relating segregation to mass incarceration
and community-level spillover effects. To do so, these studies combine rarely
accessible geocoded data on policing and incarceration with detailed individual-
level data on voting and mortality. By combining top-down sociological theories
of place and punishment with bottom-up data science and machine-learning
techniques, this project brings new evidence to bear on these theories and
contributes synergistic new methods to the fields of sociology, data science,
and their application.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.