* 2237898
* CAREER: Engineering Autonomic Control of Cardiac Tissues
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Tracy Hookway, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 02/29/2028
* USD 397,457.00

The human heart is a critical organ that is responsible for pumping blood to the
rest of the body. This pump is able to speed up or slow down to ensure enough
blood is carried throughout our bodies during times of activity or during times
of rest. The heart is able to achieve this variation in pumping rate through
control by the nervous system. Neurons send signals to the heart to change the
beat rate and help make sure the heart beats in unison. This Faculty Early
Career Development (CAREER) project supports fundamental research to understand
how neurons connect to the heart and improve heart function. This research will
be achieved by using stem cells in three-dimensional engineered structures to
examine how the neurons connect to the heart cells and how the electrical
stimulus from the neurons improves beating heart function. Results will help
advance knowledge of heart biology, will promote engineering solutions for
potential future therapies, and can be used as a drug screening platform. This
project is fully integrated with community outreach in the Southern Tier of NY.
which is demonstrated through the development of biomedical engineering teaching
modules for high school classrooms in local rural
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator’s long-term career goal is to
become a scientific leader in the fields of stem cell and tissue engineering
with a specific focus on cardiovascular tissue models and biomanufacturing.
Towards this goal, the goal of this CAREER project is to interrogate the role of
autonomic neural stimulation on the function of engineered cardiac tissues in
vitro. A detailed understanding of the multicellular interactions that occur in
the heart is a necessary, but challenging, aspect to improve the performance of
engineered cardiac models. The research and education plan is organized under 3
separate objectives. The first objective is to engineer heterotypic
multicellular models to measure the effects of autonomic innervation on cardiac
contractile behavior and cellular composition. To achieve this, pluripotent stem
cells will be differentiated into sympathetic and parasympathetic neurons. These
neuronal cell populations will be mixed with cardiomyocytes at different
developmental stages to investigate their influence over beat rate, contraction
force, and calcium handling kinetics. The second objective is to develop a
variable frequency electrical stimulation bioreactor to mimic the signals that
the cardiomyocytes receive from the autonomic neurons. Cardiac tissues will be
cultured under variable electrical stimulation and their contractile properties
will be compared directly to innervated and non-innervated tissues to determine
if variable electrical stimulation improves cardiac tissue responses to stress
exposure. The third objective is to achieve research and educational integration
through activities for high school students and undergraduate students
incorporating tissue engineering, cardiovascular physiology, biomanufacturing,
and stem cell biology. As part of the outreach efforts, a series of STEM based
games will be developed and used as a centerpiece for community outreach in
local, rural school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.