* 2237371
* CAREER: Engineering in Youth-led Technology-rich Settings: Promoting Belonging and Preventing Harm
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Avneet Hira, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 07/31/2028
* USD 158,654.00

We live in a world where we increasingly use technology to do essential daily
tasks, and the number of STEM and non-STEM jobs that use technology is steadily
increasing. Yet, only students who have access to expensive resources or see
themselves as people who are good with technology due to many factors, including
images in popular media, have opportunities to develop comfort and fluency in
engineering and technology. This dynamic adversely impacts individuals who have
been historically minoritized in STEM fields. Often, youth do not engage with
engineering and technology because they feel like they do not "belong" in
engineering. In this project, middle and high school youth will lead the design
of spaces where different types of technologies (for example, 3d printers, laser
and vinyl cutters, microcontroller boards, sensors and other electronics, sewing
machines, and hand tools) will be used, by youth, to solve engineering problems
relevant to them in a low-stakes environment. The spaces will be designed with
two aims: 1) to support youth in developing a sense of belonging to the space
and in engineering; and 2) to consider preventing harm to communities and the
environment as central to their engineering problem-solving. The youth will also
work with the research team to develop ways to introduce the idea of preventing
harm to people and the environment as an essential tenet of engineering and
develop best practices to create similar youth-led technology-rich spaces. The
project will also bring together groups of coordinators who run such spaces and
students who are or might become leaders in such spaces, to learn from them and
support them in learning new ideas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using technology to
create artifacts aligned with students’ interests and motivations has great
promise in promoting inclusion and attracting students to engineering. However,
women, students from low socioeconomic backgrounds, and students from
underserved racial and ethnic groups remain underrepresented and underserved in
these inclusion efforts. A lack of sense of belonging in engineering and STEM
contexts plays a clear role, as do the inadvertent gatekeeping behaviors of
teachers, shop staff, and coordinators. This project addresses these barriers by
conducting youth participatory work to meet the unmet promises of technology-
rich spaces in engineering education. The project has two primary goals: Goal 1:
To support youth in leading explorations of how technology use and creation can
support a sense of belonging in engineering. Goal 2: To develop a framework
along with youth that centers preventing harm to people and the environment when
engineering. For the research component of this project, the team will develop
1) best practices to promote belonging in technology-rich settings and an
instrument to assess it, 2) a framework to center preventing harm in engineering
design practices, and 3) best practices for youth to lead the development and
maintenance of technology-rich engineering spaces. The educational plan of the
proposal will focus on integrating research findings with an engineering design
curriculum in a first-year engineering course and training and development
programs for informal engineering educators and youth leaders. This work will
significantly contribute to the PI’s long-term career vision to support
historically underserved students in using engineering and technology to live
lives of purpose and connection in an increasingly engineered
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.