* 2237479
* CAREER: Transforming the Future of Flexible Transistors with Photonic Processing
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2028
* Sarah Swisher, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 05/31/2028
* USD 458,699.00

Electronic devices have become an integral part of human life. From cell phones
and medical devices to cars and traffic monitors, we rely on electronic circuits
to keep us connected, healthy, and safe. While the vast majority of electronics
today are built using hard, rigid materials, electronics that are soft and
flexible are desirable for many applications. For example, wearable and
implantable biomedical sensors will benefit from advances in flexible
electronics that can bend and stretch to conform to the body. This research aims
to make transformative changes in the performance, stability, and durability of
flexible electronics. The proposed activities will generate a novel low-cost
approach to fabricating flexible circuits. Results from this work will enable
this novel fabrication approach to be used in a wide array of next-generation
flexible circuit applications including displays, biomedical sensors, and
durable lightweight electronics for military applications. In addition, a
synergistic combination of research and integrated education activities are
proposed that aim to inspire the next generation of electrical engineers and
increase engagement of women and under-represented minorities in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, flexible circuit technology is
readily available for passives (metals) but in applications such as displays and
sensors, flexible transistors (semiconductors) are needed. The thermal
properties and solvent compatibility of plastic substrates place severe
limitations on the fabrication of flexible thin-film transistors (TFTs), so TFT
performance is sacrificed to achieve flexible, lightweight circuits. To overcome
the fundamental tradeoff between the processing requirements of substrates and
TFTs, we will leverage new advancements in photonic processing technology to
produce high-performance flexible TFTs. Photonic curing uses short, intense
pulses of broadband light to heat a thin film, while most of the substrate
remains near room temperature. However, there is a compelling need to better
understand the physics of the photonic curing process and the quality of
photonically cured semiconductor TFTs. This research will pursue the following
four objectives: (1) Predict the 3D thermal profile in circuits during photonic
curing, and understand how geometry, device layout, proximity effects, and
material properties impact curing temperature; (2) Determine the impact of
photonic curing on trap states and electron transport in oxide semiconductors on
plastic substrates by combining electrical and materials characterizations with
a model of the density of electronic traps in the semiconductor; (3) Identify
failure mechanisms of the plastic substrate to enable the oxide semiconductor to
be more aggressively cured without damaging the substrates, and (4) Analyze
multiple simultaneous stress factors in flexible oxide TFTs to improve their
durability using a novel testing scheme that mimics a realistic operating
environment. This research will advance science by shedding new light on the
sub-millisecond interactions between light, heat, and thin-film semiconductor
materials. New models that predict the thermal profiles during large-area
photonic curing will enable this technology to be used in a wide array of
flexible circuit applications. Furthermore, these activities will also build a
firm foundation for the PI to pursue her long-term career goal of leading high-
impact collaborative projects with physicians and health care providers. She
aims to create innovative tools leading to a paradigm shift in how health care
is delivered in fields such as emergency triage, battlefield wound monitoring,
implantable neural interfaces, and soft wireless pediatric
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.