* 2237086
* CAREER: A Universal Microsystem-based Vibration Energy Harvester
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Nathan Jackson, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 05/31/2028
* USD 500,000.00

This project is jointly funded by the Electrical, Communications and Cyber
Systems (ECCS) and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR). With the growing demand for the Internet of Things, Cyber Physical
Systems, and Smart Buildings there will be a significant increase in wireless
sensor networks, all of which will require power to operate. However, batteries
have a limited lifetime, therefore there is a need to create a self-sustaining
system that can harvest energy from the ambient environment without the need of
batteries. Vibration-based energy harvesters have the advantage of functioning
24/7 and can be applied to almost all applications. Microsystems-based energy
harvesters have advantages such as small-scale and low cost, but there are
numerous challenges which have limited their success. This study will
investigate methods to solve those challenges and overcome the limitations. The
goal of this study is to create a universal low-frequency microsystem vibration
energy harvesting system to power these wireless sensor networks. The
investigated methods to solve these challenges have potential to be applied to
other microsystem applications to enhance sensor or actuating performance in the
future. The project will impact society as well as the scientific community. In
addition, this project aims to increase awareness of microsystems through an
interdisciplinary STEM education outreach program directed at undergraduate and
K-12 students. The program will develop outreach events to promote microsystems
and STEM education to underrepresented students. The study of microsystems is
interdisciplinary consisting of all STEM disciplines. The educational goal of
this project is to increase awareness of microsystems and how they impact our
daily lives to inspire the next generation of scientists and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Microsystem vibration energy harvesters have
been extensively investigated over the past decade but limitations due to their
micro-scale and mechanisms of actions have limited the systems from progressing
past the lab environment. There are four grand challenges that currently limit
their use: 1) narrow frequency bandwidth, 2) lack of frequency tunability, 3)
low power density, and 4) reliability. This study will investigate and develop
novel designs and microfabrication methods to address these challenges. The
research objective of this project is to enhance functionality of a low
frequency low acceleration piezoelectric microsystem energy harvester by
combining novel integration and actuation mechanisms to i) widen the bandwidth,
ii) perform wide range active/passive frequency tuning, and iii) enhance power
density using novel functional thin film material structures. Each component
will be designed and characterized individually and then integrated together to
develop a complete universal system that can overcome the current challenges
associated with micro-scale vibration energy harvesters. Non-linear dynamics
mechanisms to widen the bandwidth without significant decrease in power using
monolithically integrated movable proof-mass will be investigated. This will
result in a passive wide bandwidth system that does not require any additional
power consumption. Frequency tuning will be investigated using a novel mass load
distribution method that can be passive to increase manufacturability of the
devices and promote batch fabrication advantages of microsystems to obtain a
universal low-frequency system for multiple applications (&lt;250 Hz). An active
tuning mechanism based on mass load distribution with a targeted frequency range
of 200 Hz with a resolution of &lt;1 Hz will also be investigated. Power density
will be enhanced by developing new polarity controlled piezoelectric structures
by enhancing material properties of ternary nitride thin films. Integration of
these methods to create a monolithic all-in-one system requires novel
microfabrication methods which will be developed and can be applied to future
microsystem applications beyond energy harvesters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.