* 2237613
* CAREER: Phylogenetic scale-dependency of the patterns and processes of quantitative trait evolution
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2028
* Samantha Price, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 02/29/2028
* USD 276,564.00

All life is linked by common ancestry, as revealed by genetic and physical
similarities. This is depicted as a tree of life with a single root splitting
into many branches, which further split into smaller branches and so on, forming
nested groups of species known as clades. To understand the processes that
generated the astounding diversity of life on earth, biologists and
paleontologists conduct investigations at a variety of scales across this tree,
comparing amongst clades of different taxonomic rank (e.g., Genus, Family,
Order), size or age. Although rarely acknowledged, it is currently assumed that
the conclusions identified at one scale can be applied to all other scales.
However, this critical assumption is yet to be validated. This research will
investigate how predictable results are across scales, using the highly diverse
teleost fishes, which includes approximately half of all vertebrate species. The
researchers will determine if patterns of fish body shape evolution are
identical, random or vary systematically across scales. Establishing the
predictability of these patterns, and processes inferred from them, will
determine if and how conclusions drawn at one scale can be applied to another
scale. This will have broad implications for synthesizing results across fields
that work at different scales and in particular, the ability to connect studies
on fossils and living organisms. This project will also improve access to
undergraduate research opportunities, integrating students into the scientific
discovery process through the development of a Classroom-based Undergraduate
Research Experience, and publishing associated Open Educational Resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will build an empirical understanding of how
phylogenetic scale influences patterns and processes of quantitative trait
evolution. To accomplish this objective the researchers will build upon their
existing teleostean body shape dataset of approximately 16,000 specimens from
6,000 species. They will add measurements on a further 17,500 specimens from
around 4,500 species to provide denser sampling within species and at shallower
nodes in the phylogeny. Two complementary approaches to cross-scale analysis
will be used to identify scale-dependency and its predictability. The first will
apply mixed Gaussian phylogenetic models of quantitative trait evolution to the
full phylogenetic extent to identify parameter shifts; the second will
investigate patterns one scale at a time using more traditional phylogenetic
comparative methods. Using four ways of delimiting scale: clade age, clade size,
tree depth and taxonomic rank, the researchers will also quantify how patterns
of scale-dependency are influenced by the method chosen to define scale.
Simulations will be used to investigate the potential for statistical artifacts
and the influence of methodological and data limitations. These analyses will
determine whether phylogenetic scale-dependency is the exception or the rule.
The project will also include training opportunities at the undergraduate,
graduate student and postdoctoral levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.