* 2237743
* CAREER: Unraveling the Role of the Varying Ocean Circulation in Climate Change
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Wei Liu, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 04/30/2028
* USD 799,904.00

Varying ocean circulations play an important role in climate change. These
circulations are driven by surface winds and the changing buoyancy of the sea.
Separating the effects of wind- and buoyancy-driven ocean circulations on
climate change from the effects of other varying and interacting climate
components is difficult. By isolating and quantify the effects that drive the
ocean, the main goal of this project is to obtain an in-depth understanding of
the role of varying ocean circulations in on-going and future climate changes.
The work can help quantify the climate impacts of the ocean circulations (such
as storm track shift and tropical rain-belt migration), thereby advancing
climate predictions. Along with course developments and public outreach, the
project will train young scientists at the University of California
Riverside.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will apply a novel ensemble-
overriding method to multiple climate models to address several key questions:
(1) What are the effects of wind- and buoyancy-driven ocean circulation changes
under various anthropogenic forcings? (2) How to understand the coupled changes
in extratropical atmospheric circulation and wind-driven gyre circulation? (3)
How will Southern Ocean circulation change contribute to climate response to
anthropogenic forcing? (4) How to understand the distinct changes and climate
impacts of the simulated historical Atlantic meridional overturning circulations
between the latest two generations of climate models? The activities will help
train one postdoctoral scholar and one Ph.D. student. The investigator will
incorporate project results into an undergraduate course and mentor
undergraduate students in research at University of California Riverside,
conduct workshops and give public lectures at Museum of Riverside, and conduct
summer research program for Riverside Unified School District K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.