* 2237278
* CAREER: Investigating the Role of Modularity in the Diversification of the Acanthomorph Skull
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Kory Evans, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Balakrishnan
* 04/30/2028
* USD 961,754.00

The fish skull is a highly complex biological structure. It is highly multi-
functional, and accommodates the need to perform multiple tasks at the same
time, including feeding, sensing, and communication. Over its 300-million-year
history, the skull has undergone dramatic changes as different species have
adapted it to respond to differing and unique environmental pressures. Amongst
this diversity, spiny ray-finned fishes (Acanthomorpha) have emerged as one of
the most diverse animal groups, representing over 25% of all vertebrate species
diversity. This project will be first of its kind to analyze patterns of skull
shape evolution in its proper anatomical context. This study will advance the
understanding of how complex structures evolve. The results of this project
would also provide a framework for study of shape change across other complex
biological structures. The broader impacts of this project also feature a Marine
Biology Science Co-op and summer REU program in collaboration with San Jacinto
College. The study will produce a compilation of a large open source micro-CT
scan dataset for 1084 species of acanthomorph fishes while aiding in digitizing
efforts for museum collections worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modularity is
thought to play a key role in the evolution of complex morphologies by reducing
the “cost of complexity” which can reduce the rate of adaptation in populations
that exhibit strong integration between traits. This study will advance the
understanding of how complex structures evolve and the role that modularity
plays in this process. The research objectives of this work are (1) to quantify
the tempo and mode of skull shape evolution across 1084 acanthomorph fish
species using three dimensional geometric morphometrics collected from micro-
computed-tomography (micro-CT) scan data, (2) test for evolutionary modularity
across the acanthomorph skull, and (3) test for differences in the rate and
model of evolution across different modules of the acanthomorph fish skull. The
education component will consist of the development of a hands-on course module
to teach undergraduates about modularity in biological systems that will produce
an open-access anatomical review of the skull morphology of 308 families of
acanthomorph fishes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.