* 2237429
* CAREER: Quantifying Western Atlantic Climate and Seasonality  across the Plio-Pleistocene Regional Molluscan Extinction
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2028
* Sierra Petersen, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 06/30/2028
* USD 86,238.00

Over the past ~4 million years, 70-80% of mollusk species (clams, scallops,
etc.) living in the waters of the Atlantic &amp; Gulf Coasts have disappeared.
New species originated to replace those that went extinct, and the mollusk
population remains quite diverse today. The cause of this great turnover in
species has not been established. The primary hypothesis is that declining water
temperatures pushed out warm-water-loving species and replaced them with those
that could inhabit cooler waters. The researcher will produce robust,
quantitative temperature estimates from sites up and down the East Coast over
the past 3-5 million years and compare those to extinction patterns of marine
mollusks to test this hypothesis. In addition to addressing the root cause of
the extinction, these data will reveal information about the thermal tolerances
of studied mollusk species and determine whether those are fixed or flexible
(meaning a species could adapt to live in different water temperatures than it
currently inhabits). This will have implications for the survival of mollusks
living in American waters (including those farmed for aquaculture like clams and
scallops) in the coming decades and centuries as ocean temperatures warm. The
researcher will share their findings with the public through a number of
outreach projects and exhibits in partnership with the UMich Museum of Natural
History. They will create an authentic research experience course to introduce
more undergraduates to research in a way that lowers barriers-to-entry,
especially for underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher
will conduct a program of isotopic measurements on fossil mollusks using the
clumped isotope paleothermometer (D47), including calibrations of modern marine
gastropods and bivalves. Use of this new method is vital, as preliminary
D47-based temperature estimates differ greatly from historical oxygen-isotope-
based estimates which are flawed due to their poor constraints on past oxygen
isotopic composition of seawater (d18Osw). Data generated here will directly
address questions of niche stability in mollusk taxa through determination of
changes (or lack thereof) in thermal tolerances over time and
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.