* 2237619
* CAREER: Blind-Label and Label-Free Acoustic Far-Field Subwavelength Imaging
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Chu Ma, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 05/31/2028
* USD 397,712.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will enable new imaging
methodologies that combine both hardware and software innovations to
significantly improve the resolution and the practicality of acoustic imaging.
In biomedical diagnosis, the imaging systems sought in this research will
improve medical ultrasound imaging quality and expand examination applications.
Locations in human and animal bodies, such as deep brain tissues, kidney stones
with sub-millimeter sizes, and lesions on the blood vessel walls, which are
difficult to access using the existing ultrasound technologies, will be
accessible via the newly developed imaging systems. In underwater sensing, this
research will provide enhanced sensing capabilities for underwater
imaging/communication, underwater robots/vehicles, underwater infrastructure
maintenance, fishery, marine biology, and underwater natural resource
exploration. In non-destructive inspection, this research will enhance soil and
rock imaging quality in agriculture and the mining industry, and support quality
control in the manufacturing industry. The educational objective of this project
is to promote and broaden participation in interdisciplinary acoustics research
and STEM education at all levels. This objective will be accomplished through
developing an education workshop for high school interdisciplinary acoustics
education, creating a pipeline that combines undergraduate courses with lab-
based projects for undergraduate students, especially those from
underrepresented groups, and demonstrating interdisciplinary acoustics research
to general public through interactive exhibitions and public
demonstrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide new solutions to
the long-existing tradeoff between resolution and penetration depth in far-field
acoustic imaging. Most of the existing subwavelength imaging approaches that
address this trade-off require exogenous “labels”, such as metamaterials and
contrast agents, to be deposited close to the objects. Those labels need to be
either static or precisely tracked during imaging. Therefore, current label
depositions are extremely restrictive in practical applications. This project
will provide blind-label and label-free solutions to overcome the restrictions.
Blind-label approaches will be developed for situations where the external label
deposition is viable, e.g., imaging in shallow water and imaging of areas in and
around blood vessels. Label-free approaches will be developed for situations
where the external label deposition is difficult and impractical, such as deep
underwater sonar imaging, non-destructive structure inspection, and biomedical
imaging of deep tissue regions. Both blind-label and label-free approaches will
follow a hardware and software co-design framework that consists of the two
parts as follows: 1) spatial mixing: a physical imaging process based on blind
labels, which are randomly deposited acoustic scatterers, or label-free
environmental inhomogeneities, and 2) computational reconstruction:
computational signal processing and imaging reconstruction using algorithms co-
optimized with the spatial wave mixing process. Beyond concept and methodology
developments, in-lab imaging systems emulating application-specific
environmental and hardware/software conditions will be developed to validate the
proposed blind-label and label-free approaches in the areas of biomedical
ultrasonography, underwater sonar imaging, and structure non-destructive
testing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.