* 2237031
* CAREER:Superconductivity, fractionalization and quantum criticality in multilayer quantum simulator
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Yahui Zhang, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2028
* USD 260,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research and education activities to explore new quantum materials. The projects
utilize atomically thin two-dimensional materials as building blocks. A typical
two-dimensional material is graphene, which consists of a single layer of carbon
atoms arranged in the form of honeycomb. Inside the material, many electrons
move together and strongly interact with each other. Combination of quantum
effects and strong correlations between electrons can lead to novel phases with
interesting material properties and potential technology applications. For
example, a superconductor material can conduct electric current with zero
resistance when it is cooled to sufficiently low temperature. Some quantum
materials may be utilized to build a quantum computer. The PI will develop
various strategies to realize new quantum phases by stacking two dimensional
materials together to form multilayer systems. The multilayer materials not only
have new properties unseen in the single layer case, but also enable better
experimental control and characterization of the material
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports the PI’s
education and outreach activities. The PI will (1) include undergraduate
students in the research program and host informal journal club seminar, (2)
develop new course materials to incorporate modern research topics and (3)
engage students from public high schools from underserved areas in Baltimore
City in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research and
education activities to explore novel quantum phases which can emerge in
multilayer systems built from stacking the elementary two-dimensional layers as
“Lego sets”. These projects will take advantage of the recent capability to
exploit the layer degree of freedom in such materials. Various theoretical and
numerical methods will be utilized, including parton mean field theory, quantum
field theory and density-matrix-renormalization-group (DMRG) simulations. The
studies will work closely with on-going and near future experiments in the three
different platforms: (1) Novel phases of matter and their experimental
signatures in bilayer moire superlattices; (2) Quantum criticality and non-
Abelian fractional phases in quantum Hall bilayers; (3) Enhanced
Superconductivity and Kondo transition in bilayer optical
lattice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop new theoretical
frameworks and numerical methods for strongly correlated models, benchmarked and
refined by ongoing and near future quantum simulation experiments. The project
can potentially lead to better understanding of the mechanism towards high
temperature superconductors and development of new platforms for topological
quantum computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal closely links
research with support for diversity, education and community outreach. The
proposal will develop new lecture notes and course materials for the course
‘Condensed Matter Physics’ to include modern research topics such as band
topology and twisted bilayer graphene. The PI will include undergraduate
students in the research program and encourage communications between
undergraduate students, graduate students and postdocs by hosting an informal
journal club seminar. The PI will also engage students from public high schools
from underserved areas in Baltimore City in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.