* 2237329
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: Understanding the Impact of Privacy Interventions on the Online Publishing Ecosystem
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2026
* Cristobal Cheyre, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 01/31/2026
* USD 300,000.00

The project studies the impact of privacy interventions on the online publishing
industry. Widespread concerns over online privacy have led governments worldwide
to enact new privacy regulations and have compelled firms to implement self-
regulatory data-protection initiatives. While such privacy interventions are
often positively received by the public, industry stakeholders have suggested
that privacy interventions may reduce the availability of free, ad-supported
online content and services. Online publishers and their ability to provide
content play a crucial role in democratic societies. The project integrates
technical, organizational, behavioral, and economic studies to investigate how
the implementation of privacy interventions impacts publishers, their users, and
various downstream economic outcomes. The project aims at providing insights for
scholars, policy makers, and practitioners toward understanding and designing
effective privacy interventions without endangering digital products and
services.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project leverages collaborations with media
companies granting access to data from a large set of heterogeneous websites.
The novel contributions of the project include: 1) the investigation of factors
influencing publishers’ compliance with privacy interventions; 2) the creation
of an open auditing API for automated remote compliance auditing of publishers’
systems; 3) the analysis of users’ responses to privacy mechanisms to understand
the extent to which privacy initiatives translate into usable tools for users;
4) the investigation of the impact of privacy implementations on user engagement
and experience; 5) the investigation of how the implementation of privacy
initiatives affects publishers’ revenues from online advertising; and 6) the
investigation of how the gains from user data are allocated across the
stakeholders in the online publishing ecosystem in the presence of privacy
initiatives. The collaboration with media companies enables quick transfer of
research findings to the industry. The results of the research are incorporated
in courses on online privacy and its impact on publishers and
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.