* 2237920
* CAREER: Prioritizing the Development of Team Cognition in Human-AI Teams to Engender the Advancement and Acceptance of AI Teammates
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2028
* Nathan McNeese, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Todd Leen
* 06/30/2028
* USD 332,117.00

Teamwork is a long-standing foundation of modern society, used to accomplish
many important and meaningful societal contributions. As artificial intelligence
(AI) continues to progress, it will be used to form teams with human
collaborators. Effective teamwork requires sharing knowledge and information so
teammates share understanding of how to accomplish goals. Currently, AI agents
prioritize simple task completion and have little to no conceptualization of
what teamwork and team cognition is or what being a good teammate entails. To
ensure that humans and AI are able to work together safely, research that seeks
to understand what humans want and need from an AI teammate is needed.
Furthermore, work is needed to design and develop AI teammates that
intentionally and positively contribute to human-AI team cognition. This project
provides a comprehensive exploration of how AI can be designed, created, and
implemented into human-AI teams to advance team cognition. The project will
result in AI systems that enable effective teaming with people. The knowledge
gained about effective human-AI teaming through advancing team cognition will
improve human acceptance of AI teammates and increase human enthusiasm for
working with AI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical goals of this project are
divided into three related aims. First, interviews with real-world workers,
followed by a large-scale survey experiment, are used to identify ways that
humans want AI to contribute to and benefit team cognition. Second,
participatory design is used to ensure that AI teammates actively promote team
cognition. during human-AI team. These designs are then tested, validated, and
refined in a mixed methods experiment (collecting and analyzing quantitative and
qualitative data). Finally, an additional mixed methods experiment links AI
teammate design, human-AI team cognition formation, and human acceptance of AI
teammates to better understand humans' acceptance of AI teammates. This work is
then extended and applied through collaborations with academic and industry
institutions. The results of this research will be continually integrated into
educational opportunities to promote human-centered perspectives in next-
generation AI practitioners and researchers. The three aims tackled by this
research create a human-centered foundation for creating team cognition in
human-AI teams, and for designing teammates that more effectively contribute to
teaming processes and outcomes. This foundation includes the identification of
how humans want AI teammates to benefit team cognition, the actions AI teammates
can take to create said benefit, and how that realized benefit creates high-
performance human-AI teams and highly accepted AI teammates. The outcomes will
contribute concepts and design principles for human-AI teaming, team cognition,
and human-centered AI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by
CISE-IIS, and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.