* 2237964
* Constraining Arctic wave-ice interactions and the sea ice floe-size distribution
* GEO,OPP
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Cecilia Bitz, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 02/28/2026
* USD 411,911.00

1. Arctic sea ice has declined in area over recent decades. Ocean surface waves
are becoming more common in the Arctic as sea ice loss exposes the ocean surface
directly to wind producing waves. Sea ice floats on the ocean in pieces called
floes that flex and fracture under the influence of waves. Although waves
traveling into the sea ice lose amplitude, waves propagate deeper into sea ice
as floes are fractured into smaller pieces and are more widely spaced. Sea ice
that is highly fractured is more prone to side melt, therefore further enabling
wave production and propagation, floe fracture, and sea ice retreat.
&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual merit of this award is the furthering of wave-ice
interaction theory and developments to an Earth system model that simulates sea
ice floes, ocean surface waves and their interactions. Observations will inform
the model developments. Climate simulations with these model advances will be
the first ever to treat sea ice and wave interactions. Previous climate
simulations have generally simulated too little Arctic sea ice decline compared
to measurements over the last 45 years. Including wave-ice interactions in the
model is expected to improve the simulation of the past, produce a better
estimate of expected sea ice and climate change over the next century, and yield
better forecasts of the sea ice response to storms.&lt;br/&gt;This work has
broader impacts due to the importance of understanding past and future climate
change. Future projections of Arctic sea ice cover, warming, snowfall, and sea
level rise are necessary to inform policy decisions. Simulating Arctic waves in
sea ice is also important for warning communities about coastal erosion and
hazardous coastal conditions. The project results will be disseminated by
publishing in standard scientific journals. The project findings will contribute
to the content of courses the science team teaches on global warming, climate
and climate change, ice and climate interactions, and climate modeling. The
project team will give lectures on research findings to the public, to high-
school students, and broadly to other scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. The
decline of Arctic sea ice exposes larger open water areas in the Arctic Basin
and subpolar seas, enabling greater production of local wind driven ocean
surface waves in the Arctic. In addition, thinner, less concentrated, and more
fractured sea ice floes permit waves to propagate deeper into the sea ice pack.
Sea ice floe are heavily fractured near the sea ice edge due to wave-induced
flexural motion. Floes are also fractured in the interior of the sea ice pack
from sea ice deformation driven by wind and current stresses. Heavily fractured
sea ice can enhance lateral melt, which further accelerates the rate of sea ice
decline. Observations have shown that the width of the wave-induced fracture
zone varies by region and seasonal and extends up to a few hundred kilometers
into the sea ice. The evolution of the sea ice cover and the near surface heat
exchange of atmosphere and ocean depend on the geometric distribution of floes
and the open water surrounding them. The distribution of floes has the greatest
impact on the sea ice state near the edge, where ocean heat content tends to be
greatest. Observations suggest that a single large storm can cause severe floe
fracture and mix ocean heat upward into leads, subsequently accelerating the
loss of sea ice area. The intellectual merit of this award is the furthering of
wave-ice interaction theory and developments to a prognostic floe-size
distribution of sea ice in a widely-used sea ice model. Improvements to wave
attenuation in sea ice will also be made to a wave model. Objective methods to
estimate parameters dynamically while combining models and observations with
data assimilation will be employed. Code improvements to the floe-size
distribution in sea ice and wave components will be incorporated into the
Community Earth System Model, in fully-coupled mode. Simulations with these
model advances will be the first ever to quantify the role of dynamical sea ice
fracture in the coupled climate system. The new dynamics are expected to
increase Arctic climate feedbacks and improve the predictive capability of the
model. Increased sea ice feedbacks are expected to strengthen sea ice loss
during Arctic storms, where winds are southerly on the eastern flank of storms.
The model will permit new fundamental research about how sea ice floes evolve in
the climate system.&lt;br/&gt;This work has broader impacts due to the
importance of understanding past and future climate change from rising
greenhouse gas concentrations and other climate forcings. Future projections of
Arctic temperature, precipitation, ice mass balance and sea level rise are
necessary to inform policy decisions. Simulating Arctic waves in sea ice is also
important for predicting coastal erosion and hazardous coastal conditions. The
project results will be disseminated by publishing in standard scientific
journals. The project findings will contribute to the content of courses that
the science team teaches on global warming, climate and climate change, ice and
climate interactions, and climate modeling. The project team will give lectures
on research findings to the public, to high-school students, and broadly to
other scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.