* 2237878
* CAREER: Microstructural Engineering of Solid Composite Electrolytes through Process Manipulation
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Jena McCollum, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 06/30/2028
* USD 509,197.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant supports research that will
provide critical, fundamental relationships between processing and
microstructure in solid electrolyte systems. Findings under this award will
promote national prosperity through advanced energy system production in many
fields ranging from energetic materials to structural batteries. Structural
batteries (i.e., a battery that can bear mechanical load) are an attractive
option to improve electric vehicle viability as they replace hazardous liquid
electrolytes with a solid counterpart. These solid electrolytes typically
combine electroactive polymers and ceramics to enhance battery durability and
electrical performance. However, the production of highly conductive,
mechanically robust solid-state batteries is currently impossible due to the
significant knowledge gaps concerning the manufacturing history â€“ microstructure
link. This award supports integrated experiments and modeling to uncover the
impact of manufacturing history (e.g., temperature, cure conditions, and shear
rate) on the interface between the electroactive polymer and ceramic in solid
composite electrolytes. This interface determines how an electrolyte composite
behaves mechanically and ionically. By understanding interface formation
mechanisms, structural battery performance can be designed during the
manufacturing stage, thus informing industrial processes at all scales to tune
and enhance structural battery performance through microstructural manipulation.
This project also aims to strengthen science, technology, engineering, and math
(STEM) career accessibility by introducing caregivers to manufacturing science
and increasing accessibility of undergraduate research to this population that
faces high barriers. This will be accomplished with course-based undergraduate
research experiences, enhancing caregiver support for undergraduate research
scholars, and reaching into the community to support parents of first-generation
STEM scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to unveil a mechanistic
understanding of microstructural development in controlled manufacturing
conditions to tune bulk response in composite electrolytes. The research
objectives will be accomplished through a multi-scale investigation to fill
knowledge gaps in the manufacturing-microstructure-performance lifecycle. The
research team will perform coupled rheology and spectroscopy to examine
molecular interactions between polymer and ceramic regarding interface
formation, utilize atomic force microscopy techniques to quantify interface size
both mechanically and electrically, and perform ionic conductivity measurements
on electrolyte specimens under mechanical load to tie nano-scale effects to bulk
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.