* 2237527
* CAREER: Untangling Chaotic Electromagnetic Transient Phenomena in Power Systems Mixed with Volatile Inverter-Based Renewable Energy Resources
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Paul Moses, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Mahesh Krishnamurthy
* 01/31/2028
* USD 399,686.00

Energy infrastructure resilience is a high priority research area as highlighted
by recent and wide-spread power grid disruptions in the United States. This
CAREER proposal aims to advance the study of chaotic grid disturbances and their
mitigation through a deeper understanding of their underlying physics and
characteristics considering high volumes of renewable energy. A major technical
barrier to achieving truly sustainable and reliable power grids of the 21st
century are the unknown electromagnetic incompatibilities from combining
renewable energy technologies with fundamentally archaic, yet vital
infrastructural components such as transformers and rotating machinery. Solid-
state power converters are an enabler for many green technologies such as wind
and solar power. However, when their volatile operation becomes entangled with
certain types of grid disturbances, complex and chaotic fault signatures are
likely to undermine grid operations. The project will 1) pioneer new analytical
tools to reveal overlooked disturbance signatures influenced by renewable energy
activity, 2) develop advanced protection and grid stabilization techniques to
mitigate the impacts of chaotic disturbances and 3) reinvigorate much needed
STEM-oriented educational resources to stimulate participation of K-12 and
minorities into electrical energy related fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER proposal will focus on two types of destructive and chaotic disturbance
phenomena that have periodically occurred but have not been studied in a
renewable energy rich environment: ferroresonance and geomagnetically induced
currents. The project will answer fundamental questions of (i) how chaotic
electromagnetic disturbances change their signatures and damping mechanisms in a
high converter-based renewable energy environment, (ii) how to determine new
safe operating limits of critical network components such as electrical machines
and transformers, (iii) what system protection improvements can be made to
correctly detect and suppress disturbances, and (iv) what grid design
modifications should be done to reduce disturbance severity and outage risks.
The study will first develop novel numerical models and analytical tools to
explore, characterize and predict these disturbances under the largely ignored
influence of solid-state converter dynamics. Secondly, numerical results will be
validated through a small-scale experimental hardware model of a representative
power grid with solid-state converters. Thirdly, new system protection
technologies will be prototyped for enhanced disturbance detection and
suppression. Ultimately, this project is aimed at de-risking the integration of
sustainable energy technologies to realize a more robust, resilient and self-
healing energy infrastructure for greater economic prosperity, health and living
standards for society&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.