* 2237266
* Super-generalist predation in a model microbe Dictyostelium discoideum
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2027
* Joan Strassmann, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 01/31/2027
* USD 1,261,723.00

This project will study how organisms evolve to be either generalist or
specialist predators using an amoeba, Dictyostelium discoideum, that preys on
bacteria. This amoeba can eat many different bacterial species, despite their
wide variety of defenses. The project will seek to determine whether the amoebas
see all edible bacteria as equivalent, or the degree to which they must handle
different bacteria in different ways. For bacteria that they do handle in
different ways, it will ask whether the amoeba’s changes in strategy are
effective. This work will determine amoeba genes that important in handling prey
and will test the idea that these genes evolve particularly rapidly because they
must respond to changing bacterial strategies. Since bacteria can cause disease,
provide services in our microbiomes, and have impacts on agriculture and
nutrient cycling, a better understand their predators is needed. The study will
involve the training of undergraduates from diverse backgrounds, along with
graduate students and a post-doctoral scholar. The project team will reach out
to share its knowledge with diverse groups via public talks and popular
articles, a booth at the Ferguson Farmer’s market, a blog, and a computer
project for university classes, and a Behavior and Evolution Day for high school
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will investigate the extent to
which D. discoideum handles distinct prey differently using a panel of 15
diverse bacteria species. This array of prey species will be explored by four
methods: studies of costs to amoebas of switching between prey species,
responses to experimental evolution of amoebas on different prey, amoeba
transcriptomic changes on different prey, and selection of amoeba gene knockout
libraries on different prey. Each of these four studies will be analyzed by
similar multivariate statistical and clustering methods, giving four independent
takes on which prey species are handled similarly. The researchers will use the
results of the transcriptomics and the knockout selections in two further ways.
First, the knockout selection results – do gene knockouts increase or decrease
amoeba fitness on each prey – will be used to test how broadly adaptive the
transcriptional changes on different prey are. Second, those genes that most
strongly show adaptive changes in this sense will define a set of “predation
genes” which will be tested to see if predation drives evolutionary arms
races.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the Behavioral Systems
program in the Division of Integrative Organismal
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.