* 2237499
* CAREER: Molecular Approaches for Understanding Defect-Porosity Relationships in Microporous Organic Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2028
* James Bour, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Johnson
* 03/31/2028
* USD 733,778.00

In this CAREER project, funded jointly by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp;
Mechanisms-B (CSDM-B) program in the Division of Chemistry (CHE) and the Solid
State &amp; Materials Chemistry (SSMC) program in the Division of Materials
Research (DMR), Dr. James Bour and his research team at Wayne State University
are studying how imperfections in polymer structures affect polymer
microporosity. Microporosity is an important property affecting the performance
of polymers in applications such as water purification, gas storage, gas
purification, energy harvesting, sensing, and catalysis, yet there are few
design principles for controlling it. The goal of this project is to address
this knowledge gap by exploring the hypothesis that defects strongly influence
microporosity. Dr. Bour and his team aim to establish relationships between
defects and porosity through the development of chemical reactions that allow
quantification and simulation of potential defect structures. These studies have
the potential to result in improved understanding of key structural features in
high microporosity polymers. Insights gain will aid in the hypothesis-directed
design of synthetic approaches to microporous polymers. In parallel with these
studies, Dr. Bour will host a yearly state continuing education clock hour
program in polymer chemistry for middle and high school teachers in Michigan.
This activity is designed to interface directly with early science education
mission in the state, helping to prepare the nation’s future workforce in
polymer science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Owing to their high microporosity,
structural diversity, and robust chemical stability, porous organic polymers
have potential to address modern challenges in water purification, energy
harvesting, gas storage/purification, catalysis, and sensing. Polymer porosity,
and ultimately their performance in these targeted applications, is strongly
affected by synthetic approach. However, little is known about why some
reactions consistently and significantly outperform other synthetic strategies.
This project aims to address this fundamental knowledge gap by studying how
reaction-dependent defect structures impact bulk porosity. Spectroscopic
interrogation of defects in microporous network polymers is historically
challenging. This research will instead focus on determination of defect-
porosity relationships through chemical methods. Network disassembly approaches
specifically designed for the rigid structures of porous polymers will be used
to characterize native defectivity in model polymers. Systematic relationships
between defect incidence and structure will be determined through
copolymerization of conventional monomers with defect-simulating or pro-
defective monomers. Taken together, these studies are expected to establish
quantitative relationships between defects and porosity metrics such as apparent
surface area, pore volume, and pore size distribution. Insights gained will help
guide the development of improved and more controlled synthetic protocols,
particularly for high surface area microporous
polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.