* 2237413
* CAREER: A Decentralized Optimization Framework for Next-Gen Transportation and Power Systems with Large-scale Transportation Electrification
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2028
* Zhaomiao Guo, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 07/31/2028
* USD 525,781.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project aims to enhance the
sustainability and resilience of transportation and power systems (TPSs) in
response to rapid deployment of electric vehicles (EVs) and clean energy.
Traditional, system-specific approaches are often inadequate or unable to
address close couplings and decentralized decision-making scheme. This research
meets this fundamental challenge by offering a novel mechanism design for
system-level planning and operation. The methodologies developed have the
potential to extend to other infrastructure systems, where heterogeneous
stakeholders interact with each other over a large-scale network. Research
findings will help inform future strategies for EV adoption and grid integration
of intermittent clean energy sources. The integrated research and education
activities are intended to facilitate knowledge transfer to students,
practitioners, and the public, including K-12 and college students, utility
companies, and transportation planning agencies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
scientific goal of this CAREER project is to advance the understanding of the
mechanism design of decentralized TPSs. More specifically, the research efforts
will advance the knowledge on (1) network modeling strategies to elucidate the
spatiotemporal interactions among heterogeneous and decentralized stakeholders
with incomplete information, (2) optimal information sensing and sharing
strategies for decentralized TPSs, and (3) equity-aware market mechanism design
to optimize TPSs leveraging EVs and clean energy. Meanwhile, it will integrate
convexification, decomposition, and variational analysis theories to cope with
the computational challenges brought by multi-agent interaction, multi-stage
decision-making, and multi-dimensional scenarios for TPSs planning and
operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.