* 2237990
* CAREER: Electro-Chemo-Mechanics of Multiscale Active Materials for Next-Generation Energy Storage
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Dibakar Datta, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2028
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will support integrated
research, education, and outreach efforts to advance the field of mechanics for
energy storage materials. In modern society, rechargeable batteries dominate the
energy storage landscape, from portable electronics to electric vehicles.
However, current microparticle-based battery technologies are insufficient for
efficient, affordable, and safe energy storage. Advances in nanotechnology have
spurred interest in deploying nanoparticles as battery electrodes. However,
there are problems associated with nanoparticles that need to be overcome before
the battery industry would use them over microparticles. A way forward lies in
utilizing multiscale active materials to leverage the advantages of both worlds
(micro and nano). The goal of this research is to gain fundamental knowledge of
the interrelated electrical, chemical, and mechanical behaviors of multiscale
active materials. These materials incorporate microscale particles with built-in
nanoscale features. This project will develop an integrated atomistic simulation
and machine learning framework to discover the optimal multiscale active
materials for next-generation energy storage, which is urgently needed to
advance the US economy, prosperity, welfare, and defense. The integrated
outreach and educational activities will provide research opportunities for
underrepresented community college students in partnership with the Louis Stokes
Alliances for Minority Participation program. Workshops for elementary teacher
trainees will provide STEM content to promote science among lower-grade
students. Additionally, free online workshops related to this research will
benefit the worldwide mechanics research community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanomaterials-based battery electrodes offer several
advantages: high rate, power density, gravimetric capacity, superior fracture
toughness, and fatigue resistance. However, the industry has been resistant to
replace microstructured electrodes with nanostructured counterparts.
Nanomaterials-based batteries have low volumetric capacity, reduced coulombic
efficiency, and high cost. The transformative solution to address this issue
lies in multiscale active materials. These materials can be either engineered
(assembly of nanoparticles into microparticles) or natural (micrometer-scale
materials naturally endowed with nanoscale tunnels). However, various
computational and experimental challenges have impeded research progress in this
area. This project aims to overcome these challenges through four integrated
objectives: (i) studying the interfacial mechanics in engineered multiscale
materials, (ii) determining electrode/electrolyte stability and solid
electrolyte interface formation, (iii) investigating stress, fracture, and
voltage variation within electrodes during charge/discharge cycles, and (iv)
utilizing data from the first three objectives to train recently developed
Modified High Dimensional Neural Networks for novel multiscale materials
exploration. The Non-Local Long-Range Charge Transfer will be implemented for
accurate charge calculation and correct force and stress analysis. Tasks will be
experimentally validated with colleagues. The project will generate fundamental
knowledge to advance the field of mechanics of energy storage
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.