* 2237122
* CAREER: Charge Delocalization: A New Tool for Controlling Ionic Selectivity and Conductivity of Ion-Exchange Membranes
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Jovan Kamcev, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Christina Payne
* 01/31/2028
* USD 433,886.00

Management of highly impaired waters (i.e., waters that contain high
concentrations of salts and other dissolved solutes) is critical for
applications such as water desalination and hydraulic fracturing. The difficulty
of brine management hinders the growth of such applications, which ultimately
affects the water and energy security of our Nation. Electrodialysis, a
membrane-based technology that uses charged polymer membranes and electricity to
separate ions, removing them from water, has been proposed for treating highly
impaired waters. However, this technology is energy intensive and inefficient
because the membrane performance significantly deteriorates when contacted by
highly impaired waters. In this study, the connection between the chemical
identity of the charged groups on the polymer backbone and the membrane
performance will be systematically investigated. The development of such
structure/property relationships will guide the design of membranes with
improved transport properties when contacted by highly impaired waters. To
enhance the involvement of low socioeconomic status students in STEM, a
comprehensive summer research program for high school students will be
developed. The program will involve hands-on laboratory work, a short course on
membrane science, and dissemination of the results to a broad and diverse
audience via outreach programs developed via a collaboration with the University
of Michigan Museum of Natural History.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ion-exchange
membranes (IEMs) that are used for treating highly impaired waters via
electrodialysis contain low amounts of water. There is evidence of ion pairing
in such materials, which ultimately decreases the charge density of the membrane
and worsens both the ionic conductivity and selectivity. Increasing the charge
delocalization of the fixed charge groups is hypothesized to enhance both the
ionic conductivity and selectivity of low water content IEMs by weakening
electrostatic interactions between the fixed charges and mobile ions. This
hypothesis will be systematically tested via a combined experimental and
modeling study on the influence of charge delocalization on transport properties
of IEMs. The majority of IEMs for aqueous ion separations utilize sulfonate
anions or trimethylammonium cations as the charged groups attached to the
polymer backbone, so the proposed project will open up a new direction of study
on IEMs for aqueous ion separations. Due to the fundamental nature of the
proposed study, the knowledge generated will have broad implications for other
technologies that use IEMs in low dielectric environments (e.g., energy
conversion and storage devices).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.