* 2237576
* FRR: Collaborative Research: Unsupervised Active Learning for Aquatic Robot Perception and Control
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2026
* Todd Murphey, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 03/31/2026
* USD 411,557.00

Rapid developments in machine learning and artificial intelligence in recent
years have greatly advanced perception capabilities and thus the level of
autonomy for machines, as evidenced by great strides made in autonomous vehicles
and aerial drones over the last decade. These successes are due to advances in
computing hardware and large datasets for training learning algorithms. However,
for many real-world robotic applications, a robotâ€™s environment may be so
complex that no existing datasets are adequate, and synthetically generating
high-fidelity data in simulation may not be possible. In such cases a robot will
need to collect data in its real operating environment to learn. The robot will
need to purposefully plan its motion and interaction with the environment to
enable sensors to gather the most informative data. This award supports research
to create algorithms for efficient robot active learning for perception and
control of complex systems in highly dynamic and uncertain environments, such as
the aquatic environment. Advances will have broad implications in applications
of robotic technologies, such as aquatic debris cleanup, underwater search and
rescue, and personalized minimally invasive robotic surgery. In particular, the
team will collaborate with the United States Coast Guard and apply the developed
algorithms to improve their search capacities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project will be accomplished through the pursuit of three interconnected
research thrusts: 1) active learning for building data-driven perception models
with multi-sensory data; 2) active learning of models describing temporal
evolution of perceptional features for control purposes, using data-driven
operators to describe latent dynamics; and 3) experimental demonstration and
evaluation with a running case study of autonomous aquatic debris removal using
an unmanned surface vehicle equipped with soft sensor-rich robotic arms. This
work will advance the fundamental understanding of design principles for
learning-based perception models when multiple sensing modalities are involved.
The project will moreover develop new theory for learning the evolution of
latent features, including convergence guarantees and controllability
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.