* 2237039
* CAREER: Using Physics-Based Machine Learning to Reconcile the Crack Tip with the Plastic Zone during Fracture of Metals
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Ryan Sills, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 06/30/2028
* USD 622,248.00

Metal fracture occurs when cracks or other flaws grow, leading to failure of
metallic structures such as buildings and aircraft that has been estimated to
cost 4 percent of US gross domestic product. Current theories and models used to
predict fracture are based on an incomplete picture of the fracture process,
which lead to inaccurate predictions of crack growth, making it difficult to
design engineering structures and next-generation structural metals. This
Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award supports research to develop
better material models used in the design of fracture-resistant engineering
structures relevant to energy, defense, aerospace, and transportation
applications, thereby supporting the U.S. economy and defense. The machine
learning methods developed under this project will be broadly applicable to many
fields of science and engineering. Through a collaboration with local and
national science teaching organizations, the research findings from this project
will be used to develop a multi-day lesson-plan for the high school science
classroom wherein students learn about fracture of metals using computer
simulations. This lesson-plan will be made available to science teachers
nationwide. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Prevailing theories of metal fracture focus on
either the crack tip where dislocation nucleation governs the propensity for
brittle fracture, or the plastic zone surrounding the crack tip where plastic
dissipation governs the fracture toughness. Recent work has shown, however, that
there are important interplays between the crack tip and plastic zone which
affect various fracture behaviors such as dislocation multiplication and growth
of fatigue cracks. This project is to develop a three-dimensional discrete
dislocation dynamics model which simultaneously accounts for the crack tip and
the plastic zone by capturing all relevant dislocation and bond-breaking
processes in one unified model. To achieve this goal, a physics-informed machine
learning-based image solver will be developed which utilizes a new convolutional
architecture that couples to the finite element method. Atomistic simulations
will be used to quantify the dislocation nucleation rate near the crack tip,
grain boundary weakening due to dislocation adsorption and/or emission, and
grain boundary decohesion. Predictions from the fracture model will be compared
with state-of-the-art fracture experiments. Insights gained from this research
will directly inform fracture models used in engineering design, prediction of
embrittlement, and alloy design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.