* 2237012
* CAREER: Integrating Trust and Accountability into Compliance Enforcement for a Secure Internet of Things
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2028
* Adwait Nadkarni, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 02/29/2028
* USD 109,301.00

Regulators have only recently begun to grapple with the reality of billions of
vulnerable Internet of Things (IoT) products and have responded with targeted
security and privacy regulations. The usefulness of such policy initiatives
relies on their enforcement in practice. The enforcement strategy outlined in
such regulations is similar to that used for software security compliance,
wherein regulators delegate enforcement to Commercially Licensed Evaluation
Facilities (CLEFs), which evaluate vendor products. While such delegation is
useful in scaling the enforcement to millions of products, it comes at a price:
the affected party, i.e., the regulators and consumers who are the primary
beneficiaries of security compliance, play a limited role in it, enabling an
incentive structure skewed against effective enforcement. To elaborate, product
vendors have little incentive to select an ideal CLEF that would thoroughly
evaluate their product, instead of one that offers the fastest route to
certification. Even if a vendor searched for an ideal CLEF in good faith, they
have few means to gauge the CLEF’s effectiveness aside from brochures, limited
demonstrations, and the CLEF’s reputation. Moreover, CLEFs are not licensed on
the basis of their performance at detecting vulnerabilities, but instead on
procedural competence (e.g., adequate facilities, personnel). Hence, traditional
model, if applied as is to the IoT sector, would foster unvalidated CLEFs who
have little incentive to improve, and vendors who simply view certifications as
liability shields. This project seeks to avert such a future by empowering the
affected party with practical tools to objectively measure the performance of
CLEFs, and influence accountability in security compliance enforcement. The
systematic, data-driven, evaluation techniques developed in this research will
enable regulators and standards bodies to reform the compliance infrastructure
by directly evaluating the claimed performance of CLEFs as a part of the
license-granting process or periodic audits. Moreover, this research will also
help CLEFs and vendors improve through self-evaluation, help vendors seek
effective CLEFs, and help CLEFs compete on the basis of performance. By
improving the compliance enforcement infrastructure for IoT, this project will
generate tangible benefits for consumers in the form of secure IoT products, and
has the potential to increase consumer confidence in and adoption of IoT
technology. The research will be incorporated into graduate and undergraduate
security classes at William &amp; Mary through experiential learning activities,
and disseminated to key stakeholders such as policymakers and developers, as
well as the broader research community. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
synergistically blends the approach of mutation testing with static and dynamic
analysis, machine learning, and qualitative studies, to lay the foundation for
empirically and systematically evaluating CLEFs, along three core research
thrusts and a fourth thrust that investigates extensibility. The first thrust
examines if the scope of work assumed by CLEFs is sufficient, by investigating a
key underlying question: what should CLEFs look for? To this end, the research
acquires and analyzes IoT products at market-scale, in order to develop a
generalizable understanding of what vulnerabilities are relevant to detect,
i.e., pose risk in the IoT context, resulting in a comprehensive, risk-based IoT
vulnerability taxonomy. The second thrust rigorously evaluates a CLEF’s ability
to detect non-trivial variants of vulnerabilities from the taxonomy, i.e.,
mutants. It develops a threat-aware mutation framework that generates mutants
guided by a threat model for compliance enforcement that encapsulates the
conditions CLEFs must account for, thus ensuring a non-arbitrary evaluation of
CLEFs. The third thrust re-imagines security analysis for compliance enforcement
with the approach of mutation-driven vulnerability prediction, which combines
the strengths of machine learning and security-focused mutation for effective
detection. The fourth thrust explores the extensibility of the research to IoT
product-types, application domains (e.g., smart cities), and usage paradigms.
This research project leverages well-founded techniques from security, software
engineering, and machine learning to make novel contributions at the
intersection of security and software engineering. Finally, the initial focus on
mobile-IoT apps as a target product-type will advance security research at the
key intersection of mobile and IoT security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.