* 2237693
* CAREER: Robust and Autonomous Robot Adaptation in Novel Scenarios
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2028
* Chelsea Finn, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 05/31/2028
* USD 500,000.00

A major current technological challenge is to enable deployment of robots into
open real-world environments to help advance human welfare. This Faculty Early
Career Development (CAREER) project will serve this goal while promoting
scientific progress by studying how robots can adapt to new and unfamiliar
surroundings encountered during deployment. Adaptation is needed for handling
open-world environments since it is remarkably challenging to foresee all the
possible scenarios that a robot may encounter. Adaptation demands a degree of
autonomy and robustness. This project will study how robots can autonomously
adapt during deployment, identify when and how to ask a human for help, and
avoid catastrophic failures or getting perpetually stuck in place. The outcomes
of this project are expected to have the potential to significantly expand the
set of practical applications of robotics, including in manufacturing settings
when there is variability in parts and desired configurations, and in the
service industry, such as in hospitals and homes where the environment changes
frequently based on peopleâ€™s behavior. This project will also support the
development of freely available course lectures and course content pertaining to
robotics and machine learning, as well as a mentoring program for undergraduates
from groups that are underrepresented in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central
objective of this project is to advance the capability of robots to adapt online
during deployment. Robotic reinforcement learning systems can in principle be
applied to enable online adaptation, but in practice they are currently ill-
equipped to do so. This is because they require supervision and environment
resets that are unavailable during deployment. These reinforcement learning
systems also do not provide means for robots to identify failures and
proactively request interventions in novel environments. This research will
develop capabilities that address these challenges and integrate them into a
single real robotic system. The research will advance our understanding of: (1)
how robots can prepare for unknown situations; (2) how autonomy affects the
performance of robotic learning systems; (3) how robots can detect and avoid
failures and irreversible states even in new environments; and (4) when
automated robot systems should seek external forms of supervision. The developed
framework will be thoroughly evaluated on physical robot arms, testing the
ability to adapt to a wide variety of unseen circumstances, including new object
poses, object materials, and object shapes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.