* 2237077
* CAREER: Bioinspired optical sniffer based on microtoroid resonators and science and technology convergence
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2027
* Tsu-Te Su, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 12/31/2027
* USD 300,000.00

The goal of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project is to create
an optical “nose” as sensitive as a bloodhound’s and as selective as an
insect’s. Animals' noses can distinguish among many thousands of different
chemicals. Smell plays a critical role in chemical communication, sensing
danger, and navigation. Thus, a biomimetic sensor based on an olfactory system
would have tremendous benefits. This project will combine optical sensing
technology that can detect changes in how light interacts with molecules with
engineered olfactory receptors. Pattern recognition will be accomplished using
artificial intelligence. It is anticipated that these advances will enable the
detection of extremely low concentrations of biological and chemical targets
relevant to a diverse range of diseases, environmentally important chemicals,
and threats. In parallel, a do-it-yourself (DIY) refractometer kit will be
developed to introduce middle and high-school students to optical engineering
concepts. Lessons involving optics and food and water quality testing with
refractometers will be developed to build a sustained STEM pipeline and to
democratize science for a better world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A biomimetic sensor
based on an olfactory system could automate, with greater sensitivity, tasks
that can currently only be performed by humans and animals. Existing bioinspired
electronic (e-) noses have not been widely adopted due to poor stability, slow
response speed, and selectivity artifacts. In the proposed work, the biochemical
sensing field will be advanced by creating an optical nose with improved
sensitivity and selectivity by incorporating computationally designed olfactory
receptors, which are superior to existing e-nose polymer coatings, onto
whispering gallery mode (WGM) microtoroid optical resonators. WGM resonators
have previously been widely used for biological and chemical sensing because of
their high sensitivity compared to electronic sensors, but WGM resonators have
never been used in concert with natural olfactory receptors for VOC detection
due to the challenge of designing, producing, binding, and maintaining the
functionality of these receptors. Here the field of WGM biochemical sensing will
be advanced through a convergence of computational molecular design, synthetic
biology, specialized surface chemistry approaches and photonic advances for
multiplexing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.