* 2237543
* CAREER: Building a Model of Instructional Congruence through Exploring the Role of Language in Introductory Undergraduate Engineering Courses
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Nicole Pitterson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Amy Wilson-Lopez
* 05/31/2028
* USD 331,718.00

Introductory engineering courses may seem alienating to many undergraduates when
fundamental concepts are presented primarily through highly technical language,
unfamiliar metaphors and analogies, and complex abstractions. This sense of
alienation may be particularly acute when students’ educational backgrounds,
prior experiences, and linguistic practices are not reflected in engineering
instructors’ written or verbal examples and course materials. To counter this
sense, the purpose of this project is to develop a model of instructional
congruence that connects undergraduates’ linguistic practices and experiences
with core engineering concepts. This project focuses on undergraduates that have
historically been marginalized in engineering courses due to their socioeconomic
status, race, ethnicity, or language, including people who identify as African
American or Black and Hispanic or Latiné. This project is based on the
fundamental assumption that language can function to build a sense of belonging
in introductory undergraduate engineering courses when instructors encourage the
use of students’ home languages; when they use everyday language to build
understandings of complex disciplinary ideas and practices; and when they
connect students’ experiences with fundamental engineering concepts through
familiar analogies, metaphors, or examples. To explore this assumption, the
project will conduct research in introductory electrical engineering courses at
five universities, including a Hispanic-Serving Institution, a Historically
Black Research University, and Predominantly White Institutions with
intentionally inclusive engineering courses. The project will result in an
empirically-based, open-access, scalable, and nationally-disseminated model that
can be used by undergraduate engineering instructors who seek to build their
students’ disciplinary expertise and enhance their sense of belonging in
engineering through instructionally congruent approaches.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will explore how various types of language
can support undergraduates in developing disciplinary expertise through building
connections between familiar examples and fundamental engineering concepts. To
achieve this research purpose, a multi-phase discourse analysis will be
performed in introductory engineering courses across five colleges or
universities, which were purposively selected to ensure diversity among
students, instructors, programs, and institution types. Within this context, the
research team will collect numerous data sources, including written course
materials, protocols from classroom observations, and transcripts from pre- and
post-focus groups with undergraduates. Additionally, the research team will
interview the instructors to better understand their rationales behind using
specific types of language, including analogies and metaphors, to support
student learning. Qualitative content analyses of these data sources will result
in a model of instructional congruence that is widely transferrable to
institutions and programs across the country. This model will be shared through
research publications, workshops, webinars, and a graduate course for
instructional faculty. Collectively, these resources will result in actionable
knowledge regarding how instructors can use language to foster disciplinary
expertise in undergraduate engineering courses, while simultaneously enhancing
students’ sense of belonging in engineering. This project is supported by NSF's
EDU Core Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM
education research that generates foundational knowledge in the field.
Investments are made in critical areas that are essential, broad and enduring:
STEM learning and STEM learning environments, broadening participation in STEM,
and STEM workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.