* 2237217
* CAREER: Unlocking Ductility in Magnesium: How to Replace Twinning and Impede Damage
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Christopher Barrett, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 05/31/2028
* USD 260,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports basic
research designed to make magnesium a more useful material. Currently, magnesium
alloys are too brittle for many applications, despite being lighter and stronger
than steel or aluminum. Less brittle magnesium would be broadly useful to make
lighter and more efficient vehicles. In this project, the PI will develop better
computational models for magnesium alloys using artificial intelligence methods
and use these models to investigate the origins of cracks at the atomic scale.
The insights gathered from characterizing these simulations will be used to
develop strategies for making magnesium less brittle by changing the recipe for
alloying elements and temperatures used to create magnesium
parts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award also supports the PI’s educational
activities at the undergraduate and graduate levels. In addition to training
students in the areas of computational modeling and machine learning, a new
educational software will be developed with powerful research capabilities for
material property exploration and discovery by coupling well established
computational tools and calibration code with a simple graphical interface. The
PI has developed a split-level course to engage both undergraduates and graduate
students in computational modeling techniques. By making advanced modeling tools
available and understandable to a broader audience, this class will serve as an
outreach tool for materials research, inspiring students to study questions that
no one has yet answered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports basic research
activities designed to reveal mechanisms producing the lack of ductility of
magnesium. A good understanding of how cracks form in magnesium and how to
prevent them has eluded researchers so far. Mitigation strategies such as work
hardening and alloying have only shown limited success which has prevented
magnesium from achieving broad market use. This is largely due to magnesium’s
plastic anisotropy, non-Schmid stresses required for activation, and the
diversity of complex active plastic modes such as &lt;c+a&gt;
slip.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using molecular dynamics and topological modeling,
magnesium deformation and failure will be studied by using the isotropic
approximation to insert dislocations and twins into the simulation box and
characterizing reactions during plastic deformation. Since the behaviors of Mg’s
plastic modes are critically affected by alloying elements, simulations
including important additives in solid solution such as aluminum, zinc, yttrium,
and bismuth will also be employed. To do this effectively, new interatomic
potentials for these solid solution binary alloys will be developed using the
rapid atomistic neural network method. As a result, the role of contraction
twins and their interactions with other twins, dislocations, solutes, and grain
boundaries will be quantified. This will enable the PI to develop strategies
which enhance ductile mechanisms and thereby retard crack
formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award also supports the PI’s educational
activities at the undergraduate and graduate levels. In addition to training
students in the areas of computational modeling and machine learning, a new
educational software will be developed with powerful research capabilities for
material property exploration and discovery by coupling well established
computational tools and calibration code with a simple graphical interface. The
PI has developed a split-level course to engage both undergraduates and graduate
students in computational modeling techniques. By making advanced modeling tools
available and understandable to a broader audience, this class will serve as an
outreach tool for materials research, inspiring students to study questions that
no one has yet answered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.