* 2237053
* CAREER: Knowledge Exchange for Supporting Youth with or at Risk for Mathematics Difficulty
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Jessica Rodrigues, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Ochsendorf
* 06/30/2028
* USD 174,759.00

One of the most persistent challenges in education is the gap between research
and classroom practice, meaning that research-informed recommendations and
practices that could support students’ mathematics learning do not always reach
the classroom. Students struggling with mathematics in upper elementary grades
experience cascading difficulties and limited access to science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields. Improving how mathematics-focused
education research is communicated to a teacher audience—using strategies that
are useful and valuable from the teacher perspective—is one key avenue for
mitigating consequences of the research-practice gap. This project will develop,
assess, and refine innovative key abstracts (i.e., concise, infographic-type
resources) for communicating mathematics-focused practitioner articles with a
teacher audience. Teacher perspectives will be embedded throughout the project
to inform key abstract design. The project also involves a collaboration with
the university disability center to provide funded research opportunities in
STEM education to university students with
disabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project builds on a sequence from a
systematic journal analysis that will develop a database of practitioner
articles for subsequent project studies; to a qualitative exploration of
teachers’ perceptions of key abstracts; to a mixed methods study; and finally,
to an experimental pretest-posttest control group design to investigate the
impact of abstract types on teachers’ perceptions and behavioral intentions. The
context for the research is communication of mathematics-focused practitioner
articles for supporting upper elementary students with or at risk for
mathematics difficulty. As noted, promoting students’ mathematics and overall
STEM achievement is a critical need in the United States. The focus of the
research aligns with and advances in the PI’s early-career research program.
Project outcomes hold potential for empowering researchers, teachers, and
students. Researchers will have strategies grounded in evidence for improving
their communication which may, in turn, support use of effective mathematics
practices in the classroom that bolster student
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a Faculty Early Career Development
Program project responsive to a National Science Foundation-wide activity that
offers the most prestigious awards in support of early-career faculty who have
the potential to serve as academic role models in research and education. The
proposal was submitted to the Discovery Research K-12 program, which seeks to
significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering and mathematics by preK-12 students and
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.