* 2237317
* CAREER: Reconfigurable and Predictive Control with Reinforcement Learning Supervisor for Active Battery Cell Balancing
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Jun Chen, Oakland University
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 12/31/2027
* USD 400,000.00

This project will support research that will contribute novel methodologies
related to battery electric vehicles, promoting the progress of science and
advancing national health and prosperity by enabling greener electric vehicles.
Due to battery cell variations, significant amount of electricity in electric
vehicle remain unused, which raises concerns on efficiency and sustainability.
Active battery cell balancing control aims to address these concerns, but
existing methods have limited success in battery electric vehicles due to
concerns in real-time constraints and limited sensing capability inherent to
many automotive systems. This project supports fundamental research that
addresses the major challenges in control of large-scale systems, control
fusion, intelligent control, and battery management. The new designs and
methodologies will offer a transformative framework in active battery cell
balancing control that seamlessly integrate vehicle level information into
battery management to improve the energy efficiency and driving range of
electric vehicles. This research is synergistic with key societal goals related
to developing efficient transportation systems for combating the climate change.
Therefore, results from this research will benefit the U.S. economy, life
quality, and health. This research involves several disciplines including
control theory, reinforcement learning, sensing and estimation, and battery
management. The multi-disciplinary approach also facilitates the participation
of underrepresented groups in research and positively impacts engineering
education and automotive workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The active battery
cell balancing control is expected to greatly enhance the efficiency of battery
electric vehicles, increase the driving range, and improve public acceptance. In
pursuit of this goal, four closely integrated research objectives are planned:
1) Develop an efficient cell level estimation framework to estimate cell state-
of-charge and capacity under limited measurements without incurring heavy
computation; 2) Develop a novel predictive cell balancing control framework to
seamlessly integrate vehicle speed preview with fast and robust adaptation to
preview errors; 3) Develop a reconfigurable control framework to scale up cell
balancing control algorithm for EV batteries without degrading overall balancing
control performance; and 4) Evaluate and validate the proposed framework through
extensive simulations and experiments. Collectively, advances from these
research endeavors are expected to make electric vehicles more acceptable and
more affordable, and it will create new computationally-efficiency control
mechanism for large scale dynamical systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.