* 2237629
* CAREER: Selectively Reprogramming Proteases through the High-Throughput Discovery of Functional Protein-Protein Interactions.
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Carl Denard, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 01/31/2028
* USD 488,691.00

Proteases are enzymes that cleave peptide bonds in proteins. They abound in all
organisms and play key roles in regulating cellular processes. If their activity
is impaired, diseases can arise. These range from infectious diseases to cancer
and neurodegeneration. The main research objective of this project is to
discover and redesign proteinaceous molecules that can reprogram proteases. The
major educational objective is to develop a STEM comic series on synthetic
biology targeted at K-5 students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Protease dysregulation
is a disease indicator, as proteases play central roles in bacterial and viral
pathogenicity. An experimental and computational framework is proposed to
understand how proteases work and how to reprogram them. This will require the
development of function-centric technologies to discover protein-based binders
that can reprogram a proteaseâ€™s catalytic activity and substrate specificity.
Aim 1 is to isolate selective, potent inhibitory and stimulatory nanobodies from
a synthetic nanobody (Nb) library against proteases from four groups, including
human protease targets. Aim 2 is to leverage deep learning to accelerate
modulator discovery by designing machine learning-optimized Nb libraries using
Nb sequence-function data. Aim 3 is to map the functional landscape of insulin-
degrading enzyme (IDE) through Nb-mediated protein-protein interactions (PPIs)
and protease engineering. Deep sequencing data analysis will elucidate the
sequence-function landscape for novel functional PPIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.