* 2237850
* CAREER: Towards Hierarchical and Provably Safe Control for Learning-Enabled Autonomous Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Xiangru Xu, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 02/29/2028
* USD 603,643.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) grant will fund research
that enhances the reliability, trustworthiness, and societal acceptance of
autonomous systems that rely on machine learning-enabled technologies, thereby
promoting the progress of science, and advancing the national prosperity and
welfare. Autonomous robotic systems, such as self-driving cars and drones, are
shaping the nation's future insofar as the transportation, logistics, and
service segments of the economy are concerned. Artificial neural networks have
become an indispensable component of modern autonomous systems, especially in
their perception and control pipelines. However, neural networks are complex,
difficult to analyze, and sensitive to input perturbations or adversarial
attacks. This renders their rigorous analysis and design very challenging. Thus,
despite the continued optimism and tremendous technological progress in recent
years, truly autonomous systems remain elusive because of outstanding safety and
reliability concerns. This project overcomes these concerns by establishing a
rigorous methodological framework and efficient algorithms for the analysis,
verification, motion planning, and control design of safety-critical dynamic
systems with learning-enabled components. It demonstrates how this framework
enables provable performance guarantees for safe and reliable operation. Through
close integration of research, education, and outreach, the project aims to
leverage knowledge discovery to stimulate teaching and learning, use inspired
teaching to encourage excitement in research, and make newly generated knowledge
accessible to the public. This is accomplished through active learning-based
design of a course on safety control in robotics, by engaging students from
underrepresented groups in research and organizing K-12 summer workshops with
hands-on robotics activities, and by increasing public literacy, awareness, and
trust in safety-related technologies for autonomous
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to develop the foundations of a
mathematically rigorous framework for the multi-rate and provably safe motion
planning and control of autonomous systems with neural network components. It
achieves this aim by investigating constrained zonotope- and hybrid zonotope-
based algorithms for computing over-approximated reachable sets for neural
feedback systems with a tunable trade-off between computational efficiency and
approximation accuracy; robust quadratic program-based methods for designing
provably safe, periodic event-triggered tracking controllers; second-order cone
program-based trajectory planning methods for neural feedback systems with
continuous-time safety guarantees; and provably safe multi-rate planning and
control algorithms with an assume-guarantee contract between the planning and
tracking layers. Verification and validation of the theoretical results will be
performed using high-fidelity vehicle dynamics software simulations and with
physical experiments on two lab-based robotic
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.