* 2237551
* CAREER: Epigenetics of Synthetic Biology
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Alessandra Eustaquio, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Bianca Garner
* 03/31/2028
* USD 271,828.00

Constructing or reprogramming cells by editing their DNA sequence is central to
synthetic biology. The creation of tools that drive this process have
applications in not only understanding the fundamental mechanisms that govern
molecular processes, but also in the development of a sustainable bioeconomy.
This proposal seeks to elucidate how epigenetics improves product yields to
enhance natural product discovery in microbes. The mechanisms of epigenetic
control will be examined in Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria to engineer
a programmable system. This research will form the basis of a new synthetic
biology course at the University of Illinois at Chicago and will provide
research opportunities for students at various levels, including high school. A
key goal of the educational activities is to make synthetic biology accessible
to students of diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Epigenetic DNA
methylation is involved in bacterial host defense as mediated by Restriction-
Modification systems, and in the control of DNA replication and gene expression.
Synthetic biologists have recently started to explore epigenetics and
Restriction-Modification systems to engineer memory in biological systems.
Unfortunately, understanding of this mechanism is hindered by numerous
challenges, including the low production yield of heterologous gene expression.
An industrial Burkholderia strain, which produces 580-times the normal levels of
the peptide capistruin, will be employed as a heterologous test host.
Preliminary studies have demonstrated that this overproduction is most likely
mediated by epigenetic factors that impact plasmid copy number and gene
transcription. This research seeks to identify the underlying basis for this
regulation, by perturbation of enzymes within the Restriction-Modification
system. Methylome and transcriptome datasets will be generated separately and
then integrated to determine methylation patterns. In addition, the role of
epigenetic factors in controlling product yields will be further explored in
both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria model organisms. The project is
expected to provide critical understanding of the basis for stochastic variation
in product yields and thereby to contribute to construction of improved
synthetic biology tools in diverse model organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.