* 2237658
* CAREER: Helping or hindering? Determining the influence of repetitive marine heatwaves on acclimatization of reef-building corals across biological scales
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2028
* Katie Barott, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 03/31/2028
* USD 597,159.00

Ocean warming driven by climate change has led to staggering losses of coral on
reefs worldwide and is now among the most pressing of stressors threatening the
survival of coral reef ecosystems today. As marine heatwaves associated with
ocean warming become increasingly frequent, it is urgent to understand if and
how reef-building corals will be able to respond to these repeat stress events
and thus survive in a rapidly warming ocean. To address this problem, this
project is investigating how corals on the reef respond to recurring marine
heatwaves in order to identify if repeat exposure to heat stress promotes coral
tolerance of higher temperatures via acclimatization or instead leads to the
accumulation of stress and thus reduced performance and survival following
future stress. The results of this study are critical for understanding how the
current generation of corals will respond to increasingly warmer oceans, and
whether acclimatization will buy enough individuals sufficient time for
adaptation to occur and promote coral persistence into the future. In addition,
this project is training students from secondary schools through advanced
postdoctoral researchers in global change biology and ecology. Specifically, the
investigators are increasing access to research opportunities for undergraduate
students by developing a new hands-on course-based undergraduate research
experience (CURE) in Global Ocean Change Biology that will reach hundreds of
students per year. Outreach efforts are also being developed to increase the
participation and retention of historically disenfranchised students in marine
science, and include creation of hands-on coral reefs and climate change
activities for incoming first-generation, low-income undergraduate students and
a professional development program to train middle and high-school teachers to
deploy these climate change activities in their classrooms in the Philadelphia
Public School District, which serves a predominantly low-income Black and Latinx
student body. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Acclimatization following exposure to sub-
lethal heat stress may be an important protective mechanism for corals to
survive a changing climate. However, the role of environmental memory of marine
heatwaves in driving acclimatization or, conversely, stress accumulation and
sensitization of reef-building corals is not well understood. This study is
addressing this question using a combination of in situ and mesocosm experiments
to assess the cellular, organismal, and ecological consequences of repeat
heatwaves on corals with contrasting bleaching histories. Specifically, the
researchers are monitoring adjacent conspecific pairs of bleaching-susceptible
and bleaching-resistant individuals of two reef-building coral species in
Hawaii, Montipora capitata and Porites compressa. These corals have been
monitored for over 7 years through multiple bleaching events and are being used
to test the hypothesis that environmental memory of marine heatwaves
differentially alters coral thermal performance due to phenotypic variation in
acclimatization ability within and between species. This work is identifying
whether the bleaching thresholds of corals with different bleaching histories
varies through time, and the consequences of these phenotypes on coral
calcification, survival, and population size structure are being assessed using
a combination of benthic surveys, photogrammetry, and in situ growth
measurements. The influence of environmental memory of heatwaves on coral
physiology is being assessed using thermal performance curves to determine how
the thermal optima of respiration, photosynthesis, calcification, and host
intracellular pH change (or not) over time (e.g. ambient vs. heatwave years) and
if that response differs between corals with contrasting bleaching phenotypes.
Finally, the contribution of algal endosymbionts to acclimatization is being
evaluated by exposing corals to a range of increasing temperatures in
experimental mesocosms, potentially uncovering differences in the degree of
acclimatization or sensitization for host vs. symbiont traits in corals with
high fidelity (P. compressa) vs. cosmopolitan (M. capitata) symbiont
associations. By understanding of the phenotypic diversity in thermal
performance across biological scales, this research improves predictions of
coral persistence in the face of the ongoing climate
crisis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Biological
Oceanography, Integrative Ecological Physiology, and Ocean Education
Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.