* 2237423
* CAREER: The Neurobiology of Neophobia in a Wild Songbird
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Christine Lattin, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jodie Jawor
* 04/30/2028
* USD 702,553.00

Because novel urban and suburban environments are replacing natural environments
on a global scale, neophobia, or an animal’s fearful response to novel objects,
foods, or environments, is a behavior with critical relevance for wild
populations. In many species, including humans, different individuals respond
very differently to novelty. However, it is still poorly understood what causes
differences in neophobia among individuals. The proposed work will help fill
this knowledge gap by testing whether individual variation in one key brain
region, the hippocampus, can help explain individual variation in neophobia.
This work will build on previous research on a well-studied wild songbird, the
house sparrow, and take advantage of wide and repeatable individual variation in
neophobia in this species. Through three linked research and educational aims,
this research will engage a diverse population of undergraduate students in an
active research program in the neurobiology of behavior, and develop a clear and
replicable approach for how to combine research and teaching at a large public
university. This research will also provide critical insights into how
differences in neurobiology can lead to differences in behavior, and reveal how
social experiences may change the brain to decrease fearful behavior towards
novelty. This, in turn, will help us understand the ability of animals to adapt
to environmental change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neophobia may be particularly
important in determining why some individuals, populations, and species are able
to persist in human-altered landscapes while others are not. The proposed
research will combine transcriptomics, molecular biology, endocrinology,
neurobiology, and individual and social behavior to significantly advance our
mechanistic understanding of this critical behavioral phenotype. These projects
will also provide essential data about how different brain regions mediate the
ways animals perceive and respond to the world, and how evolution has conserved
or modified the functions of those regions and molecular mediators within those
regions. The first aim will use classic experimental neuroendocrine methods to
temporarily inactivate the caudal dorsomedial hippocampus and test the role of
two neuroendocrine receptors (dopamine receptor 2 and estrogen receptor beta)
that show expression differences in neophobic and non-neophobic birds. The
second aim will use PhosphoTRAP to assess whether an observed change in
neophobia in response to social learning is associated with altered novelty-
seeking and anxiety-related gene expression in hippocampal neurons. The third
aim will expand the scope of this research by developing a new Course-based
Undergraduate Research Experience (CURE) lab through the highly successful LSU
CURE program to test whether neophobia is part of a behavioral syndrome in house
sparrows, and to examine gene expression in brain regions connected to the
hippocampus in birds exposed to a social learning paradigm. This research is
jointly funded by the Behavioral Systems Cluster, the Neural Systems Cluster;
Modulation Program, and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.