* 2237523
* CAREER: Polymeric ligands with tunable affinities to enable selective f-element separations
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2028
* Christine Duval, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Christina Payne
* 01/31/2028
* USD 434,475.00

The f-elements (lanthanides and actinides) play a crucial role in several
peaceful applications of nuclear technology, including electricity generation,
clean energy technologies, and cancer treatment. These elements can be harvested
from natural resources through traditional mining approaches or by processing
industrial waste sources. In many cases, the lanthanides must be separated from
the actinides, like uranium and thorium, before they can be used in the final
application. Lanthanides and actinides are currently separated by solvent
extraction approaches - a chemical process with large physical and carbon
footprints and also generates mixed radioactive waste. Membrane-based
separations are an alternative to solvent extraction that can have a smaller
physical footprint and minimize the volume of waste generated. Thus, designing
membrane materials that can selectively achieve these separations is a key step
in improving the sustainability and cost-effectiveness of these processes. The
fundamental knowledge generated in this project will guide the design of future
membranes that will be used in lanthanide/actinide separations from various
feedstocks. The ability to selectively separate lanthanides from actinides via
membranes will enhance national security and improve the efficiency of resource
recovery and water treatment. This research program is integrated with an
educational program that will develop service-learning opportunities for
graduate students, engage the local Cleveland community through nuclear-focused
outreach activities, and build a training program for future STEM educators
focusing on inclusive teaching strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
research is to understand the molecular-level phenomena that underpin ion-ion
selectivity in copolymer ligands used for f-element separations. This goal will
be achieved by synthesizing polymer ligands with controlled compositions to
serve as a platform for studying ligand-ligand and ligand-ion interactions.
Molecular interactions will be investigated through a combined approach of
computational modeling and spectroscopy. Finally, the polymer ligands will be
coated on membrane surfaces. These studies will reveal the practical
implications of intermolecular interactions on affinity, kinetics, and
selectivity. This research will be integrated with a graduate-level
radiochemistry course in which students will develop teaching tools to
communicate radiochemistry concepts to non-scientific audiences. These tools
will be deployed at outreach events that target K-12 students in Cleveland
through partnerships with the Leonard Gelfand STEM Center and the Girl Scouts of
Northeast Ohio. Finally, a new mentored-teaching experience for graduate
students will serve as a practicum to integrate inclusive pedagogical techniques
into their teaching portfolios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.