* 2237391
* CAREER: How Does the Heart Contract? A Microstructure-Based Approach to Understand Cardiac Function and Dysfunction
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Luigi Perotti, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 04/30/2028
* USD 520,769.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant supports research that will
link cellular and tissue level mechanics to heart function in health and
disease. At the microscale, cardiac tissue consists of a network of continuously
branching and merging cardiomyocytes. These heart muscle cells form a complex
microstructure with preferential orientations and sheetlet planes. Driven by an
electrical signal, the cardiomyocytes shorten and lengthen leading to sheetlets,
tissue, and ventricular motion. To investigate function and dysfunction across
scales, this project will develop a multiscale and multiphysics model capable of
relating observable macroscopic motion to its causes at the cellular and tissue
levels. The resulting approach will be applied to investigate localized and
diffuse abnormalities and how they contribute to cardiac dysfunction across
scales. The microstructure-based understanding of cardiac function can advance
the diagnosis and therapy for patients affected by cardiac diseases. The
multiscale models will connect changes at the cellular and microstructural
levels to tissue and ventricle scale deformation measures, which may lead to new
diagnostic markers. Simultaneously, the microscale mechanisms leading to
abnormal cardiac motion can suggest targets for therapy planning. To accelerate
the dissemination and adoption of the results obtained in this research, the
constructed modeling framework and deformation measures will be shared with the
imaging community, integrated into the education of graduate and undergraduate
students, and included in outreach activities with middle and high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a microstructure-based
understanding of cardiac motion and function. The computational framework will
model: (i) the continuous network of the cardiomyocytes; (ii) the complex
mesoscale structure; and (iii) cardiomyocytesâ€™ mechanics and electrophysiology.
Accounting for these discrete components will uncover how deformation of cells
and cell aggregates lead to observed cardiac motion, e.g., longitudinal
shortening, wall thickening, and twist during ventricular contraction. The
identified deformation modes will be leveraged to formulate microstructure-based
markers of cardiac deformation, which will be computed and tested using
preclinical voxelwise experimental data. The framework and deformation measures
will then be applied to understand the kinematics and mechanics of cardiac
dysfunction in the presence of localized scar tissue or diffuse fibrosis and
cardiomyocyte function impairment. Micro and mesoscale changes will be accounted
for without a priori hypotheses on their effect, enabling the discovery of how
cellular and mesoscale abnormalities are connected to macroscopic tissue and
ventricular dysfunction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.