* 2237889
* CAREER: Thermal proteome profiling applications for in-situ bioreporting of contaminant degradation in soils
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Justin Hutchison, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 01/31/2028
* USD 441,172.00

Emerging contaminants, commonly referred to as contaminants of emerging concern
(CECs), are anthropogenic chemical pollutants that are increasingly being
detected in soils, surface water systems, and groundwater aquifers. In the
United States, CECs pose a significant threat to the Nation’s drinking water
resources. Microorganisms in soils play a critical role in the protection of
drinking water sources by degrading anthropogenic chemical pollutants into
harmless and nontoxic byproducts. However, our ability to grow soil
microorganisms and characterize/harness the enzymes responsible for the
degradation of CECs has remained elusive. The overarching goal of this CAREER
project is to advance the fundamental understanding of microbial enzyme-soil
interactions with the goal of developing and validating proteomic-based assays
and techniques to probe the microbial degradation of CECs in soils. To advance
this goal, the Principal Investigator proposes to combine soil characterization,
active enzyme extraction from soils, predictive modeling, and thermal proteome
profiling (TPP) to 1) probe and unravel the microbiological attenuation of CECs
in soils and 2) detect and discover novel enzymes that can degrade CECs in
soils. The successful completion of this project will benefit society through
the generation of new fundamental knowledge on CEC microbial degradation
pathways to support the development and deployment of natural and engineered
solutions to protect drinking water sources. Additional benefits to society will
be achieved through student education and training including the mentoring of a
graduate student and four undergraduate students at the University of Kansas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Contaminants of emerging concerns (CECs) threaten the
Nation’s drinking water sources and access to clean and fresh water.
Understanding and harnessing the degradation of CECs by microbial communities in
soils, surface water systems and groundwater aquifers could lead to greater
source water protection. The goal of this CAREER project is to investigate and
unravel the degradation pathways of CECs by microbial communities in soils using
advanced proteomic techniques including thermal proteome profiling (TPP). This
innovative approach leverages protocols and assays developed and used
extensively in drug discovery to identify a pharmaceutical's protein target.
However, a barrier to applying TPP to environmental remediation problems is a
lack of knowledge of how active enzymes interact with complex soil matrices,
including a robust framework to assess and quantify the extraction of active
contaminant-degrading enzymes from soils. The specific objectives of this
research are to: 1) probe and unravel the interactions of contaminant-degrading
enzymes with complex soil matrices, 2) develop predictive models of soil-enzyme
extraction efficiency based on sorption isotherms, proteolytic potentials, and
machine-learning approaches, and 3) integrate model predictions and advanced
“omic” techniques (e.g., metagenomics and meta transcriptomics) to validate the
use of TPP as a platform for (i) identifying enzymes/proteins involved in
contaminant degradation and (ii) in-situ bioreporting of contaminant degradation
in soils. The successful completion of this project has the potential for
transformative impact through the generation of new fundamental knowledge on
enzyme-soil interactions to support the development and deployment of natural
and engineered solutions to protect drinking water sources from CECs. To
implement the educational and training goals of this CAREER project, the
Principal Investigator (PI) proposes to develop classroom and research-based
education modules to increase the motivation and retention of junior college
transfer students. This coursework will be paired with research opportunities
provided by the University of Kansas Emerging Scholars Program. Junior college
transfer students will be identified through a network of eight Kansas community
colleges. In addition, the PI plans to disseminate the education modules to
Rose-Hulman Institute of Technology, a primarily undergraduate institution, to
recruit and engage undergraduate students in environmental engineering research
at the University of Kansas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.