* 2237110
* CAREER: Regulating the Interface Chemistry of Sodium Ceramic Electrolytes for Solid-State Sodium Metal Batteries
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Weiyang Li, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 03/31/2028
* USD 415,586.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Beyond lithium-ion batteries, sodium-ion
batteries show great potential for transportation electrification and large-
scale energy storage owing to their analogous battery chemistry, high abundance
of sodium sources, low cost of sodium raw materials, and accessibility.
Meanwhile, solid-state batteries, which employ nonflammable solid electrolytes
to replace the flammable liquid ones, offer a revolutionary solution to mitigate
fire hazards that have hobbled the advances of battery technology. One of the
major challenges in the development of high-performance solid-state sodium
batteries lies in the large interfacial resistance between the sodium ceramic
solid electrolyte and the electrode material. This CAREER award project, jointly
supported by the Ceramics program in the Division of Materials Research, and the
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), addresses
the critical interfacial challenges facing between a sodium metal electrode and
the sodium ceramic solid electrolyte through regulating the electrolyte surface
properties. The PI and her research group seek fundamental understanding on the
interfacial structure-composition-property relationship of the sodium ceramic
solid electrolyte. The advancement of scientific knowledge enabled by this
research will stimulate the development of solid-state sodium batteries with
superior thermal and chemical stability. Such batteries can serve as new
alterative low-cost power sources for diverse energy storage applications.
Through this project the PI will promote engagement between local elementary,
middle and high school students, undergraduate and graduate students in
scientific discourse, particularly in the field of energy materials. The PI will
integrate this research into high school AP curriculum and will develop a
battery-themed summer workshop, especially for elementary and middle school
girls to get hands-on experience for science and engineering projects. The
scientific and educational merits of this project will advance the frontiers of
energy storage technologies, promote the diversity in science and engineering
research, and tackle the gender gap in STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Among the known solid
electrolytes for sodium battery systems, sodium-ion superionic conductor, namely
NASICON, is one of the most promising sodium-ion conducting ceramic solid
electrolytes owing to its high sodium-ion conductivity and excellent
electrochemical and thermal stabilities. Meanwhile, sodium metal is considered
as the “holy grail” anode material for sodium batteries because of its low
electrochemical potential and high theoretical specific capacity. However, the
pairing of NASICON electrolyte with metallic sodium anode for solid-state sodium
batteries gives large NASICON/sodium interfacial resistance and nonuniform
dendritic sodium deposition over electrochemical cycling. In this CAREER
project, the interface chemistry of NASICON will be regulated by a variety of
ultrathin metal oxide coatings via atomic layer deposition. This research will
investigate the hypothesis that the composition, crystallinity, morphology, and
microstructure of the oxide coating on NASICON play critical roles in the early-
stage electrochemical wettability of sodium metal and the sodium-ion transport
across the interface, which affect the interfacial impedance, the sodium
nucleation/growth process, and the electrochemical characteristics. This
research can take a leap beyond the lithium technology by utilizing the much
more sustainable, natural abundant and low-cost sodium resources. The reduced
cost of sodium batteries compared to the lithium systems will make them highly
desirable for large-scale energy storage application. The PI will integrate this
research program into a variety of educational and outreach activities to
broadly disseminate the knowledge/research findings, to promote the diversity in
engineering research, and to tackle the gender gap in STEM fields. The education
components mainly include the following aspects: (1) incorporating this research
into teaching by developing new course curriculums and research projects for
undergraduate and graduate students; (2) integrating this research into local
high school AP curriculum; (3) developing summer workshop “Battery Wonderland”
for elementary and middle school girls to get hands-on experience for science
and engineering projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.