* 2237847
* RAPID: Bacterial Population Dynamics and Community Composition during the US Synoptic Arctic Survey
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Jacqueline Grebmeier, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 08/31/2024
* USD 35,480.00

As the Arctic continues to experience rapid environmental change, including
increasing water temperatures and declining sea ice extent, researchers have
observed ecosystem and biological population shifts in the Pacific Arctic
shelves and deeper Arctic Ocean basins. However, the microbial component in the
marine ecosystem remains understudied. This project is taking advantage of the
2022 US Synoptic Arctic Survey (SAS) cruise on the USCGC icebreaker Healy, which
is studying the current status of the physics, biology, and chemistry across
much of the Arctic Ocean. The overall SAS project is establishing a baseline so
that future studies of the Arctic will have a basis to understand how the Arctic
is changing in the coming decades. This microbial project is evaluating the
population distributions of Arctic prokaryotic microbes, their function in the
Arctic ecosystem, and their roles in the cycle of carbon in the Arctic. The
project is also providing access to genomic sequencing data and isolate
collections for undergraduate students in Iceland and Maryland to carry out
additional research. The team is participating in a “Science for Citizens”
lecture series at the Chesapeake Biological Laboratory of the University of
Maryland Center for Environmental Science and the Strait Science lecture series
that is supported by the Northwest Campus of the University of Alaska Fairbanks
in Nome, both of which are available globally online. Both of these science
communication forums promote better public understanding of Arctic change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will undertake field collections and post-
cruise genetic analyses of sediment and macrofauna-associated prokaryotes from
the shelf to the Arctic Basin as part of larger SAS efforts. Prokaryotes are an
essential biological component for the breakdown of complex biopolymers; cycling
of carbon, nitrogen, phosphorous, and sulfur; and for making nutrients available
to higher trophic levels in the marine ecosystem. The vulnerability of sediment-
associated prokaryote populations to shifts in temperature is crucial for
mapping future changes in prokaryote population dynamics, carbon cycling, and
changes in nutrient cycling at the sediment-water interface that influences the
marine carbon cycle. This sediment prokaryote analytical work fills a gap in the
US contribution to the SAS effort and complements other components, including
investigations of sediment and macrofaunal respiration, nutrient exchange at the
sediment-water interface as well as meiobenthic characterizations. The microbial
component is a US contribution to the international SAS program and allows for
pan-Arctic comparisons with other microbial studies planned as part of the
international SAS program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.