* 2237581
* CAREER: WoU-MMA: Understanding the Neutrino Sky
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Nathan Whitehorn, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 04/30/2028
* USD 360,892.00

Cosmic rays, particles arriving at the Earth from distant sources, can have
energies exceeding 10 million times that of the highest-energy man-made particle
accelerators. A century after their discovery, however, the origin of these
remarkable particles, and the process responsible for giving them these energies
remains unknown. A first glimpse at these sources has come over the last decade
from the Antarctic's IceCube Neutrino Observatory, revealing the approximate
locations of a number of them, but without the precision to identify what they
are. This award supports new approaches to analyze existing IceCube data to
untangle this mystery as well as the first steps to develop a next-generation
observatory, P-ONE, at the bottom of the Pacific Ocean off the Washington coast
that will provide much higher-precision measurements and fully open the new
window on the universe provided by IceCube -- as well as providing a unique
platform for studying the deep ocean. As part of this effort, the award will
also support work to improve teaching in physics to improve accessibility and
emphasize the subject as an experimental science rather than as only a
mathematical exercise and to better align coursework with the skills needed for
both academic and industry careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Neutrinos, able to pass
through obstacles opaque to light, provide a unique view of the high-energy and
distant universe. Over the last eight years, the IceCube Neutrino Observatory
has provided the first glimpse of these high-energy neutrinos from astrophysical
objects, with the first detection of a bright, diffuse background (2014) and of
the first source (2018). These results present something of a puzzle: The
neutrino sky is more isotropic than light at any wavelength except the cosmic
microwave background and the first (and presumably brightest) source is both a
vast distance from Earth and otherwise unremarkable. Together, these
observations strongly suggest that neutrinos are telling us something
fundamentally new about the universe, something that we have not anticipated and
have no other way to see, but we do yet have the data to understand what it
might be. This award approaches this problem on two paths: new methods for
analysis of existing IceCube data, notably by cross-correlation with millimeter-
band observations of active galaxies, of which hints have been reported, and by
development of the electronics for a new neutrino telescope in the northeast
Pacific, P-ONE. P-ONE is expected to achieve angular resolution 4-5 times better
than IceCube, increasing the expected number of detected sources by an order of
magnitude and allowing the first population studies of neutrino sources.
Moreover, P-ONE's peak sensitivity will be in the southern sky, unlike IceCube,
which makes it well-matched to studies of our galaxy and the fields of view of
most next-generation electromagnetic observatories (Rubin, ELT, CMB-S4, SKA,
SWGO, etc.). Anticipated education and outreach aspects of the award include
outreach in Michigan schools, a pair of programs to increase diversity at the
undergraduate to graduate transition, and new programs for teaching experimental
physics at the graduate and undergraduate level. In addition, the award supports
the installation of a new exhibit on cosmic rays and particle physics at the
Impression Five science center, a major center for science education in mid-
Michigan attracting nearly 200,000 visitors a year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
award is aligned with the NSF Big Idea of Windows on the Universe: the Era of
Multi-messenger Astrophysics as it coordinates the use of multi-messengers
observations utilizing long wavelength (mm/cm) photons with high energy
neutrinos from IceCube and will improve the interpretation of data especially
through improving the understanding of diffuse
sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.