* 2237050
* CAREER: Electrically tuned topological phase transitions in moire heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Benjamin Feldman, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 02/29/2028
* USD 338,002.00

Non-technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advances in isolating and
manipulating atomically thin materials provide new approaches to tailor material
properties. Such two-dimensional systems are both highly sensitive to their
environment and they can be stacked so that properties from one layer influence
adjacent layers. This project involves combining dissimilar materials so that
one both acts as a sensor for and can modulate the electronic properties of the
other. In particular, twisting one layer relative to another induces strong
interactions between the electrons in them. Modifying the number of electrons in
a third nearby layer enables control over the strength of interactions and can
change electronic properties such as the distribution of charge at the
nanoscale. Furthermore, the reverse process, where the nanoscale charge
arrangement imprints a reconfigurable modulation on the third layer, can also
lead to exotic quantum behavior. The predicted states may have applications in
low-power electronics, fault-tolerant quantum computing, and novel
electromagnetic devices. The project also trains undergraduate and graduate
students for careers in quantum technology, builds a library of non-technical
videos introducing fields of physics, and inspires the next generation of
researchers by developing and implementing hands-on high school instructional
modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stacking
van der Waals materials into heterostructures provides unprecedented flexibility
to engineer emergent electronic phases. This project investigates hybrid moiré
systems in which a twisted transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) is separated
from a bilayer graphene flake by a thin spacer. In this geometry, the graphene
both acts as a sensor and can be used to tune among correlated and topological
ground states of the twisted TMD. The research focuses on thermodynamic
measurements addressing the order and spin/valley character of the ground states
and excitations. Primary goals include: 1) exploring the topological phase
diagram of twisted TMDs as a function of displacement field; 2) investigation of
ferroelectricity and novel Hubbard model geometries; and 3) using the TMD moiré
lattice to imprint a reconfigurable periodic potential on the graphene to study
Hofstadter butterfly physics. The research is intertwined with parallel
educational goals, including development of instructional modules demonstrating
key concepts of topology and geometry, and building a library of non-technical
videos introducing research subfields. In addition, undergraduates, graduate
students, and high school teachers gain direct laboratory experience in the area
of van der Waals assembly and low-temperature electronic
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.