* 2237096
* CAREER: Electrochemically Mediated Carbon Dioxide Separation via Non-Aqueous Proton-Coupled Electron Transfer
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Yayuan Liu, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Read
* 06/30/2028
* USD 406,228.00

The efficient capture of carbon dioxide (CO2) from stationary emitters and
ambient air is vital in meeting climate targets. However, the conventional
thermochemical methods for CO2 capture are energy-intensive, cost-prohibitive,
and fossil fuel-dependent. On the other hand, emerging carbon capture approaches
driven by electrochemical reactions promise mild operating conditions,
flexibility for coupling to intermittent renewable energy resources, and could
accommodate the multi-scale nature of carbon capture needs due to their
modularity. Nevertheless, the practical deployment of existing electrochemical
carbon capture processes remains hindered by issues such as oxygen sensitivity
and evaporative loss. Correspondingly, this project explores a new concept for
carbon capture modulated by electrochemical stimuli. The concept involves the
generation of low-volatility, air-stable CO2 sorbents at an electrode surface,
followed by CO2 capture in an absorber unit and the subsequent CO2 release upon
switching the polarity of the electrode. The goal is to understand and
ultimately harness control over the thermodynamics, reaction kinetics, and
transport properties of the model electrochemical system, utilizing a multi-
modal toolkit of materials synthesis, characterization, and electroanalysis. The
broader impacts involve education and mentoring activities from high school
through graduate levels to prepare a young generation of engineers with an
interdisciplinary skillset essential to solving humanity’s sustainability
challenges, which include developing high school laboratory modules on carbon
capture and integrating advances in separation methods and interfacial sciences
into the university’s chemical engineering curriculum. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project aims to research an electrochemical interface composed of redox-tunable
Brønsted base moieties that can undergo proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET)
in non-aqueous electrolytes for the reversible (re)generation of air-stable CO2
sorbents. At the molecular level, the relationship between molecular structure,
Brønsted basicity, and PCET energetics will be delineated to inform the rational
design of carbon capture chemistry. At the material level, microporous
electrodes will be synthesized to examine the interplay between electrode
microstructure and the corresponding mass and charge transport behaviors. The
impact of the electrolyte environment on the PCET and CO2 chemisorption kinetics
will also be systematically investigated via (electro)analytical techniques.
Finally, the CO2 separation concept will be evaluated in a bench-scale
prototype, and a combined experimental and modeling effort will shed light on
possible degradation mechanisms and bottlenecks to promote rationally motivated
improvement strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.