* 2237730
* CAREER: GLOW: Investigation on the evolution of magnetic fields of early Earth and beyond with cutting-edge research opportunities for future scientists
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2028
* Miki Nakajima, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy Panero
* 01/31/2028
* USD 107,298.00

In the inner solar system, Earth is the only terrestrial planet that has a
strong magnetic field. The geomagnetic field provides a habitable environment
for life by shielding it from harmful high energy particles. Thus, the presence
of a magnetic field can help support life on the planetary surface. Mars
appeared to have had a magnetic field in the past based on remnant magnetic
fields in the Martian crust. Mercury currently has a magnetic field, but it is
approximately 100 times weaker than that of Earth. Venus does not have any
indication of a current or past magnetic field. Some observed planets in
extrasolar systems (exoplanets) might have signs of magnetic fields, but further
studies are needed. Currently, Earth’s magnetic field is produced by processes
in the iron core, which consists of a solid inner core and liquid outer core
with some light elements. As Earth cools, the solid inner core grows, releasing
heat and light elements to the bottom of the liquid outer core. This facilitates
convection in the outer core and contributes to generating a magnetic field.
However, it is likely that this mechanism did not operate in the past because
recent studies suggest that Earth’s core was completely molten in the early
Earth and the solid inner core did not nucleate until recently (~ 0.5 – 1 Ga).
Simultaneously, terrestrial rock records indicate that Earth had a magnetic
field by 3.5-4.2 Ga. This may suggest that early Earth generated a magnetic
field in a different mechanism from today’s process. It has been hypothesized
that planetary magnetic fields may be influenced by meteorite impacts, but the
details are not well understood. In this proposal, the team will investigate the
mechanisms of Earth’s magnetic field over its history and apply the model to
other planets, including Mars, Venus, and exoplanets, to achieve a comprehensive
understanding of planetary magnetic fields. This will also help understand the
habitability of a planet throughout its lifetime. One of the key aspects of the
proposal is participation of local high school, undergraduate and graduate
students, who will conduct cutting-edge research, numerical simulations, and
learn scientific communication. This proposed work will provide a unique and
enriching opportunity to a diverse group of students, encouraging them to pursue
STEM career paths. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research will include the
following tasks over the next five years to understand the history of magnetic
fields of Earth and other planets: (1) Determine the Earth’s initial interior
structure. Earth and other planets form by collisions among growing planets.
This impact stage determines the initial structure of the planetary core and
mantle, which strongly influences whether generation of a magnetic field in the
core is likely or not. The team will calculate the planetary interior structure
based on impact simulations using a smoothed particle hydrodynamics (SPH)
method, which calculates fluid flows. (2) Using SPH, the team will investigate
how meteorite impacts affect the magnetic field of Earth during the Hadean
(4.5-4 Ga) and Archean (4-2.5 Ga) era. (3) Conduct shock experiments. The team
will investigate the possibility that early Earth’s magnetic field was produced
in an iron-rich silicate melt at the core-mantle boundary (basal magma ocean,
BMO) instead of magnetic field generation in the core. For the BMO to generate a
magnetic field, the BMO needs to have a very high electrical conductivity, which
controls how quickly electrons move in the material. The team will calculate the
electrical conductivity of a BMO analogue material based on laser-driven shock
experiments at the University of Rochester Laboratory For Laser Energetics. (4)
Simulate a magnetic field generation process in BMO using the electrical
conductivities estimated in (3) as an input, and (5) apply the model developed
for Earth to other planetary bodies, including the Moon, Mars, Venus, and
exoplanets to predict the history of their magnetic fields. The proposed
projects will be led by two graduate students and contributed by high school and
undergraduate students. Four local high school students will join this project
as summer interns and they will learn coding, data visualization, and cutting-
edge research during Years 1 and 2. They will be responsible for data
visualization of impact simulations, which will be used in paper publications
and short public videos. During Years 3 and 4, the PI will develop a course
focused on science communication and research primarily for first- and second-
year undergraduate students, where they will learn planetary impact events,
science communications, and how to conduct research. The course includes a field
trip to the Sudbury impact basin, which is the second largest basin on Earth.
During Year 5, the team will host an exhibit at the Rochester Science and Museum
Center (RMSC) to present research output of the team over the past five
years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.