* 2237117
* CAREER:  Elucidating the Causal Link Associated with Energy Metabolism and Mitochondrial Ultrastructure
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2028
* Jason Bazil, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 03/31/2028
* USD 337,477.00

Mitochondria are subcellular organelles that are essential for energy production
in so-called higher organisms, like plants and animals, including humans.
However, we do not fully understand how the makeup and structure of mitochondria
determine their life-sustaining abilities. We do know that biochemical reactions
in mitochondria are separated into compartments known as cristae, which become
disrupted under stress. To understand the reasons for this disruption, this
project will employ advanced microscopy to visualize mitochondrial structural
details and molecular methods to mimic disrupted mitochondrial metabolism. The
project will provide educational experiences to high school students and
teachers and research experiences to undergraduate and graduate students, who
will learn how theoretical concepts can be linked through experiments to produce
new knowledge of how mitochondria function as the energy factories of cells. The
project will also recruit participants from underrepresented groups to improve
equity. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cristae are invaginations of the inner membrane of
mitochondria that contain the bulk of the biochemical enzymes required for the
oxidative phosphorylation of ADP. Under stress, cristae remodel in a
controllable manner, which correlates with the maximum rate of oxidative
phosphorylation. This project seeks to identify causal mechanisms behind this
correlation. In Aim 1, novel calcium related mitochondrial physiology will be
elucidated using bioenergetic data collected from purified mitochondria,
interpreted via computer modeling. In Aim 2, cryo-electron tomograms of
mitochondria in specific conditions will be used to quantify cristae morphology
parameters at near-nanometer resolution. In Aim 3, 3D spatial models
constraining a biochemical reaction/diffusion model of oxidative phosphorylation
will be used to reveal the biophysical mechanisms regulating energy metabolism
and cristae morphology. By uncovering the mechanisms underlying the
structure/function relationship of mitochondria, this project will open new
avenues of scientific inquiry focused on improving the health and well-being of
people across the world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.