* 2237330
* CAREER: Postsecondary STEM Educational Trajectories of Formerly Incarcerated Persons
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Tolani Britton, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Tori Rhoulac Smith
* 05/31/2028
* USD 160,202.00

The Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program is a National Science
Foundation-wide activity that offers awards in support of early-career faculty
who have the potential to serve as academic role models in research and
education, to lead advances in the mission of their department or organization,
and to build a foundation for a lifetime of leadership in integrating education
and research. This CAREER project explores the postsecondary trajectories of
persons with conviction histories to investigate whether access to college
courses while in prison is associated with postsecondary persistence and
completion of a certificate or degree. The research is timely, given increased
interest by national, state, and local policymakers in providing access to
higher education to incarcerated or formerly incarcerated, persons and those who
have conviction histories. In 2014, California passed SB 1391, a law allowing
for equal per-student funding of college courses in prison and on campus. This
CAREER research uses administrative data from California between 2012 and 2021
and regression analysis to measure the likelihood of re-enrollment, persistence,
and completion of a community college certificate or degree for formerly
incarcerated persons in California who took community college courses while
incarcerated. Given the legislation and challenges concerning college access and
success for many students from working-class backgrounds and students of color,
study findings are expected to inform policy, approaches to expanding
postsecondary education, and the body of knowledge on educational access and
success for individuals with conviction histories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
college degree serves as a pathway to economic mobility for persons from
working-class families in the United States. Fiscal returns to education are
highest for those students earning science, technology, engineering, mathematics
(STEM) degrees. This CAREER project also explores the types of degrees earned by
persons with conviction histories, the number of degrees that are earned in STEM
fields, and the characteristics of formerly incarcerated persons who earn these
degrees. Given the importance of the structural context for learning,
institutional conditions associated with higher rates of persistence and
completion for students with conviction histories are also being examined. This
project is funded by the Directorate for STEM Education Core Research (ECR)
program, which supports work that advances fundamental research on STEM learning
and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.