* 2237542
* CAREER: Understanding and Harnessing the Dynamics of Complex Fluid-Structure Interactions
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Casey Harwood, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2027
* USD 473,893.00

Fluid-structure interaction describes the effects of fluid dynamic forces upon
flexible structures – such as wings, bridges, or ship hulls – and vice versa.
Prediction, modeling, and monitoring of fluid-structure interactions are
necessary capabilities for avoiding fluid-induced failures in engineered systems
critical to transportation and infrastructure. At the same time, targeted
structural vibration holds promise as a method of flow-control, with
applications that include improved stall resistance of aircraft wings or drag
reduction on bluff-bodies such as tractor trailers or large maritime vessels.
Current experimental methods do not paint a complete picture of the potential
hazards or the realizable benefits of fluid-structure interaction. The principal
aim of this research is a deeper and more actionable understanding of the mutual
effects of flexible structures and fluids upon one another, and how those
effects can be leveraged for improved safety and performance. The research also
encourages and thrives upon the collaborative involvement of both graduate and
undergraduate research assistants, with pipelines for paid assistantships, class
projects, and student outreach initiatives on campus and at a rural high
school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research contributes toward a paradigm
shift in the way that experiments in fluid-structure interactions are performed
and leveraged for smarter, safer, and more efficient design, modeling, and
monitoring. Specifically, the planned approach will (1) produce new workflows
for quantifying spatial fluid loads on flexible bodies; (2) deduce previously
unrecognized causal links between fluid flow structures and fluid-structure
dynamics; (3) quantify the efficacy of structural vibration in controlling
turbulent flow separation; (4) generate a large and well-documented experimental
database for use by other researchers; and (5) evaluate the use of blended
didactic-experiential learning for improving student competency in the topic of
fluid-structure interactions. Spatial models of fluid loading will be developed
through systematic experimentation on submerged structures, using novel full-
field deformation sensing. The study will utilize particle tracking velocimetry
of flow over canonical vibrating profiles to assess the effects of structural
resonances upon flow separation and reattachment. Open-access educational
modules will be developed and piloted in existing undergraduate courses to
introduce engineering students to fluid-structure interactions through hands-on
experimentation. This work will produce generalizable physical insights that
improve the safety and efficiency of aerospace, civil, and maritime systems.
Moreover, by making such research more accessible to engineering students, this
work facilitates awareness of fluid-structure interactions across engineering
disciplines, helping future engineers produce smarter, safer, and more efficient
designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.