* 2237314
* CAREER: Open-Access, Real-Time High-Throughput Metabolomics for High-Field and Benchtop NMR for Biological Inquiry
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Aaryani Sajja, University of Memphis
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Gao
* 04/30/2028
* USD 609,976.00

Metabolomics is an indispensable approach in systems biology that uses
analytical techniques to measure metabolites in cells, tissues, and biofluids
and provides direct information of the biological phenotype. Nuclear magnetic
resonance spectroscopy (NMR) is a powerful tool for metabolomics due to its
excellent analytical reproducibility and ability to detect numerous metabolites
in a single measurement. NMR metabolomics is conventionally performed on a high-
field (HF) spectrometer, but the recent development of benchtop spectrometers
has led to a resurgence of interest in low-field (LF) NMR due to its
accessibility, low cost and small footprint compared to HF. NMR metabolomics at
both HF and benchtop LF, however, require time-consuming, user-dependent
processing and expertise for metabolite identification and quantification. Due
to these limitations, both HF and LF NMR are underexplored for metabolomics
research in the biological community. This project will fill these critical gaps
by developing, validating, and disseminating real-time, high-throughput NMR
metabolomic techniques for both HF and benchtop LF NMR for advancing biological
infrastructure and research. This interdisciplinary project will prepare the
next generation of women and minorities to pursue bioengineering and
bioinformatics career—currently an under-represented discipline. The project
will also integrate research with educational objectives to target the broader
community from K–12 to graduate students and the general public: (a) coursework
to strengthen biosignal processing &amp; analysis skills in undergraduate and
graduate curricula; (b) internships, targeted to talented women, minority, and
low-income college students; (c) hands-on STEM projects to motivate high-
schoolers through collaboration with school teachers; (d) disseminate
bioengineering research to support K–12 learning through the Society of Women
Engineers, West TN STEM Hub, and Girls Experiencing Engineering programs; and
(e) educational exhibits at local museums to enable public outreach and exposure
to NMR applications. This early hands-on exposure will benefit students of all
ages to understand fundamental concepts and realize NMR applications in a broad
range of fields—including molecular biology, biomedical engineering and chemical
engineering—and ultimately motivate them to pursue a STEM career.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop, validate, and disseminate open-
access metabolomic techniques that will automatically quantify the metabolites
in complex biological spectra obtained from high-field (HF) and benchtop low-
field (LF) NMR via the following objectives: 1) investigate high-throughput
metabolomic methods for HF NMR using deep learning, 2) reconstruct high-
resolution and high-throughput spectra from benchtop LF NMR using autoencoder,
3) investigate these techniques for inquiring biological questions, and 4)
disseminate metabolomic libraries and techniques for biological research and
education via an open-access software. This research will provide a breakthrough
in the field of NMR metabolomics by eliminating a major processing barrier for
both HF and benchtop NMR, thus making NMR an accessible and effective analytical
tool to the biological community. The results of this project will be available
at the institutional website: &lt;br/&gt;https://www.memphis.edu/mrisl/projects/
index.php&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.