* 2237240
* CAREER: Engineered Affinity-Based Biomaterials for Harnessing the Stem Cell Secretome
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Marian Hettiaratchi, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 12/31/2027
* USD 117,048.00

Non-technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stem cells hold tremendous promise
for the field of regenerative medicine due to their potential to repair injured
and diseased tissues. However, the promise of stem cells has not been fully
realized, as the majority of stem cells transplanted into the body after injury
die rapidly after transplantation. Despite their fate, these stem cells still
often manage to have a small positive impact on the damaged tissues into which
they are transplanted. This healing response is partly due to the proteins
secreted by the stem cells into the surrounding injury environment, which can
reduce inflammation and make the environment more hospitable for the
infiltration of host cells to regenerate the injured tissue. However, proteins
typically also do not remain within the injury site for long periods of time,
making their effects short-lived. The goal of this CAREER proposal is to develop
biomaterials to capture and concentrate these potent cell-secreted proteins to
enhance and prolong their therapeutic effects beyond the initial period of stem
cell survival. These biomaterials will be engineered to only capture specific
proteins of interest from a complex mixture of cell-secreted proteins, thereby
allowing them to act as sieves – enriching therapeutic proteins without trapping
ineffective proteins. Toward broad societal impact, the ability to selectively
enrich regenerative proteins from complex mixtures could transform the
therapeutic potential of stem cell transplantation with implications for
treating many diseases and injuries, including musculoskeletal injuries,
cardiovascular disease, and spinal cord injury. This highly interdisciplinary
project requires participation by students interested in bioengineering,
chemistry, biology, and human physiology, and will engage students across
multiple departments at the University of Oregon in both bioengineering research
and education. An inclusive bioengineering education course will be developed to
give students from a variety of disciplines the skills necessary to develop
sustainable bioengineering outreach activities that can, in turn, be used to
promote pathways to bioengineering for K-12 students underrepresented in
science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM). By increasing access to
bioengineering curriculum at multiple levels (K-12, undergraduate, and graduate
students), the proposed work will diversify the pool of talented scientists and
engineers with the skills and desire to engage in interdisciplinary
bioengineering research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mesenchymal stem/stromal cells (MSCs) secrete
proteins that can mediate the immune response to injury and stimulate tissue
repair. However, poor viability of transplanted MSCs can limit long-term
therapeutic effects. Harnessing the regenerative potential of stem cells through
the proteins they secrete (i.e., the “secretome”) represents a recent paradigm
shift in the field of tissue engineering. Biomaterials can be used to sequester
and prolong the presentation of secreted proteins beyond the initial period of
cell survival. Yet, current biomaterials have a limited ability to selectively
sequester specific target proteins from complex protein mixtures. The goal of
this CAREER proposal is to develop a library of affinity-based biomaterials that
can selectively sequester and present therapeutic proteins secreted by MSCs.
Several key innovations will be employed herein, including the use of directed
evolution to identify high-specificity affinity interactions between target
proteins and materials, and the use of bio-transport modeling to predict the
effects of protein-material affinity interactions and protein secretion rates on
overall protein sequestration, thereby enabling the optimization of biomaterials
for protein sequestration. This highly interdisciplinary project requires
participation by trainees interested in bioengineering, chemistry, biology, and
human physiology, and will engage students across multiple departments at the
University of Oregon in both bioengineering research and education. An inclusive
bioengineering education course will be developed to increase access to
bioengineering curriculum and give students from a variety of disciplines the
professional and pedagogical skills to develop sustainable bioengineering
outreach activities that can, in turn, be used to promote pathways to
bioengineering for K-12 students underrepresented in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.