* 2237128
* CAREER: The end of winter: How changing snow conditions affect soil redox and biogeochemistry
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Caitlin Hicks Pries, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine O'Reilly
* 02/29/2028
* USD 829,340.00

Winter is changing faster than other seasons. Regions that once had regular snow
cover during winter now experience warm spells and rain-on-snow events that can
cause snow to melt. Without consistent snow cover, soils will no longer be
insulated from freezing temperatures or protected from water during the winter.
Most research has focused on soils during the summer season when plants are
growing, so little is known about how changes in winter conditions will affect
soil processes like decomposition, greenhouse gas emissions, and nutrient
export. This research uses an experiment that will melt snow, along with
observations along a snow-cover gradient in the New Hampshire mountains, to
understand how changes in snow cover will affect soil processes. This project
provides graduate and undergraduate education in winter ecology, experiments,
and data analysis. This project also involves community members, including
public school students, to help monitor snow and soil conditions in the New
Hampshire mountains and to help the public learn more about the effects of
changes in winter on their communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The loss of a
persistent snowpack is increasing soil climate variability as snowmelt
periodically raises soil moisture levels and leaves the soil vulnerable to
episodic freezing. Recent measurements in upland forest soils indicate this
winter variability is causing redox fluctuations. Increased redox fluctuations
will have profound effects on soil biogeochemistry with implications for
greenhouse gases, such as increased N2O fluxes and reduced CH4 uptake, and may
increase nutrient exports to aquatic systems. This research will 1) construct a
novel in situ experiment that manipulates winter climate with three treatments:
melting 50% of snowfall, melting 100% of snowfall, and a control, where snow is
not manipulated; and 2) use a natural gradient of snow conditions as a space-
for-future-time substitution. Within the experiment and across the gradient,
soil environmental variables (temperature, moisture, frost depth, O2, and redox
potential), and biogeochemical fluxes, including greenhouse gas production (CO2,
N2O, CH4) and the leaching of carbon, nutrients, and metals through the soil
profile, will be measured. This research will generate the knowledge needed to
fill the unaddressed gap of how midwinter snowmelt affects soil biogeochemistry
through changes to moisture, temperature, and redox and quantify how this loss
of snow affects soil.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.