* 2237790
* CAREER: Normative Macro-Finance
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Eduardo Davila, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 05/31/2028
* USD 320,366.00

This CAREER project expands and consolidates a particular area of economics,
normative macro-finance. This field studies the efficiency, distributional
impact, and optimal design of policy in economies in which risk, heterogeneity,
dynamic considerations, imperfect commitment, and financial frictions are of
first-order relevance. To that end, this project i) develops a general framework
to make welfare assessments in environments with risk and uncertainty, ii)
explores the welfare implications of assigning different mandates to central
bankers, iii) studies the design of corrective regulation with imperfect
instruments and multiple regulators, iv) examines the welfare properties of
trading in financial markets when agents have different information, and v)
explores the welfare consequences of allowing for joint borrowing agreements
among different governments. The educational component of this project develops
new self-contained materials on how to conduct normative analysis on questions
pertaining to financial economics and macroeconomics. This will lower the
barriers to entry to normative macro-finance, in particular for policymakers and
economists in policymaking institutions. Better understanding of the welfare
consequences of economic policies will influence the optimal design and
implementation of government policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project
has five components. The first component develops a general framework for making
welfare assessments in dynamic stochastic economies with rich individual
heterogeneity by introducing the notion of Dynamic-Stochastic weight (DS-
weights). This framework allows for a novel, exact, and widely applicable
decomposition of welfare assessments. This decomposition opens the door to
defining new mandates for policy institutions that were not possible before. The
second component explores the welfare implications of assigning different
mandates to central bankers in an environment in which optimal monetary policy
may be time inconsistent, perhaps because of distributional considerations. The
third component studies the design of optimal corrective regulation whenever
policies are conducted with imperfect instruments and when there are multiple
regulators with potentially different regulatory mandates. The fourth component
studies the welfare properties of trading in financial markets when individual
investors have dispersed information and markets are incomplete. The fifth
component studies the welfare consequences of allowing for joint borrowing
agreements among different governments. Each component is directly related to
economic policymaking and will provide new insights into normative questions in
finance and macroeconomics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.