* 2237015
* CAREER: Unraveling the Role of Thin Water Films in Controlling Subsurface Transport of Surface-Active Contaminants across Scales
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Bo Guo, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Hendratta Ali
* 06/30/2028
* USD 331,551.00

Human-made chemicals in the environment can flow through soils to contaminate
groundwater that is critical to daily life and the Nation’s prosperity. In the
ground, many such contaminants are active at surfaces of solid particles and the
interfaces between air and water. Because of this surface-activity, significant
amounts of toxic chemicals can accumulate in the spaces between air and water in
soils and cause long-term threats to essential groundwater. While most of the
air–water interfaces in soils are from thin water films on soil-grain surfaces,
how the surface-active contaminants and thin water films interact is still not
well understood. Researchers will investigate the processes that govern these
complex interactions to improve the tools that scientists use to predict and to
assess the contamination risks from human-made chemicals such as the
perfluoroalkyl and polyfluoroalkyl substances commonly known as PFAS. The
results of this research will lead to more effective cleanup strategies to
reduce harm to human health from PFAS and similar contaminants. The scientists
will use this research on groundwater PFAS contamination as a resource to
collaborate with and support high school teachers with innovative curriculum
tools, and training to engage Arizona high-school students, advance their
interest in STEM, and enhance their experiential and critical thinking
skills.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project goals are to advance the fundamental
understanding of the thin-film-mediated retention and mass-transfer processes
for surface-active contaminants in vadose zones and to develop a cross-scale
framework that incorporates this new information to improve macroscopic
transport models. The research will combine thin-film theory, experimental image
characterization, and multiscale modeling approaches. The methodological
approaches to differentiate the thin-film and bulk capillary air–water
interfaces in soils will potentially transform how hydrologists conceptualize
the movement of surface-active contaminants in vadose zones. The PI will partner
with the University of Arizona’s cooperative-extension Arizona Project WET for
Water Education, a STEM teacher in a Tucson public school, and a College of
Education professor. Together, the project education team will develop, test,
and formalize a fully inquiry-based educational program that involves hands-on
experiences in building and using physical and digital models for deepening
understanding and problem solving. The formalized educational program will be
available to all high schools in Arizona via the existing infrastructure of
Arizona Project WET supported by Tucson Water and the Arizona Department of
Water Resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Hydrologic
Sciences and Environmental Engineering programs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.