* 2237506
* CAREER: Additively Manufactured Soft Robots with Integrated Fluidic Logic and Flexible Electronic Interfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Markus Nemitz, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 07/31/2028
* USD 599,815.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project will support
research to create a new class of made-to-order, 3D-printable soft robots with
the capability to tolerate levels of structural deformations that would disable
conventional approaches to computing and control. The goal of the project is to
be able to rapidly design, fabricate, and deploy a highly customized fleet of
robots to respond to unique and urgent missions. These robots would be able to,
for example, navigate small, winding spaces in cave systems or debris fields, as
might be required for robotic search-and-rescue or exploration. The synergistic
use of mechanical intelligence, embedded fluidic circuits, and flexible
electronics will enable these new robot capabilities. Mechanical intelligence -
the use of robot geometry and material properties to adapt to unexpected
conditions - can significantly reduce the amount of computing capacity needed
for the robot to accomplish its goals. Fluidic logic uses the movement of fluid
in flexible channels within the robot body to convert signals from contact
sensors and other external stimuli into commands that turn robot actuators on
and off. Fluidic logic can be directly built into the robot body and bend and
twist without losing function. Finally, communication and control functions that
are best performed electronically will be implemented using flexible and
stretchable electronics with a high tolerance for dynamic deformation. The
resulting robots will be able to implement sophisticated functionality, while
undertaking severe shape changes as needed, to traverse otherwise inaccessible
spaces. Comprehensive educational activities incorporate and complement the
research, including a new hands-on undergraduate course on printable robotics,
and an outreach program to public high schools in Worcester County.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create robot architectures that can be
quickly 3D printed using additive manufacturing techniques, to produce
inexpensive robots that can crawl, jump, swim, and dive through confined spaces,
and which can be rapidly customized to incorporate mission-specific details. The
research goal is to 3D print robots with integrated fluidic state machines that
respond to fluidic sensors and control fluidic actuators. A new class of
complementary fluidic logic gates and electro-fluidic memory elements will be
developed from multi-stable flexing beam structures with integrated linear
actuators and fluidic tubing. Flexible electronic circuits and electro-fluidic
interconnects will be integrated into the robots using conductive inks and
elastomers. The role of electronics will be minimized and limited to selecting
fluidic functionalities, functionalizing fluidic sensors and actuators, and
writing programs into fluidic memory. The program will deliver a comprehensive
robot architecture for terrestrial, underwater, and amphibious robots, including
designs, fabrication processes, modeling and control methodologies, and
software. The project will maintain a continuously evolving robot component
library and will seek to build a community of researchers and potential users by
sponsoring a sequence of increasingly challenging benchmarking scenarios
inspired by the Tham Luang cave rescue in Thailand in
2018.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.