* 2237986
* CAREER: Affirming Bilingual Children’s Participation in Mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* José Martínez Hinestroza, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Continuing Grant
* Toya frank
* 07/31/2028
* USD 373,409.00

This project will contribute new knowledge on two aspects of participation in
mathematics education. First, this research aims to understand how perceptions
of race influence how teachers, future teachers, and researchers assess how
bilingual children use their languages and movement to participate in
mathematical activity. Second, it will explore ways to counter deficit views
that influence teachers’, preservice teachers’, and researchers’ perceptions of
these multiple ways of participating as inferior to what is traditionally
considered as meaningful participation. The project has the potential to improve
bilingual children’s wellbeing by helping teachers to develop mathematics
classrooms where children can participate on their own terms. This project will
also equip teachers and preservice teachers with the research capacity to
potentially transform their own classrooms beyond the duration of the project.
These transformations may encourage more bilingual children to pursue careers in
mathematics-related fields in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
seeks to answer the overarching research question: How can teachers and
researchers affirm bilingual children’s non-normative participation in
mathematics classrooms? Using a participatory design research methodology, the
project will bring together a raciolinguistic perspective and embodied cognition
to: (1) elicit children’s perspectives on participation, (2) co-design lessons
with pre- and in-service teachers, and (3) co-analyze children’s linguistic and
embodied ways of participating in these lessons. The PI will collaborate with
children and teachers in second, third, and fourth grade, including one
classroom per grade level in two schools (six teachers and approximately 250
children). The contrasting racial and linguistic backgrounds of children in the
two participating schools offer a unique opportunity to learn about the how
children’s linguistic and embodied participation is legitimized and
delegitimized given their racialized and linguistic differences. Discourse
analysis with a focus on translanguaging and qualitative social network analysis
will highlight how students use linguistic and embodied participation to make
mathematical meaning. Findings will support educators in affirming racially and
linguistically diverse students’ unique ways of participating.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER proposal is funded by The Discovery Research
preK-12 program (DRK-12), which seeks to significantly enhance the learning and
teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12
students and teachers, through research and development of innovative resources,
models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research
in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that provide
theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.