* 2237215
* CAREER: Reconfigurable Infrastructure and Scalable Execution for Advanced Air Mobility (RISE-AAM)
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Zhenbo Wang, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 04/30/2028
* USD 537,847.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project will advance the
knowledge needed to develop transformative infrastructure and execution schemes
for the emerging advanced air mobility missions. With the goals of addressing
future mobility needs and fostering safe, efficient, and sustainable
transportation systems, advanced air mobility focuses on the transition from the
traditional air transportation to future passenger or cargo-carrying services in
and around urban areas. However, integration of air mobility into complex three-
dimensional built environments presents many unique challenges in infrastructure
design and operation. To address these challenges, this project will develop and
test a novel airway system as well as the coupled operational rules and control
schemes. These approaches are adaptive and scalable depending on the real-time
travel demand, vertiport distribution and throughput, airspace capacity, and
environmental footprint. The resulting advances are expected to impact multiple
fields including transportation, aerospace, smart cities, and civil engineering.
The research activities are closely integrated with educational activities to 1)
support pre-college education and research through K-12 teacher training and
summer pre-college programs, 2) promote undergraduate and graduate education and
research by creating new courses, enhancing existing courses, and mentoring
student researchers, and 3) educate broader community and general public through
scholarly forums, university events, and network
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal of this project is to
transform the transportation system by advancing the knowledge and capabilities
of novel concepts, infrastructures, and operations for intelligent, automated,
cooperative air transportation services in and around urban areas. The overall
objective of this project is to develop and test advanced air mobility
infrastructures (both physical and digital) and execution procedures to enable
safe and efficient coordination of an increasing number of heterogeneous air
vehicles for on-demand fast transit services in chaotic, dynamic environments.
Specific research objectives include: 1) optimize location of physical air
mobility infrastructure and investigate a transformative digital air mobility
infrastructure, 2) develop a hierarchical execution approach that integrates a
novel data-driven scheduling method and a new distributed model-based vehicle
control technique for safe and efficient air mobility operations, and 3)
validate the infrastructure designs and execution approaches through integrated
simulations and emulated experiments. These contributions are significant
because they are a fundamental step toward reimagining transportation systems by
uncovering how high-tempo, high-density air mobility operations can be safely
and efficiently coordinated in limited airspace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.