* 2237521
* CAREER: Resolving the Influence of Biologically Relevant Microenvironments on Amyloid Aggregation
* BIO,MCB
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2027
* Anne Brown, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jaroslaw Majewski
* 11/30/2027
* USD 316,025.00

Amyloids are proteins that aggregate into highly ordered structures and exhibit
signature aggregation pathways that drive these proteins to functional or
cytotoxic activities. Some amyloids, like β-endorphin (βE), are signaling
molecules and do not have any known cytotoxic activities. Others, like islet
amyloid polypeptide (IAPP) and α-synuclein (αS) participate in both functional
and cytotoxic cellular activities. Completing the demonstration of a spectrum of
functional to cytotoxic states, amyloid-β (Aβ) is a known cytotoxic amyloid with
no clear functional purpose. Taken together, amyloids constitute a very curious
class of proteins that are evolutionarily and structurally connected. By
studying amyloid aggregation events in membrane environments at the atomistic
level, we can identify key molecular properties that drive the spectrum of
functionality and cytotoxicity of these peptides. Molecular dynamics (MD)
simulations offer a cost-effective and atomistic technique to probe these
aggregation events in complex membrane environments that mimic cellular
environments. Using the topic of protein-structure function relationship of
amyloids, coupled with computational techniques, we will further create
accessible, scalable, and sustainable undergraduate research opportunities and
K-12 outreach programs that enhance biochemical and data science knowledge to
students to prepare them for the workforce. Collectively, systematic
investigation of membrane impact on amyloids using cutting-edge simulation
techniques will provide essential knowledge on biophysical events that result in
essential biological function that can be utilized for materials and drug
discovery routes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Notoriously difficult to resolve and work
with in vitro and in vivo, amyloid proteins remain a challenge to characterize
given their transient, metastable structural folding pathways and a
“superficially similar” degree of comparison in microscopy studies. A notable
amyloid-world hypothesis has arisen in which the earliest biological information
transfer was mediated by amyloid proteins, encrypting environmental information
through structural changes to pass onto progeny molecular entities. Given the
duality of multifaceted functionality and cytotoxicity of amyloids and their
role in biological information transfer, it is crucial to understand the
influence of microenvironments on the biophysics of amyloid aggregation. We
hypothesize that lipid membrane composition and glycosaminoglycans presence will
impact and remodel aggregation events of amyloids. Relatedly, amyloid structural
morphologies and sequence-specific motifs will indicate position on the spectrum
of functional to cytotoxic amyloids. Utilizing cutting-edge molecular dynamics
(MD) simulations, that include classical, replica exchange, and polarizable MD,
we will simulate aggregation events of oligomeric amyloids in various membrane
environments. Conformational dynamics will be explored utilizing transition
networks and Markov state models. This proposed work will push the capabilities
of MD simulations to atomistically explore protein aggregation pathways and
interconnect various amyloidogenic species (β-endorphin (βE, islet amyloid
polypeptide (IAPP), α-synuclein (αS), and amyloid-β (Aβ)), to biological
implications and phenomena. Utilization of data-rich, computational methods will
further the integrated data and research literacy education components of this
work given the ability to connect computational and algorithmic thinking with
biology via local, regional, and global education programs that enhance the
computational skillsets of K-12 students, undergraduates, and the
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.