* 2237624
* CAREER: Quantifying climate induced landscape evolution during early Eocene hyperthermals
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Emily Beverly, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 01/31/2028
* USD 237,832.00

The US has incurred billions of dollars in damage from extreme precipitation
events linked to anthropogenic climate change since the 1980s. Increased erosion
and sediment yield from these events is likely to damage soils, clog rivers, and
cripple hydraulic infrastructure. However, we have little information on the
magnitude of the response of our rivers and landscapes to global climate change
because these changes occur on timescales difficult to measure in our lifetimes.
Therefore, we must look to times in Earth’s past when temperatures and
atmospheric CO¬2 concentrations rose rapidly to study landscape response. During
the early Eocene, approximately 56 to 52 million years ago, there were repeated
intervals known as hyperthermal events where global temperatures rapidly
increased due to releases of CO2 over a period of ~20,000 years. These
hyperthermals provide one of the best analogs to modern anthropogenic climate
change, albeit at a slower rate than today. This project will focus on improving
scientific and public understanding of how future climate change will affect our
river systems by using analogs from the early Eocene in New Mexico, Wyoming, and
North Dakota. The education plan will target a diverse population of students
from the University of Houston that will strengthen undergraduate exposure to
field geology using virtual field trips. Because climate change can be an
abstract and intimidating concept for some groups, collaborations with a world-
renowned climate-artist will be used to break down mental barriers and
communicate science to the public and low-income and minority students from the
Houston area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will generate new terrestrial
paleoclimate records from three fluvially dominated basins in the western US: 1)
San Juan Basin of New Mexico, 2) Wind River Basin of Wyoming, and 3) Williston
Basin of North Dakota. It will use a novel method that integrates datasets from
both sandstone channel facies and floodplain paleosols to test the hypothesized
connection between hyperthermal-driven hydrologic cycle intensification and
increased weathering that formed large sand bodies and thick packages of
kaolinite. This project will use a multi-proxy approach that includes
geochemistry, mineralogy, stable isotopes (δ13C, δ18O, and Δ47), sedimentology,
stratigraphy, radiogenic isotope geochronology (40Ar/39Ar, U-Th-Pb), and
magnetostratigraphy to reconstruct the paleoclimate and constrain landscape
response to the hyperthermal events both spatially and temporally. The resulting
dataset will be integrated into quantitative models to test how rapid
atmospheric CO2 increases, global warming, and the resulting hydrologic cycle
intensification will increase the magnitude of weathering and sediment yield,
which has the potential to cause billions of dollars in damage to infrastructure
and ecosystems from soil loss, erosion, and increased
flooding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.