* 2237530
* CAREER: Fundamentals of Entropy-Driven Mechanics of Flexible Nanostructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Fatemeh Ahmadpoor, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 05/31/2028
* USD 531,018.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will support research into
understanding the fundamental mechanics of flexible, plate-like nanostructures.
Examples of these nanostructures include low-dimensional materials, e.g.,
molybdenum disulphide, phosphorene, boron nitride, and MXenes, and biomembranes.
These nanostructures have applications in nanosensors, biomedical devices, gene
therapy, nanoelectronics, energy harvesting, and structural composites. One
special aspect of these nanostructures is that they constantly experience random
deformations due to stored thermal energy, which affects their mechanical
behavior and response to external stimuli. It has proven quite difficult,
however, to incorporate this effect into conventional mechanical models. This
project will develop coupled statistical mechanics and solid mechanics models
that will account for large thermal fluctuations in flexible nanostructures. The
resultant framework will enable mechanics-guided design of next-generation
multifunctional nanostructures for applications in defense, healthcare, and
environmental sectors. The award will also support education of next generation
interdisciplinary engineers, especially promoting women and minorities, as well
as facilitate STEM education for K-12 students through innovative activities,
such as a Musical Math Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thermal fluctuations are a
universal characteristic of all flexible nanostructures due to their low bending
stiffness, which impacts their macroscopic mechanical behavior including
properties, structural stability, and dynamics. In this project, continuum
mechanics models of plates and shells will be integrated with concepts of
statistical mechanics to characterize: (1) the macroscopic mechanical properties
of a fluctuating membrane with imperfections, (2) the instability, imperfection
sensitivity, and buckling behavior of elastic fluctuating membranes, and (3) the
dynamics, and properties of free and forced vibrations of fluctuating membranes.
These studies are challenging due to nonlinearities, non-traditional boundary
conditions, and ubiquitous presence of thermal fluctuations and material
imperfections. The developed continuum-statistical mechanics platform would be
extendable to other small-scale problems including entropy-driven failure
mechanism of nanomaterials, mechanically coupled properties of nanomaterials,
and active matters in biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by the Mechanics of Materials and Structures (MoMS) Program and the
Biomechanics and Mechanobiology (BMMB) program in the Division of Civil,
Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI) in the Directorate for
Engineering (ENG).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.