* 2237131
* CAREER: Heegaard Floer homology and low-dimensional topology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Linh Truong, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2028
* USD 76,655.00

Low-dimensional topology is the study of spaces of dimensions three and four. A
fundamental goal is to understand what properties remain unchanged under
stretching or bending; for example, the number of holes is an invariant property
of a space. This project aims to make progress on topological questions using an
algebraic invariant called Heegaard Floer homology. In parallel with its
research goals, the project includes mentoring and outreach activities. In
addition, the PI plans to organize workshops which will provide speaking and
collaboration opportunities for junior researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heegaard Floer homology plays a prominent role in modern
low-dimensional topology. In particular, the theory has been influential in the
study of knot concordance, leading to the construction of fruitful invariants
and structural results on the concordance group. Building on recent
developments, the PI plans to construct new knot concordance invariants and
four-ball genus bounds. In a different direction, the PI will study spectral
sequences involving Heegaard Floer homology and Khovanov homology, a
combinatorially-defined link invariant. Finally, the PI aims to give new bounds
on difficult-to-compute knot invariants such as unknotting
number.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.