* 2237640
* CAREER: Principled Unsupervised Learning via Minimum Volume Polytopic Embedding
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Kejun Huang, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 02/29/2028
* USD 425,475.00

Unsupervised learning problems are in general significantly more difficult than
their supervised counterparts in machine learning. This poses considerable
challenges in not only machine learning research but also education, as nearly
all models are NP-hard (with possibly the sole exception of PCA), and the
community has been dwelling on algorithms without optimality guarantees for
several decades. This project aims at developing a principled framework of
minimum volume polytopic embedding that unifies various unsupervised learning
problems such as independent component analysis, dictionary learning, and
nonnegative matrix factorization, by treating the problem as embedding the set
of data points into a regular polytope such as a simplex, a box, or an
orthoplex, while guided by a novel matrix volume criterion. The benefit is two-
fold: 1) it provides identifiability guarantee with finite samples, and 2) it
hinges on the development of algorithms that could optimally solve these NP-hard
problems under mild assumptions. The PIâ€™s prior work has showed strong
identifiability guarantees for the former benefit, while this project will focus
on resolving the latter one, starting from a Frank-Wolfe algorithmic framework
that has shown great empirical success. Furthermore, this project will greatly
expand its application domains such as POMDP identification in reinforcement
learning, aggregate flexibility in power systems, and deep polytopic word
embedding in natural language processing. In terms of the mathematical
framework, extensions to handle nonlinearity and deep representation learning
are also developed, which have been elusive and are expected to be widely
impactful beyond the main focus of theory and algorithm development in this
project. Extensive education and outreach plans are laid out to corroborate the
research impact and encourage students from all backgrounds to engage in
computer science and machine learning research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project we propose a novel framework that tries to transform all data points as
points in a regular polytope (such as a simplex, a box, or an orthoplex), hence
the aim polytopic embedding, while guided by a novel matrix volume optimization
criterion. The PI's prior work not only showed strong identifiability guarantees
of the latent representation, but also found a wide variety of practical success
in applications. Prior success inspires the PI to further investigate this
direction, resolve unsettled theoretical challenges, broaden the learning
framework, and seek even more application domains. This project will evolve
along the following synergistic thrusts: in Thrust 1, a Frank-Wolfe algorithm is
designed to solve the NP-hard polytopic embedding problem. Inspired by recent
developments in analyzing guaranteed non-convex learning, a promising pathway is
laid out to provide provable global optimality guarantees. In Thrust 2, the
proposed learning framework will be used to identify an unknown POMDP from only
observations with computational guarantees. Research along this thrust will be
applied to healthcare recommendations from medical data. In Thrust 3, the
problem of aggregate flexibility in power systems is introduced, which provides
an interesting dual interpretation of polytopic embedding. Experiments on real
data will validate the performance and expand the framework to handle nonlinear
constraints. In Thrust 4, we propose a novel word embedding scheme with not only
computational guarantee but also semantic interpretation. An extension to deep
polytopic embedding framework is also introduced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.