* 2237820
* CAREER: Leading to Accelerated Discoveries in High-Throughput Ultrafast Laser-Driven Processing of High Entropy Alloy Nanoparticles
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Ritesh Sachan, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 03/31/2028
* USD 529,164.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award supports fundamental
research that enables high-throughput creation of high entropy alloy
nanoparticles (HEA NPs). HEA NPs are structures where multiple elements
(typically five or more) are homogeneously mixed at nanoscale dimensions. This
technique of fabricating NPs offers access to a large number of compositions of
HEAs that have the ability to form unique microstructures, leading to new
physical properties which can be applied in areas like catalysis in order to
reduce the energy consumption of industrial processes. A key challenge to
realizing the unique potential of HEA NPs is the lack of manufacturing processes
that can access a large compositional and dimensional space of NPs and advance
the fundamental understanding of process-structure-property correlations. This
research project will aim to develop a laser-driven method that reliably allows
the generation of HEA NPs with control over broad composition and size ranges.
This project aims to generate extensive material libraries of HEA NPs, which can
accelerate research to understand the across-the-scale (atomic-to-nano)
structure of NPs and their correlation with the electro- and plasmonic catalytic
properties. The integrated educational program of this project will disseminate
the research activities to a broad community of students and teachers at the
K-12, undergraduate, and graduate levels. These initiatives aim toward
increasing the skilled workforce of engineers with improved participation of
underrepresented American populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
develop a high-throughput methodology to create HEA NPs with large compositional
and dimensional space by employing a nanosecond pulsed laser-driven particle
formation method. The pulsed laser processing on combinatorial multilayer/alloy
ultrathin films (1-30 nm) facilitates the fabrication of well-defined isolated
droplet-shaped HEA NPs of various compositions on substrates. These NPs are
formed through the laser-induced melt-phase dewetting phenomenon, coupled with
thermally-driven mass transport and ultrafast solidification in the nanosecond
timescale. The success of this hypothesis-driven methodology will facilitate an
accelerated fundamental understanding of the formation mechanism, governing
factors, elemental distribution, and microstructures. The utilization of
conventional and advanced data science driven characterization methods, such as
4D scanning transmission electron microscopy, will resolve the compositional and
microstructural complexities to fill the knowledge gaps in understanding laser-
material interactions for creating NPs. These results will have broader
implications for advancing the fundamental science of microstructure
correlations with the electro- and plasmonic catalytic properties of HEA NPs.
The project will lead to the creation of new material libraries for HEA NPs and
open up future opportunities for applications in catalysis and other areas. This
project is jointly funded by the Advanced Manufacturing Program, the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the Metals and Metallic
Nanostructures Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.