* 2237229
* CAREER: Verified AI in Cyber-Physical Systems through Input Quantization
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Stanley Bak, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 07/31/2028
* USD 214,287.00

Advances in artificial intelligence (AI) implemented with neural networks and
other machine learning techniques have transformed what computers can
accomplish. Despite their potential, AI has had comparatively less impact on
cyber-physical systems (CPS). Many CPS interact with the physical world where
safety is important, so a solution with superior performance 99.9% of the time
may still be unacceptable for a CPS. Unfortunately, AI systems are hard to prove
correct — it is difficult to trust the systems will always do what they are
designed to do. The goal of this research is to advance the foundations of
formal methods in order to make formal verification of AI-based CPS practical.
If successful, the work will enable a justified trust in AI systems and allow AI
to be applied within safety-critical processes that interact with the physical
world. The project investigates approximation approaches where an AI component
is replaced by an approximation with similar performance that is easier to
verify.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main approach explored in the research
approximates a neural network or other machine learning component by first
performing input quantization. Input quantization rounds the continuous-valued
inputs to a finite set of discrete values, allowing for exhaustive enumeration
when the number of inputs is low. Adjusting the degree of quantization allows
for a trade off between the closeness of the approximation (the performance) and
the ease of verification. Further, such an approximation can be constructed
using black-box executions of the AI component, so that the developed techniques
can be used on machine learning components beyond neural networks as well as
with yet-to-be-discovered designs. This project matures techniques for the use
of input quantization to prove system-level properties of CPS, including new
core data structures and different quantization and repair approaches to enable
scalable closed-loop verification for CPS with AI components. Aspects of the
research will be integrated in graduate and undergraduate courses, as well as
part of outreach efforts with K-12 students targeting traditionally
underrepresented groups in computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.