* 2237242
* CAREER: Transforming Machine Learning Models Developed in Labs to Manufacturing Plants for In-Process Quality Prediction
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Peng Wang, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 04/30/2028
* USD 567,930.00

Recent advances in areas such as automation, data science, and artificial
intelligence, are creating new opportunities for advanced manufacturing.
However, most machine learning-based solutions are developed in lab
environments, which require extensive model tuning and expensive data labeling
to be implemented in manufacturing plants. The technical barrier arises from the
major discrepancies in the amount, distributions, veracity, and modality between
lab and plant data. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will
investigate new machine learning methodology to make machine learning
generalizable and deployable. If successful, the project will accelerate the
deployment of artificial intelligence in manufacturing plants and lower the
entrance barrier to Industry 4.0 for small and medium manufacturers. This
project is also expected to contribute to the development of new manufacturing
workforce by engaging middle/high school students and local industries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop a machine learning
architecture with expandable modules to learn from massive unlabeled data
streaming and adapt to dynamically changing manufacturing conditions in plants.
The lab-to-plant transformation will be realized upon testing two scientific
hypotheses: (1) a generic model for characterizing massive unlabeled data can
effectively learn the similarities of plant data; (2) an established model can
be fully adapted to unseen but related scenarios with limited tuning. A
transformer architecture-based novel machine learning framework will be
configured to simultaneously realize: i) task-agnostic self-supervised
contrastive learning from massive plant data for multi-level data
characterization; ii) normalizing flow for building one-to-one mapping between
sensing data toward virtual sensing data generation in plants for improved
quality prediction; and iii) prompt model turning for effectively and
efficiently adapting models between different manufacturing conditions. If
successful, this project will enable generalizable, deployment-ready machine
learning solutions that will be readily scalable for a broad scope of
manufacturing applications and help U.S. manufacturers adopt smart manufacturing
technologies at an accelerated pace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the Advanced Manufacturing Program and the Established Program
to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.