* 2237474
* CAREER: Networking and Compute for Next Generation Low-Earth Orbit Satellites
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2028
* Deepak Vasisht, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 03/31/2028
* USD 124,128.00

The next generation of Low Earth Orbit (LEO) satellites, dedicated to Earth
observation, seeks to enable a compelling vision: frequent high-resolution
monitoring of the Earth to track humanity scale events. These satellites operate
in low orbits, less than 1000 Km above Earth, and democratize access to Earth
imagery for multiple applications: precision agriculture that improves farm
yields and incomes, disaster management such as early detection of forest fires,
modeling the spread of diseases, geo-political analytics, and climate
monitoring. As such constellations scale to hundreds of satellites, traditional
architectures for space-Earth connectivity fail to meet their needs.
Specifically, these constellations generate hundreds of terabytes of data every
day that must be transported to the Earth, while the satellites travel at fast
speeds with respect to ground stations on the Earth. Therefore, the data
download process experiences day-level delays and is prone to failures due to
bad weather or hardware errors. The goal of this proposal is to design a new
paradigm for space-Earth connectivity that removes these bottlenecks and enables
fault-tolerant networks that generate near-realtime (minute-level) insights from
data collected by these satellites. The proposed research will remove networking
and compute bottlenecks for LEO satellites and enables novel commercial,
academic, and national security applications. Some example applications include
early response to aircraft intrusions, forest fires, and geopolitical events.
The educational efforts in this proposal will train students to engage in
research and development efforts focused on space-Earth networking and edge
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research designs new algorithms and
architectures for networking and edge computing on satellites and ground
stations. Specifically, the proposed research includes: (a) a new distributed
ground station architecture that is robust to transient failures, agile to
traffic variations, and enables low latency data download from satellites, (b)
an edge computing framework that extracts insights, schedules data transfer, and
prioritizes important imagery for networked transfer while being scalable to
multiple applications, and (c) design and analysis of interconnects between
communication and Earth observation satellites for opportunistic routing. The
proposal takes an end-to-end systems level approach to large-scale space-Earth
networks, which is essential for their robust, fault-tolerant, and high-
performance operation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.