* 2237295
* CAREER: Enabling Users to Audit the Integrity of Their Cloud Services
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Cheng Tan, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 02/29/2028
* USD 128,187.00

Cloud services (for example, cloud databases, serverless computing, and machine
learning as a service) are now the basic building blocks of today's digital
world. These services are complex black boxes, running in a different
administrative domain from the service owners. It is unclear if cloud services
always run as expected when facing operator errors, misconfigurations,
unexpected failures, hardware faults, and software bugs. This proposal aims to
develop a new set of techniques to enable users to audit the integrity of their
cloud services without trusting the cloud and without help from the
cloud.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research has three main thrusts
targeting three families of cloud services. The first thrust verifies
transactional databases with a new framework that combines new polygraph data
structures, graph encoding, Satisfiability Modulo Theories solving, and hardware
accelerations. Besides auditing cloud databases, this thrust helps clarify
client-centric guarantees provided by different isolation levels. The second
thrust studies auditing the execution integrity of serverless computing, which
enables users to ensure their serverless functions run as written. The third
thrust aims to verify cloud deep learning compilation by proving the two models
before and after compilation are semantically
equivalent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed systems, by making auditing cloud
services possible, enable individuals and organizations to gain confidence about
the correctness of their outsourced services and further spur cloud providers to
provide better services. In addition, the project will produce new lectures,
talks, and outreach activities to highlight the risks of cloud failures and how
auditing techniques work. The proposed project will develop a new graduate
course about execution integrity. All the materials will be freely available to
the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project's code, data, documents, papers,
technical reports, and course materials will be publicly available at the
website: https://khoury-srg.github.io/AuditCloud. The website will be available
for at least five years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.