* 2238679
* CAREER: Novel platforms for topology and non-Fermi liquids: From projected topological branes to non-Abelian and fractional materials
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Bitan Roy, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 12/31/2027
* USD 220,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical
research into topological states of quantum matter and electronic materials in
which electrons interact strongly. In ordinary metals, like copper and aluminum,
impurities are usually detrimental to current conduction. Topological materials,
on the other hand, have special current carrying channels that are exceptionally
robust to the effects of impurities. They also provide a platform that may
realize quantum computation and pave the way for future applications in
electronics. However, topological materials that have so far been investigated
are mostly limited to periodic crystals in three spatial dimensions. The PI will
go beyond this limitation and extend the landscape of topological materials by
theoretically studying and designing more general structures that are non-
periodic or have extended defects in them. The general aim is to theoretically
investigate the electronic behavior of such systems which may eventually lead to
technological advances in quantum computation and efficient electric power
transmission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports the PI's educational
and outreach activities. The PI will (i) develop open access online learning
modules on pedagogical introduction to Topological Condensed Matter Physics,
leading to a future undergraduate level review article, (ii) build an outreach
program involving local undergraduate colleges and HBCUs, followed by an on-
campus mini-workshop at Lehigh with 10-15 attendees, and (3) mentor selected
undergraduate students from minority and underrepresented communities with the
goal of attracting them to careers in STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award supports theoretical investigations at the forefront of topological
condensed matter physics, focused on some of its key limitations. The PI will
extend classification of topological materials beyond three dimensions by
constructing lower-dimensional projected topological branes on quasicrystals and
their rational approximants. Lattice defects, such as dislocations and grain
boundaries, will also serve as tools to identify a new class of translationally
active Floquet topological phases in the dynamic realm, when crystals are
exposed to time periodic drives. The PI will showcase non-crystalline materials,
such as amorphous networks, fractals, and quasicrystals, for realizing
topological superconductors. In parallel, the PI will compute hallmarks of
strong electronic interactions in non-Abelian Dirac materials, such as graphene-
based van der Waals heterostructures and fractional Dirac materials.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports the PI's educational and outreach
activities. The PI will (i) develop open access online learning modules on
pedagogical introduction to Topological Condensed Matter Physics, leading to a
future undergraduate level review article, (ii) build an outreach program
involving local undergraduate colleges and HBCUs, followed by an on-campus mini-
workshop at Lehigh with 10-15 attendees, and (3) mentor selected undergraduate
students from minority and underrepresented communities with the goal of
attracting them to careers in STEM disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.