* 2238878
* CAREER: Smart and scalable approaches for developing multimodal optical and acoustic imaging technologies
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Sri-Rajasekhar Kothapalli, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Vikram Dalal
* 02/29/2028
* USD 426,725.00

In vivo imaging is an integral part of basic life science research and also
plays a critical role in diagnosis of several diseases in clinic. Unlike in
vitro diagnostics, in vivo imaging is non-destructive and repeatable, but
typically provides information about one or two biological parameters at a given
time. Study or detection of complex diseases in a living subject requires
information about anatomical, functional (e.g., oxygen saturation), and
molecular biomarkers. Therefore, multimodal imaging methods combining
conventional imaging techniques - such as Magnetic Resonance Imaging, Position
Emission Tomography and X-Ray Computer Tomography - have gained clinical
importance. However, these multimodal technologies are expensive and not
suitable for point-of-care (POC) imaging applications. This CAREER project will
develop and integrate optical, ultrasound and photoacoustic technologies and
demonstrate reliable multimodal POC imaging. The educational outreach activities
will prepare female and underrepresented K-12, undergraduate, and graduate
students for next generation biomedical imaging device
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this proposal is to
build an integrated research, education and outreach program centered on the
science and engineering of next generation smart, affordable, portable, and non-
ionizing, multimodal imaging and sensing devices. The research objective is to
develop a novel multimodal optical, photoacoustic, and ultrasound imaging
platform built at the interface of transparent ultrasound transducer technology,
model-based data science tools and artificial intelligence. The platform will be
validated for studying neural activity in brain cancer models. The educational
objective is to prepare STEM leaders (at K-12, undergraduate and graduate
levels) for advancing innovations in smart biomedical imaging and sensing
devices through focused seminars and workshops for teachers, live demo of
portable ultrasound imaging and inexpensive ultrasound bioreactor for cell
stimulation, and new teaching materials at the intersection of multimodal
sensing and AI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.