* 2238955
* CAREER: Modeling and Simulating Generalized Diffusion for Computer Graphics and Computational Science
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Mridul Aanjaneya, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2028
* USD 77,252.00

Many problems that arise in computer graphics (such as virtual painting and
phase changes like ice formation and dendrite growth) are driven by diffusion as
pigment, crystals, or neural branches spread. The predominant model employed to
capture diffusion is Fourier's law. However, this formulation prevents the
simulation of anomalous diffusive processes, where diffusion occurs either
faster (super-diffusion) or slower (sub-diffusion) than the rate predicted by
Fourier's law. Currently, there is a need for efficiently simulating and
visualizing super-diffusive phenomena, such as the super-spreader events for
disease propagation witnessed during the COVID-19 pandemic or the melting of the
permafrost due to global warming. This project will push the frontiers of
physics simulation in computer graphics by developing a general framework for
efficiently simulating all kinds of diffusive processes in large-scale
applications, thereby enabling for example characterization of diffusion
parameters that lead to specific experimental observations in the real world or
the design of policies for preventing disease outbreaks in moving crowds.
Project outcomes will have broad impact by supporting the visualization of such
complex physical processes at greatly expanded scales. Additional broad impact
will derive from the ability to run high resolution simulations on commodity
workstations, which will allow a broad audience, particularly students in STEM,
to simulate large-scale problems on their own workstations that previously may
have required less-accessible enterprise-grade computational resources. Outreach
and educational activities such as workshops will leverage diversity programs at
Rutgers University to recruit and support students from under-represented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the state-of-the-art in
computer graphics by developing a novel formulation for diffusion using
fractional derivatives that can not only simulate sub- and super-diffusive
processes but also recover the efficiency of the best-known solvers for
traditional Fourier-based diffusion. A hybrid Lagrangian/Eulerian representation
will be adopted for modeling both micro- and macroscopic interactions, the two
being strongly coupled together while accounting for discontinuities such as
cracks that may emerge. To scale to large problem sizes, an adaptive
discretization scheme will be developed using spatial polynomial regions that
can flexibly represent the diffusion fluxes in any irregular domain of arbitrary
shape using polynomial functions. For fast numerical solutions, this project
will develop an efficient solver using Multigrid methods that better utilize the
hardware memory bandwidth by avoiding construction of the linear system while
leading to fast convergence rates on modern workstations. The resulting
framework will allow the simulation of diffusive phenomena such as super-
diffusion that have either not been explored in computer graphics or are
currently beyond the reach of existing methods. Implementations of the proposed
methodology will be made available to the community as open-source software
packages, along with a lightweight client that supports interactive user
feedback from the browser while the computationally intensive simulation runs on
a remote server thereby making this research broadly accessible, in particular
to undergraduate and K-12 students, to cultivate their early interest in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.