* 2238838
* CAREER: Efficient Learning of Equilibria in Dynamic Bayesian Games with Nash, Bellman and Lyapunov
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Lichun Li, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 04/30/2028
* USD 400,000.00

Dynamic Bayesian games characterize long-term interactions among multiple
organizations or agents with private information that changes over time. The
balance among the agents occurs when every agent has the best response to the
others’ strategies. At this equilibrium, agents strategically exploit their
private information to gain long-term benefits. Dynamic Bayesian games have
broad applications in cyber, physical, economic, and social systems like cyber
security, resource allocation, war field, market share, and governance of social
media. The main difficulty in bringing the intelligence of the game into the
society and the economy is the extremely high computational complexity of the
equilibrium. Currently, only supercomputers can handle the computation. This
project proposes an innovative method that integrates AI, control theory, and
game theory to provide efficient computation algorithms such that the
computation can be handled on typical PCs, which makes it possible to fight
efficiently and intelligently against millions of cyber-attacks, to rapidly
allocate resources in 6G ultra-dense networks in a near-optimal way, and to
automate the governance of metaverse in real-time. The project will build an
initial model of a support system for female engineers, including a freshman
course to enhance female students’ interest in engineering and early research
opportunities to encourage female students to pursue further engineering
careers. Meanwhile, the project will regularly deliver the research results to
the public using narratives in summer camps in cooperation with the Challenger
Learning Center, STEM events, and open house events. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims at breaking the curse of time in Bayesian games and develop
efficient algorithms to compute the perfect Bayesian equilibrium in
long/infinite horizon stochastic Bayesian games with typical PCs. Computing
equilibria in dynamic Bayesian games is extremely difficult. Current algorithms
need to compute equilibrium for every possible information set. The total number
of possible information sets grows exponentially with respect to time, and hence
current algorithms soon exhaust computing resources. This project will break the
curse of time through three innovative approaches. First, the Bellman equation
in dynamic Bayesian games suggests that the current stage equilibrium can be
computed based on the value function in the future, so evaluating the Nash
equilibrium at all information sets is unnecessary. Second, Lyapunov-like energy
functions established based on our prior work promise to solve the Bellman
equation efficiently. Third, our proposed dual neural network structure has
great potential for approximating the value function with time-insensitive
structures without introducing the curse of dimensionality. This project will
develop a video game to test the algorithms against humans in real-time. This
algorithm has great potential to automate and intellectualize defense strategies
in security problems, coordination strategies in multi-agent systems, resource
allocation in 6G ultra-dense networks, governance of metaverse, and much more.
As the algorithms can be run on typical PCs, it will allow many more scientists
and researchers to investigate the complicated equilibrium behavior in general
stochastic Bayesian games.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.