* 2238296
* CAREER: Composite Physics-Informed Learning of Dynamic Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Truong Nghiem, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 06/30/2028
* USD 492,470.00

Cyber-physical systems (CPSs) are core technologies in many modern engineering
systems, spanning from automobiles, robots, medical devices, buildings, to power
grids and advanced manufacturing systems. With the wide availability of data
from these systems, machine learning (ML) and artificial intelligence (AI) have
found great success in many CPS applications. However, their current fundamental
challenges are that they often require big data, may violate basic physical
principles leading to underperformance or even failures, and do not robustly
handle messy data from real-life systems. This project creates new methods,
algorithms, and software in a cyberinfrastructure (CI) that seamlessly and
synergistically integrate ML/AI with traditional physical knowledge in so-called
physics-informed machine learning (PIML) models that can overcome these
challenges. The CI is built upon a unified theoretical foundation of PIML, a
framework and software for composing heterogeneous models into composite PIML
models, and novel methods for improving their efficiency and accuracy. The
developed technologies will push forward the frontiers of ML/AI in CPSs to open
up new exciting pathways for overcoming the inherent challenges and enhancing
the performance and safety of AI-driven CPSs, thus broadening their real-life
applications. This project deeply integrates research activities with education
activities to excite and foster experiential learning and research experience in
computer science and engineering at the undergraduate and graduate levels, and
to promote STEM participation among underrepresented groups and enrich public
understanding through collaboration with local schools and public programs. The
project serves the national interest, as stated by NSF's mission, by promoting
the progress of science, and to advance the national health, prosperity, and
welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is
to integrate ML and physics within a comprehensive, flexible, and synergistic CI
for composite PIML and active learning of dynamic systems. To this end, its
objectives are to develop (1) a theoretical foundation of unified PIML
frameworks; (2) a theoretical framework and software for composing models and
physical properties in composite PIML models; and (3) physics-informed active
learning methods which directly integrate physics to obtain the most informative
data consistent with physics for improving the sample efficiency and accuracy of
learning. This research advances the state of knowledge regarding unification of
PIML methods, the benefits and costs of PIML, how to effectively and efficiently
compose models and physical properties in a heterogeneous PIML model, and how to
integrate physical properties into active learning. It also creates
methodologies and software that enable rapid development and exploration of
novel data-driven modeling methods for dynamic systems, pushing the limits and
enhancing the applicability and performance of ML in CPSs. By building a solid
foundation for integrating physics and ML to yield accurate, interpretable,
robust, and physically consistent models, the CI will facilitate high-
performance data-driven prediction, simulation, optimization, and control
methods for CPSs, benefiting a broad range of scientific and engineering
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.