* 2238049
* CAREER: Inference on Macroeconomic Heterogeneity
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Mikkel Plagborg-Moller, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 02/29/2028
* USD 243,609.00

Recent research on the aggregate economy tries to understand how aggregate
economic performance has differential impacts on individual economic units. This
is partly due to increased access to detailed micro-level data sets, increased
and cheaper computing power, and partly due to growing concerns among
policymakers about inequality. While much progress has been made in both theory
and empirical methods of understanding the links between inequality and
aggregate economic activity, current statistical methods used by academic
researchers, central banks, and other policy institutions are not designed to
account for these differences. This proposal consists of four projects that will
develop new and modern econometric tools to improve empirical research on
differential effects of macroeconomic outcomes. The project will also develop
video materials to educate students and practitioners in these econometric
tools. The results of this research project will improve macroeconomics policies
that increase economic growth as well as reduce inequality, thus improve the
well-being of the average American. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER research
proposal will use three projects to develop new econometric methods for studying
heterogeneity in macroeconomics. The first project develops an inference
procedure with formal coverage that guarantees visualizing multi-dimensional
cross-sectional heterogeneity, such as heterogeneity in dynamic response
profiles across groups of households or firms. The second project provides a
causal reinterpretation of popular methods for estimating temporal heterogeneity
and nonlinearities in time series data, such as state- or sign-dependence of
impulse responses. The third project runs a large-scale simulation study of
impulse response estimators and provides quantitative recommendations on how to
choose between the many available procedures. Finally, the project proposes a
plan for developing a collection of interactive educational materials on modern
macro-econometric methods. Besides the contribution to econometric theory, the
results of this research project will also improve macroeconomics policies and
increase economic growth as well as reduce inequality, thus improve the well-
being of the average American.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.