* 2238340
* CAREER: An Integrated Geophysical Approach to Research and Education to Solve the Tectonic Puzzle of the Northern Atlantic
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Irina Filina, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 02/29/2028
* USD 122,288.00

The Northern Atlantic has diverse geologic features including a hotspot under
Iceland, volcanic-rich passive continental margins of Norway and Eastern
Greenland, and active and abandoned spreading centers in the Atlantic Ocean with
the Jan Mayen microcontinent in between. However, the tectonic history of the
region has generally been oversimplified. This research will reveal the crustal
type (continental or oceanic) of different tectonic blocks, reconstruct their
fit prior to the opening of the northern Atlantic Ocean, and provide a tectonic
“snapshot” for each geologic time period. The results can help pinpoint the
timing and extent of critical geological processes that affect paleoclimate,
biodiversity, and initiation of oceanic water circulation. The research will be
integrated with education efforts, including mini research projects in advanced
geophysical classes at the University of Nebraska-Lincoln; a summer camp for
high school students and underserved students from Girls Inc. of Lincoln and
Omaha, NE; and five education modules that will be disseminated to educators
across the nation via the Science Education Resource Center at Carleton College.
Such efforts will broaden participation in STEM and cultivate a diverse and
well-equipped geophysics workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With uncertainties in
the extent of the Jan Mayen microcontinent and tectonic domains of the Norwegian
margin, as well as the disputed crustal affinity of the Greenland-Iceland-Faroe
Ridge, tectonic reconstruction of the Northern Atlantic region remains poorly
constrained. This project will examine crustal architecture and tectonic
structures of individual regions via the integration of geophysical methods with
geological constraints from scientific drilling. A set of robust and
comprehensive geophysical models in three individual regions of the Northern
Atlantic – the Norwegian-Greenland conjugate margins, the Jan Mayen
microcontinent, and the Greenland-Iceland-Faroe Ridge region – will be developed
to define subsurface structures that are in agreement with multiple geophysical
methods. The identified tectonic features will be traced in-between the modeled
lines in all three regions using spatial analysis of potential fields, building
a framework for a consequent tectonic restoration, which will provide new
fundamental knowledge of the pre-Atlantic continent. Integrated with these
efforts, the education goal is to promote geophysics as a career of choice by
engaging diverse undergraduate, graduate, and high school students in
interactive learning experiences centered around an integrated geophysical
approach. These activities will promote a comprehensive multi-physics analysis
that integrates publicly available datasets and enables robust and rigorous
interpretations. Ultimately, a comprehensive geophysical research program will
be established at a public land-grant institution that will yield graduates who
are well-equipped to meet the needs of the geophysical workforce and
nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.