* 2238472
* CAREER: Multi-level Bridge Tapped Resonant (MBTR) Solid-State Transformers (SSTs)
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2028
* Pritam Das, SUNY at Binghamton
* Continuing Grant
* Mahesh Krishnamurthy
* 03/31/2028
* USD 430,519.00

Solid State Transformers (SSTs) play a critical role in various applications for
a sustainable future including integrating renewable energy and energy storage
into modern electrical grids, electrified transportation systems, buildings etc.
These applications require SSTs to comply with grid integration standard IEEE
1547, have the agility to deal with very abrupt load changes with high energy
conversion efficiency over a wide load range. Present SSTs fall short of meeting
these needs, having remained virtually unchanged since their inception. This
necessitates the need to rethink the realization of SSTs, leading to the
introduction of a family of new AC-DC bidirectional power converter topologies
and control strategies to perform power conversion at higher switching
frequencies with reduced component count and size for a wide range of
applications. Simultaneously, the proposed approach takes full advantage of
emerging Wide and Ultra-Wide Band Gap (WBG and UWBG) power semiconductors and
innovations in magnetic materials for power conversion. A tightly-coupled
educational plan supports the national priority to create renewable energy
systems-based jobs through a power electronics workforce training program that
includes students from diverse backgrounds and includes outreach to community
colleges, public high schools, and Native reservations. The outcomes contribute
to a sustainable future by reducing the cost and complexity of integration of
renewable energy, reducing power conversion losses in such systems and
transforming the charging infrastructure for electrified transportations, thus
increasing their range and payload.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project engages in
fundamental research to realize a new family of WBG and UWBG device-based, SSTs.
The anticipated outcomes include 1) discovery and validation by analysis,
prototyping, and testing of a new family of reduced device count, soft switched,
high frequency, light weight fault-tolerant non-modular and modular power and
voltage scalable SSTs naturally conforming to IEEE 1547; 2) unique multi-carrier
space vector modulation and control techniques for the new SSTs; 3) novel
additive manufacturing techniques for high temperature nano-crystalline
integrated magnetics for SSTs. The new SSTs will have 25% fewer devices compared
to state of art, will be 30% cheaper, 40% more power dense, and 5% more
efficient resulting in a more sustainable future. In applications to battery
energy storage alone, which is expected to expend to 4000 Tera-Watt Hours by
2030 in the US, the new family of SSTs will reduce the losses during power
conversion by about 400 GWatt-Hours.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.