* 2238996
* CAREER: Interfacial Engineering and Additive Printing of Flexible Thermoelectric Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Deepa Madan, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 12/31/2027
* USD 500,007.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant supports research focused
on the independent control of electrical and thermal properties of
thermoelectric composite films through interfacial engineering using additive-
printing methods. The research aims to enable flexible thermoelectric devices
that can harvest low-grade waste heat and generate a voltage output that can be
used to charge sensor capacitors and batteries. These self-sufficient power
supplies can eliminate the need for periodically charging health-monitoring
devices and enable the uninterrupted monitoring of health parameters. These
power supplies can also accelerate the adoption of continuous monitoring sensors
used in wearable devices, buildings, structures, and defense. Existing additive
manufacturing methods used for fabricating flexible thermoelectric devices
involve long duration and high temperature curing cycles making them energy
intensive. The state-of-the-art composite thermoelectric films, building blocks
of thermoelectric devices, suffer from low performance due to the presence of
insulating binder, poor interfacial connection between active particles, and
interdependence of electron and phonon-transport properties. The scientific
understanding of decoupling electron- and phonon-transport properties by
modifying composite micro and nanostructures and interfaces using low-energy-
input processing methods is necessary for improved thermoelectric performance.
The availability of high-efficiency thermoelectric devices impacts the national
priority of Clean Energy. The integrated research, education, and outreach
components include expanding the mechanical engineering curriculum by
introducing a course on flexible electronics, creating a new program to offer
paid research opportunities to a diverse group of students, and developing a
thermoelectric-generator kit for K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research aims to decouple electron- and phonon-transport properties in
thermoelectric composite films using low-energy-input stencil additive-printing
methods which involve (1) the tuning of the distribution of thermoelectric
particle (micro and nano) sizes, (2) creation of nanoscale binder interfaces,
and (3) modification of composite micro and nanostructures using moderate curing
and uniaxial pressure. Tuning the distribution of particle sizes establishes
tradeoffs between micron sized particles, which provide a large mean free path
for charge carriers, and nanosized particles and defects, which facilitate
phonon scattering. The study of the nanoscale binder interfaces examines the
interplay between how the binder amount affects electrical connection among
active particles, facilitates thermal resistance, and influences the mechanical
properties such as flexibility, adhesion, and strength of the film. The tuning
of external uniaxial pressure develops a fundamental understanding of how
applied pressure initiates defects and impacts thermoelectric properties. The
research also demonstrates a proof-of-concept scalable flexible-thermoelectric
generator (TEG) device, using the additive-printing method and roll-to-roll
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.