* 2238694
* CAREER: Molecular mechanisms of pH sensitive proteins, pathways, and cell behaviors
* BIO,MCB
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Katharine White, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Adrienne Cheng
* 05/31/2028
* USD 362,859.00

Maintaining intracellular pH (pHi) is vital in normal cellular physiology
including metabolism, cellular growth, and cellular division, with even small
changes in pHi having a drastic effect on cellular processes. While the role for
pHi in regulating biology is clear, the proteins and biomolecules that sense
these small changes in pHi are largely unknown. Furthermore, there are no good
tools to manipulate and measure pHi in single cells thereby limiting progress in
this field. In this project, the PI will determine the molecular mechanisms
driving pH sensitive proteins, reveal how pH dynamics drive single-cell
behaviors, and develop next-generation tools for changing pHi in living cells.
This project will further our understanding of how pHi regulates single-cell
biology and will reveal the molecular mechanisms of how proteins sense and
respond to pHi. The new tools to manipulate cell pHi will also be applicable to
other fields, including understanding how pHi drives pathological processes. For
the Broader Impacts of this project, the PI will develop a transformative
education program to explore scientific research as a creative endeavor. This
includes developing project-based learning curriculum for undergraduate students
and implementing activity-based learning modules for STEAM (Science, Technology,
Engineering, Art, and Mathematics) education in middle school art classrooms.
These modules will cultivate an innovation mindset, strengthen interdisciplinary
skills, and build positive associations of science as a creative endeavor, which
has been shown to encourage students to pursue STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Human
cells normally maintain an intracellular pH (pHi) between 7.0 and 7.2 but
increases in pHi to ~7.6 can signal cells to divide, to move, or to change their
metabolism. While the role for pHi in regulating biology is clear, the proteins
and biomolecules that sense these small changes in pHi are largely unknown.
Thus, this project will address major gaps in the field of pH-sensitive biology.
First, the PI will use recently validated optogenetic tools to probe how
spatiotemporal pH dynamics regulate single-cell behaviors including cell
migration and polarity changes. Second, the PI will leverage the sodium-proton
exchanger (NHE1) as a foundation for protein engineering in order to develop a
suite of next-generation optogenetic tools to raise pHi for hours to days.
Third, the PI will determine the molecular mechanisms underlying pH-sensing by
ionizable residue networks, specifically in various SH2-domain-containing
signaling proteins that regulate pH-sensitive biology. This work will reveal how
pHi dynamics drive single cell biology as well as support future work
investigating pH-dependent cellular pathways and essential design principles of
pH sensitive proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.