* 2238231
* Conference: Workshop on Future Scientific Instruments for Alloys, Amorphous, and Composite Materials Research
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Andrew Minor, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Z.  Ying
* 08/31/2023
* USD 87,287.00

With support from the Division of Materials Research (DMR), three workshops that
support Materials Genome Initiative and evaluate instrumentation and
infrastructure needs across the materials development continuum are organized.
This workshop focuses on alloys, alloys, amorphous materials, and composites. It
addresses fundamental science roadblocks and articulates a vision and community-
centered roadmap for realizing a bold new vision for laboratories of the future.
The workshop engages diverse groups of researchers from the academic,
industrial, and governmental sectors. The workshop outcomes will be published
openly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop emphasizes distinctive challenges and
unique opportunities regarding research instrumentation and infrastructure for
research on alloys, amorphous materials, and composites. It also discusses
commonalities with other materials systems. It articulates a vision for
materials laboratories of the future, identifies research needs and technical
bottlenecks, examines barriers to access, and develops actionable plans for
democratic and inclusive access to transformative modeling,
processing/synthesis, and measurement toolsets. The workshop is designed to
establish the foundations for community-driven roadmap for instrumentation,
infrastructure, data, and software, as well as the related workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.