* 2238821
* CAREER: Robust Algorithms for Corrupted Data
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* William Leeb, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 08/31/2028
* USD 207,194.00

Recent years have seen an increase in data-driven approaches to scientific
discovery and technological innovation. Datasets of enormous size and variety
are routinely used to explore new phenomena and train algorithms. As data volume
and complexity grow, however, data quality often decreases. Data can be plagued
by noise, outliers, missing values, and other forms of information loss. This
project will design robust, efficient algorithms for analyzing such corrupted
data. These methods will be deployed on problems in imaging, biology, and other
high-impact domains. They will be implemented in general-purpose codes, to be
released for public use. In addition to its research products, this project will
also create educational resources to train students at the advanced
undergraduate and beginning graduate level in the theory and practice of data
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two complementary methodologies will be
considered for processing corrupted data. For the first class of methods, the
data will be assumed to have an underlying low-rank structure that is perturbed
by both additive noise and linear filters. New results from random matrix theory
will be developed for signal recovery problems in this setting, including the
estimation of covariance and distance matrices. The second class of methods will
exploit geometric structures in data. Novel methods from computational harmonic
analysis will be devised to both learn the geometry of a dataset by uncovering
relational information between data points, and to use this geometric
information for clustering, regression, and other tasks. Both approaches have
the potential to yield methods that are not only statistically robust, but also
computationally efficient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.