* 2238705
* CAREER: Nonequilibrium effects in thermochemical energy storage: linking microstructure to thermal transport
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Akanksha Menon, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 01/31/2028
* USD 477,070.00

Decarbonization of the buildings sector, which consumes over a third of the
primary energy in the United States, is essential to meet climate and
sustainability goals. Thermal loads (e.g., space heating and hot water) account
for a large portion of building energy use, and this can be satisfied using a
thermal battery that stores heat to match demand with supply. Among the
different storage materials, thermochemical salts are promising for storing
renewable energy as heat as they undergo reversible dehydration-hydration
reactions with a higher energy density compared to phase change or sensible
storage. However, these salt hydrates experience structural changes (i.e.,
mechanical stress) and hygrothermal instabilities (e.g., melting and
dissolution) that reduce their energy density during cycling of the battery
(charge-discharge). To this end, the overall research goal of this project is to
provide a mechanistic understanding of the key factors governing thermochemical
phase transitions and its impact on coupled heat-and-mass transport. This
fundamental knowledge will enable the development of reversible thermal
batteries with long-term stability, while training graduate and undergraduate
students at the intersection of materials and thermal science. The educational
goal of this project is to provide interdisciplinary and experiential learning
opportunities for traditionally underrepresented students in STEM, as well as
curriculum development for teachers to increase literacy about energy storage
broadly. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To bridge our understanding of thermochemical
reactions across different length (molecular, micro, and macro) and timescales
(chemical reaction vs. diffusion), three research objectives will be pursued:
(i) Elucidating the kinetic limitations on transport using in situ thermal
analysis at different temperatures and vapor pressures, (ii) Correlating
reaction reversibility with structural stability, and designing composite
materials that facilitate thermal cycling, and (iii) Developing a transient and
multiscale model for coupled thermal-fluid transport in porous media to predict
energy and power density. These objectives will be pursued in tandem with two
education and outreach efforts targeted at broadening and deepening
participation in STEM: (iv) recruiting a diverse pool of high school students
and establishing engineering education for teachers, and (v) engaging first
generation college students in interdisciplinary research. Overall, this
approach will reveal structure-property relationships under realistic
conditions, which will help address long-standing questions about the energy
density and cyclability of salt hydrates for thermal energy
storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.