* 2238402
* CAREER: Making Robots More Cooperative Agents: Controlling Costs of Coordination Through Graph-Based Models of Joint Activity
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Martijn Ijtsma, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Todd Leen
* 04/30/2028
* USD 323,314.00

The deployment of smart robots promises increased safety, productivity, and
capability in domains such as disaster and emergency response, ground mobility,
manufacturing, aviation, and space operations. Good human-robot collaboration is
key to realizing these promises. This project develops novel modeling techniques
for analyzing and designing collaborative behavior in human-robot teams.
Collaborative behavior requires adjusting to and communicating with each other.
Coordination and communication incur cognitive and temporal costs. In human-
robot collaboration these costs can be high, as coordination with autonomous
agents generally is more taxing and time-consuming than collaboration with other
humans. The models developed in this project will identify the causes and
effects of coordination costs in human-robot systems. Based on these models, the
project develops techniques for managing coordination costs to avoid overloading
human operators. Improved cost management will lead to more robust and resilient
human-robot operations, broader adoption of smart robotic technologies, and
realization of their promise. The project integrates the research with education
and outreach activities to train the future workforce in systems thinking and
interdisciplinary problem-solving skills. These skills will ready future
engineers, researchers, and scientists to create integrated solutions to address
complex challenges that span technological, human, ecological, economic, and
policy dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops a generalizable
formalization for representing and analyzing joint activity in human-robot
systems by combining theories from cognitive and social sciences with techniques
from graph theory and agent-based modeling. This framework allows objective and
dynamic analysis of the teamwork required to manage interdependencies between
humans and robots. Based on the model, the research develops techniques for
dynamically adapting and controlling coordination costs to improve collaboration
and avoid lapses. The work will be validated in disaster response and space
operations. The project addresses three fundamental research challenges: First,
it determines the relation between a human-robot system organization,
asymmetries in cooperative competencies, and cognitive and temporal costs of
coordinating with robots. Second, it identifies control strategies for
dynamically regulating coordination costs in human-robot systems. Third, it
demonstrates the use of graph-theoretical metrics and algorithms to translate
theoretical concepts of joint activity into actionable guidance for making
robots more cooperative agents in dynamic environments. Findings will provide
deep insight into what capabilities robots need to be endowed with to make them
useful cooperative agents in context. These insights will tell us how robotic
functionality should be deployed to improve the robustness and resilience of
complex operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.