* 2238365
* CAREER: Next-generation Rhizosphere Monitoring - Non-invasive Plant Phenotyping and Health Monitoring Using the Light-piping Properties of Plant Stems
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Joshua Brake, Harvey Mudd College
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Fleischmann
* 04/30/2028
* USD 352,557.00

An award is made to Harvey Mudd College (HMC) for the development of a new
optical technology to monitor the function and structure of root systems by
exploiting the light-piping properties of plant stems and roots. The project
will develop a new instrument to measure quantities such as root length and
growth dynamics. The education plan integrates undergraduate and high school
students into the research activities where they will learn a broad set of
skills at the interface of engineering, optics, and plant biology. The project
will support student career development through international conference
participation and individual mentorship. A 3d-printed, low-cost computational
microscopy platform built around a Raspberry Pi and a connected camera will be
developed as a pedagogical tool to teach optics concepts through microscopy. The
project will also support the development of a curriculum of hands-on
experiments to accompany the hardware platform and guide students as they
explore light-matter interactions and computational microscopy techniques.
Annual workshops will be offered at HMC for undergraduate and local high school
students to attract students to STEM fields and offer experiential learning
opportunities in engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific research goal
of the project is to exploit the light-piping property of plant stems and roots
to develop the next generation of optical tools to investigate plant roots and
their surrounding environments. Roots and their local underground environment
play a critical role in plant health and growth. In addition to physically
anchoring and stabilizing the plant, the roots provide a pathway to acquire
resources from the soil and establish a chemical and biological link between the
plant and the below-ground environment. This means that information about the
root system is critical for plant biology and agricultural studies both in the
laboratory and the field, providing quantitative metrics for monitoring and
improving plant growth, productivity, and sustainability. Unfortunately, soil is
not transparent at optical wavelengths and stymies direct imaging of the root
systems. Current strategies to overcome this challenge include using a
transparent growth medium, glass-walled imaging systems called rhizotrons, or
alternative imaging methodologies such as X-ray computed tomography, magnetic
resonance imaging, or positron emission tomography. However, these solutions are
expensive and offer the ability to probe only a small fraction of the overall
root system. The goal of this project is to develop a minimally-invasive
instrument that will inject light into the stem and root system, capturing and
analyzing the backscattered light to map out the root structure. The project
will explore two main instrument architectures for achieving this goal: time-of-
flight detection and low-coherence interferometry. In the development process,
the instruments will also be used to explore the optical properties of plant
stems and roots. In addition to the publication of results from this project in
peer-reviewed journals and presentations at scientific conferences, instructions
on how to build and operate the instruments will be made publicly
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.