* 2238851
* CAREER: Mixing and Oscillations in Novae
* MPS,AST
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* William Wolf, University of Wisconsin-Eau Claire
* Standard Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 05/31/2028
* USD 526,813.00

White dwarfs are the dense remnants of stars like our sun after their nuclear
fuel runs out. Often, they are found in binary systems (two stars orbiting each
other). In such systems, the two stars can exchange matter as they age and
change size. When white dwarfs gain material from a companion, they undergo
explosions on their surfaces, known as novae, losing some or all of the gained
matter to space. If such a white dwarf can grow in mass appreciably over many
novae, it can be totally destroyed in a massive explosion known as a type Ia
supernova. Type Ia supernovae produce roughly half of the iron in the universe
and are used as distance measures in cosmology, but we do not fully understand
what causes them. In this project, the investigator and a team of undergraduate
researchers will use the Modules for Experiments in Stellar Astrophysics (MESA)
software tool to study mass-gaining white dwarfs. They will clarify how nova
explosions affect the long-term evolution of white dwarf masses. Additionally,
they will investigate how X-ray emission from a nova may be used to measure the
mass of the underlying white dwarf. Freely available educational activities
utilizing MESA for use in undergraduate astrophysics courses will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will probe the effects of
diffusion, rotation, and convective boundary mixing on the mass retention
efficiency of novae. The group will investigate each mechanism individually
before combining two and all three at a time. Since these mixing mechanisms can
cause core material to be ejected in the nova event, they may lead to a net mass
loss over a single nova cycle. This study will constrain what circumstances, if
any, allow a white dwarf to grow to the Chandrasekhar mass from hydrogen
accretion alone, shedding light on the Type Ia supernova progenitor problem. To
aid in measuring white dwarf masses, the group and collaborators will analyse
the MESA models with the open-source GYRE stellar oscillation software to
determine if the dominant core oscillation modes in nova models match the
observed oscillations in the post-outburst X-ray emission of novae. If such a
link can be established, it would provide a robust measure of white dwarf mass
and perhaps composition. The investigator will develop online materials to train
other researchers on using MESA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.