* 2238168
* CAREER: Making Underwater Robots Live Underwater
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Mingxi Zhou, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 04/30/2028
* USD 213,161.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project seeks to endow underwater
resident capability for underwater robots. With the new capability, underwater
robots will overcome the limited onboard energy, thus, could conduct persistent
ocean sensing and connect them with other ocean observing systems to collect key
observations at coastal and remote locations (e.g., under-ice or at deep sea) on
critical energetic, transient, and unpredictable ocean processes (such as
erupting submarine volcanos, triggered biogeochemical plumes, episodical anoxic
upwelling waters). Moreover, underwater resident robots could provide persistent
monitoring of structural health and water properties to support reliable
offshore energy and aquaculture production, addressing the grand challenges,
i.e., climate change and food security. The project will integrate research with
educational programs on training the workforce in underwater robotics and ocean
technology. Specifically, this project will support: 1) two graduate students to
conduct fundamental research on underwater robots; 2) up to twenty high school
students to build underwater robots and interact with underwater docking systems
through summer workshops; 3) two capstone projects on underwater docking arm
design and building allowing up to 10 undergraduate students to conduct original
research; and 4) integrate research into two robotic classes (about 80 students)
in the forms of special topics and demonstrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With an
overarching goal of achieving safe and reliable underwater docking operations,
this project seeks to advance three fundamental robotic topics: underwater
localization, dynamic modeling, and nonlinear control. First, a learning-
augmented pose estimator will be developed to advance vision-based robot
localization. The method will adapt deep neural networks (DNNs) to derive the
slant range between a camera to a light beacon-based color intensities from a
single image. Second, a new DNN-based dynamic model will be created for
underwater robots. The model will be trained using real-world data to capture
the highly nonlinear mapping between the robot's actuation control signals and
the robot states, which are typically ignored or simplified in existing
underwater system identification and modeling methods. The new model will
potentially improve vehicle control and localization performance, which are
critical for underwater docking. Third, a new sampling-based solver will be
designed and validated for nonlinear model predictive control. The method will
offer an end-to-end computational tractable solution to control multiple robot
states simultaneously while incorporating actuation constraints, energy
optimization, and model uncertainties. Finally, the student-led research will
develop an underwater docking arm to accommodate different AUV systems and
environmental impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.