* 2238468
* CAREER: Understanding Our Dynamic, Young, Solar Neighborhood
* MPS,AST
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Jacqueline Faherty, American Museum Natural History
* Continuing Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 02/29/2028
* USD 344,004.00

We can explore our local region of the galaxy by identifying objects that appear
to move together. This investigator will produce a complete map of the dynamic,
young, solar neighborhood. Within about 500 light years from the Sun, there are
large, small, and medium sized families of stars, brown dwarfs, and planets that
are moving through the Galaxy together. Some are tightly bound, some loosely
bound, some breaking apart, and some are just newly formed. The goal of this
project is to determine how these families form and evolve. In so doing, the
research team will address fundamental questions about where stars come from and
how they arrive at where they are now. New York City high school educators will
be included as part of the project. Participants will further collaborate on
creating cinematic visuals of the young solar neighborhood.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Astrophysical three-dimensional visualizations and imagery
provide insights to researchers and inspire the general public. This project
will pair graphical plotting and clustering algorithm methods with visualization
tools to create a comprehensive map of the 150 pc young (&lt;1 Gyr) solar
neighborhood inclusive of high mass stars through to brown dwarf components.
Coupling observed parameters such as kinematics and rotation rates that are
available in public catalogs will permit a mapping of hierarchical structures
like core clusters, tidal tails and surrounding coronae. This will enable an
improved understanding of the local star formation history across the widest
mass range possible. This information will be used to address questions such as
how star forming structures evolve/dissipate/dissolve over time, the degree of
uniformity of the initial mass function across young clusters in the solar
neighborhood, and the evolution of stellar rotation and angular momentum with
time and stellar mass. The scientific work will be integrated into a cohesive
educational pipeline that includes developing planetarium presentations and
videos for social media and course integration, with the assistance of a New
York City high school earth science teacher. This material will be distributed
to classrooms and science centers across the globe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.