* 2238553
* CAREER: Closed-loop Health Behavior Interventions in Multi-device Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2028
* Shubham Jain, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 01/31/2028
* USD 107,386.00

Motivated by the rising caregiver burden and challenges in remote health
behavior monitoring, the proposed research will enable effective assistive
interventions in response to dynamically changing health behaviors for target
populations. To be effective and impactful, assistive mechanisms need to capture
and respond to the subtle and changing context of the human. Human behaviors,
however, are challenging to learn due to their complexity and the constantly
changing physical, social, and environmental context. Recently, wearables have
emerged to fill this gap as users are adopting a variety of devices to help them
monitor health related parameters. Given their ubiquity, wearables are
positioned ideally to deliver persuasive content aimed at improving usersâ€™
health outcomes. However, there is a need for a holistic approach to infer human
health behaviors, even as the user's context and the devices measuring their
behavior vary over time. The proposed research has the potential to transform
human health outcomes by capturing and responding to fine-grained behavioral
information continuously, inexpensively, and unobtrusively. This human-in-the-
loop system will facilitate rapid development of Health applications by
providing the foundations for using adaptive and personalized interventions for
diverse health populations to enable assistive care for
all.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this research is to develop human-in-
the-loop cyber-physical systems that can model human behaviors and enable
assistive interventions in sparse multi-device environments. This research will
engender: (i) modeling human motion in sparse multi-device environments; (ii)
learning motion-derived behavioral measures (verbal, physical, and
psychological); (iii) a human-in-the-loop model that delivers interventions to
the human and solicits their feedback when needed; and (iv) development and
evaluation of the proposed techniques with target health populations. Our key
idea is to develop novel techniques for learning coarse and fine-grained human
motion in sparse multi-device environments, and infer physical, verbal, and
psychological behaviors from human motion. This ultimately feeds into a human-
in-the-loop CPS model to deliver the right interventions at the right time for
target behavioral outcomes. The research outcomes from this work will be
integrated into our comprehensive education plan and will influence pedagogy at
the intersection of multiple disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.