* 2238882
* CAREER: Integrating Robotics and Socio-emotional Learning for Incarcerated Middle School Students
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Daniel Kelly, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Margret Hjalmarson
* 07/31/2028
* USD 223,973.00

Hundreds of thousands of youth in the United States are involved in the juvenile
justice system. This project seeks to provide new choices to confined youth by
developing and investigating a robotics learning activities within a juvenile
justice alternative education program. In addition, teachers need to be prepared
to work with youth who have been involved in the juvenile justice system, so the
project also engages pre-service teachers in mentoring the youth participants.
The robotics activities will include elements of socio-emotional learning that
includes learning about responsible decision-making, self-awareness, social
awareness, and collaborating with other people. The curriculum will inspire
these students to re-enter their education with an interest in pursuing STEM as
a future career. Overall, the project will inform other efforts to design both
robotics learning experiences and opportunities for pre-service teachers to
develop their teaching practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project
are to 1) develop a semester-long robotics program built on the principles of
socio-emotional learning and deliver this program to middle school students in
the juvenile justice system; 2) train undergraduate pre-service teachers to
mentor middle school students in the juvenile justice system using socio-
emotional learning in the instruction of robotics. The research will examine the
relationship of participating in this socio-emotional learning robotics middle
school program with the STEM-identity of participating students and compare the
STEM-identity of participating students among three middle school populations,
two of which are part of the juvenile justice system. The research questions
about the semester-long program for integrating robotics and socio-emotional
learning are as follows. How does the STEM-Identity of students involved in the
juvenile justice system change? How do the career and educational interests of
students who are involved in the juvenile justice system? How do the perceptions
of students involved in the juvenile justice system with respect to the need for
an education compare to a broader population of students following participation
in this program? Is participation in the proposed program related to reduced
rates of JJAEP students returning to the juvenile justice system as confined
youth? Data gathered include surveys of studentsâ€™ STEM career interests and
attitudes, focus groups, and observation of their work on the robotics
activities. The educational integration component of this CAREER project
includes investigating how pre-service teachers change their perceptions of
students in the juvenile justice alternative education program and how this
mentoring experience influences their work as
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project is funded by the Innovative
Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports
projects that build understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and
processes contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.