* 2238425
* CAREER: microRNA-mediated regulation of dosage sensitive genes involved in morphogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Luisa Cochella, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 03/31/2028
* USD 270,000.00

The human genome has about 20,000 genes, which contain the information to
produce proteins that carry out a myriad of functions in and around the cells
that make up our bodies. For the correct development and function of human
bodies, and those of any organism, specific proteins need to be produced in
specific tissues or organs, at specific times. It is also essential that
proteins be produced at their correct levels to achieve their normal cellular
functions. A number of genes called “dosage sensitive genes” produce proteins
that are exquisitely sensitive to changes in level, meaning that too much or too
little of these proteins is detrimental to the cells, and thus to the living
organism. Changes in the level of these proteins, which may be caused by having
too few or too many copies of the genes that produce them, often result in human
disease. This project studies a mechanism for ensuring that genes are not
produced at overly high levels. The researchers study this type of regulation in
a model organism that enables a quantitative and detailed examination of
development and of protein production under different conditions. They use a
microscopic nematode, C. elegans, in which they can modify genes and measure the
output during development. Studying such mechanisms can inform our understanding
of why some gene mutations cause disease, and could ultimately teach us how to
manipulate gene dosage for therapeutic purposes.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A
significant fraction of genes in a genome are dosage sensitive, such that copy
number variation (loss or gain of even a single genomic copy) often results in
disease. Identifying the regulators that enable precise gene expression levels
is critical to fully understand gene regulation and to reveal modifiers of
disease relevant genes. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are quantitative repressors of target
mRNAs at the post-transcriptional level and it has been proposed that dosage
sensitive genes rely on miRNA-mediated regulation. The researchers have
established an experimental paradigm to test this in the context of a key
developmental process that relies on precise gene dosage: animal morphogenesis.
miR-100 is the most deeply conserved animal miRNA, present across all Eumetazoa.
Despite its conservation, the molecular, cellular and organismal roles of
miR-100 are practically unknown. The researchers propose to use C. elegans to
study the function of this ancient animal miRNA and gain insight into the
regulation of dosage sensitive genes in development. They have evidence that ECM
components are conserved targets of miR-100 in worms, fish, mice and humans,
suggesting that this miRNA may be involved in cellular signaling and adhesion in
C. elegans, and likely other animals. Using genetic approaches, the researchers
will reveal the role of this ancient miRNA in C. elegans, provide insight into
its function in other animals based on shared targets, define the role of a
dosage dependent regulator of morphogenesis, and gain new understanding of the
contribution of miRNAs as regulators of dosage sensitive
genes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Developmental Systems
Program in the Integrative Organismal Systems Division and the Genetic
Mechanisms Program in the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division of the
Directorate for Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.