* 2238129
* CAREER: Programmable Negative Water Adsorption of Bioinspired Hygroscopic Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Xi Chen, Research Foundation CUNY - Advanced Science Research Center
* Standard Grant
* Christina Payne
* 07/31/2028
* USD 538,574.00

Hygroscopic materials typically absorb water and swell when the local relative
humidity (RH) increases and then release water and shrink when the RH decreases.
A counterintuitive phenomenon has been observed in trees, where they store water
when the local environment is dry and deplete water when it is humid. Inspired
by this natural phenomenon, the investigator will develop a new class of
materials with negative water adsorption capabilities, such that water is
released when the RH increases. This project will explore the opportunities for
designing hygroscopic materials with programmable negative water adsorption
properties. The research is expected to elucidate the underlying mechanisms of
the counterintuitive phenomenon of negative water/gas adsorption. This knowledge
will lead to breakthroughs related to dynamically regulating material properties
and responsive soft condensed matter and reveal how nature designs different
micro/nanofluidic systems to harness water evaporation as an energy source. The
research will also enable the development of new low-cost water harvesting
devices that autonomously collect water in a dry environment without using
electrical energy. Educational activities are integrated with the research to
promote K-12 students’ interest in STEM and increase the public’s understanding
of scientific concepts. The educational activities include developing visible
and touchable learning kits and competitions, allowing local students and New
Yorkers to interact with state-of-the-art science engagingly.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The negative water adsorption phenomenon is achieved when domains of
materials with distinctive water-responsive actuation and cavitation
characteristics are carefully integrated. A range of hygroscopic materials will
be fabricated such that the confined water cavitation behaviors and material
water responsiveness are systematically varied through changes to the confining
geometry and surface chemistry. Using these materials/structures, the confining
geometry and surface chemistry will be correlated with the confined water
cavitation behavior. Additionally, the research will program hygroscopic
material water-responsive actuation by tuning the properties of confined water.
Negative water adsorption materials will be developed by integrating the domains
of materials with distinct water-responsive and water cavitation properties. The
overarching educational goal is to communicate the concepts and importance of
natural water evaporation to students and the public. The City University of New
York (CUNY) students will be taught through hands-on learning activities. The
investigator will host an annual “Evaporation Energy Challenge” for local high
school students and teachers and communicate evaporation science in public
venues. The investigator will also redesign an interdisciplinary graduate-level
course. The desired educational outcome is to ignite the students’ and the
public’s excitement about the potential of natural evaporation as an energy
source and attract talented and motivated students to pursue STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.