* 2238995
* CAREER: A portable nanosensor for ultrasensitive optical detection of airborne agents
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Randy Carney, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2028
* USD 400,236.00

Ultrasensitive platforms that can be deployed in real-world situations to detect
hundreds of molecules at once are central to environmental sustainability,
forensic analysis, and human health. Current approaches to detect such
molecules, known as volatile organic compounds (VOCs), are largely limited by
technical capabilities, cost, and complexity. Optical techniques that utilize
light to detect and untangle the complexity of VOC signals are promising but
still under development. The platform developed in this CAREER project features
novel nanomaterials that can be activated with light to selectively capture and
detect airborne VOCs. This new detector has high adaptability to future portable
or wearable designs and has the potential to accelerate the study of VOCs in new
ways. The development of the proposed detector will lay a solid foundation for
the design of new sensing platforms. This project will also provide tremendous
learning opportunities for students from elementary to graduate school. Major
activities include the development of community focused interactive scientific
demos, production of K-12 educational boxes, development of an optical summer
school for high school students, and the creation and dissemination of a wide
array of accessible virtual optics resources, including interactive labs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator’s long-term vision involves translating
plasmonic nanomaterials to sensing applications directly in complex matrices,
such as breath, biofluids, and real-world environmental sites. To realize this
vision, this CAREER project seeks to develop sensitive, accurate sensors for
passive detection of airborne volatile organic compounds (VOCs), including
chemical warfare agents, toxic industrial chemicals, urban wildfire pollutants,
and exhaled breath biomarkers. Common techniques to detect VOCs, including mass
spectrometry, are bulky and difficult to integrate in portable or wearable
devices for continuous monitoring. On the other hand, current portable devices
to detect VOCs are largely based on electrochemical detection that greatly lack
specificity, sensitivity, and ease. Multiplexed detection is rare, as specific
systems need to be developed for each molecule of interest. To build an
effective portable device for multiplexed VOC detection suitable for real-world
deployment, two complementary technologies will be integrated: (1) a multiplexed
array of metal organic frameworks (MOFs) tailored to differentially enrich
target VOCs, embedded with (2) metal nanostructures that enable ultrasensitive
label-free readout via the surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) phenomena.
Multiplexed detection of VOCs will be used to build advanced data models by
training on gas phase samples generated in the lab. This project will lay the
groundwork towards developing a miniaturized passive SERS-MOF sensor that can be
deployed in point-of-use applications like breath sensing or environmental
monitoring, to be conveniently read out by inexpensive portable Raman
spectrometers. This high-risk/high-reward approach is fundamentally different
from competing approaches commonly employed in portable devices to monitor the
concentration levels of a panel of VOCs and will accelerate their detection in
real world settings with great impact on human health and
safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.