* 2238415
* CAREER: Data-driven design of graphene oxide for environmental applications enabled by natural language processing and machine learning techniques
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2028
* Andreia Fonseca de Faria, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 05/31/2028
* USD 392,085.00

Graphene oxide (GO) has emerged as a promising functional nanomaterial and
building block for various environmental technologies including antimicrobial
coatings for drinking water filtration membranes, sorbents for the removal of
pollutants from air and water, and photocatalysts for the removal and
destruction of organic pollutants from contaminated water. However, the current
approaches used to design, synthesize, and optimize GO-based nanomaterials for
targeted environmental applications suffer from a lack of standardization
leading to numerous trial and error runs with prohibitive material development
costs. The overarching goal of this CAREER project is to explore the utilization
of data-driven approaches to characterize and unravel critical correlations
between the synthesis conditions of GO and the material properties that will
enable the rationale design and development of GO-based water purification and
environmental remediation technologies. To advance this goal, the Principal
Investigator (PI) proposes to use natural language processing and machine
learning techniques to 1) extract peer-reviewed information from hundreds of
thousands of scientific papers devoted to GO synthesis, characterization, and
applications, 2) structure this knowledge into robust datasets, and 3) leverage
these datasets to develop and experimentally validate structure-property
relationships between the synthesis conditions and properties of GO. The
successful completion of this project will benefit society through the
generation of new fundamental knowledge and the creation of curated datasets and
associated computational tools to advance the design and development of GO-based
environmental technologies. Additional benefits to society will be achieved
through student education and training including the mentoring of a graduate
student at the University of Florida.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design and
synthesis of tailored graphene oxide (GO)-based functional nanomaterials for
water purification and environmental remediation will require a knowledge of the
relationships between the material synthesis input parameters and the resulting
material properties. The structural, physicochemical, and functional
surface/bulk properties of GO depend on several parameters including the nature
and characteristics of the precursor graphite, the synthesis conditions, and the
post-synthesis treatment protocols. In this CAREER project, the Principal
Investigator (PI) proposes to combine natural language processing (NLP) with
machine learning (ML) and targeted materials synthesis and characterization
experiments to develop and validate structure-property relationships between the
synthesis conditions and properties of GO to advance the rationale design and
development of GO-based water purification and environmental remediation
technologies. The specific objectives of the research are to: 1) use NLP tools
(e.g., latent semantic analysis and named-entity recognition) to automatically
extract relevant information about the synthesis of GO (e.g., synthesis
conditions, precursor materials, and post-fabrication treatments) and the
resulting material properties of GO (e.g., size of sheets, and various
physical/chemical properties); 2) structure this information into datasets and
use classical frequentist approaches and other data analysis techniques (e.g.,
principal component analysis, linear discriminant analysis, and T-distributed
stochastic neighbor embedding) to find correlations between the synthesis input
parameters and the resulting material properties of GO, and 3) validate these
correlations using targeted experiments including material synthesis,
characterization, and performance evaluation of the synthesized GO nanomaterials
as antimicrobial coatings for drinking water filtration membranes and
sorbents/photocatalysts for the removal and destruction of organic pollutants
from contaminated water. The successful completion of this project has the
potential for transformative impact through the generation of fundamental
knowledge and structured datasets to advance the rationale design of GO-based
nanomaterials for water purification and environmental remediation. To implement
the educational and training goals of this CAREER project, the PI proposes to
develop and teach a graduate course on data-driven design of nanomaterials with
a focus on environmental applications. In addition, the PI plans to 1) recruit
and mentor undergraduate students from underrepresented groups and 2) develop an
online seminar series with the goal of contributing to the training of students
at the University of Florida to work on important problems at the interface of
materials sciences, data analysis, and environmental
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.