* 2238485
* CAREER: Mixed-State Computational Imaging and Light Transport Probing
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Matthew O'Toole, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 02/29/2028
* USD 139,398.00

Computational imaging is a field that combines optics, electronics, and
computational processing to capture new forms of visual information. The
theoretical underpinning of any computational imaging technique is its model for
light propagation. Vision and graphics research generally adopts a geometric
optics approximation of light transport, where light travels along straight
lines until it undergoes a scattering event or gets absorbed. At small scales,
the wave-like properties of light become far more noticeable and require
modeling light as a wave at the cost of additional computational overhead. In
practice, imaging systems are neither perfectly incoherent (as in geometric
optics) nor completely coherent (as in wave optics). Light is more aptly modeled
as a state mixture: a statistical ensemble of coherent waves. This project
develops a comprehensive theory and corresponding imaging techniques to leverage
state mixtures for a wide variety of imaging applications, including the
development of new computational microscopes, 3D sensors, and optical vibration
sensors. Moreover, this project connects techniques used in both the incoherent
and coherent settings, drawing upon imaging research developed across multiple
different research communities. In addition, the project will develop a low-
cost, open-source projector-camera platform to easily implement a collection of
important computational imaging techniques. This platform will be used to
educate students at all levels (graduate, undergraduate, and
K-12).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tackles three independent, but tightly
coupled, research thrusts focused on (1) mixed-state sensing, (2) mixed-state
illumination, and (3) mixed-state scene analysis. The first thrust explores
state mixtures observed at the sensor. Many imaging techniques depend on the
incident light being coherent (such as in coherent diffraction imaging), and do
not account for the incident light having multiple wavelengths or polarization
states. This thrust develops flexible imaging systems and reconstruction
algorithms that can uniquely recover complex fields from incoherent mixtures of
multiple coherent fields. The second thrust investigates a new form of transport
probing based on programming mixed-state illumination. Transport probing
provides a camera the ability to enhance or attenuate specific light paths. This
thrust develops a fundamentally different approach to probing that involves
selectively interfering pairs of light paths, which has applications in 3D
sensing and the separation of direct and global light paths. The third thrust
uses mixed-state scene analysis techniques to infer scene dynamics, which
includes optically amplifying and measuring the imperceptible vibrations of
objects. A focus of this thrust is to capture vibration measurements at higher
spatial resolutions, in a more light-efficient fashion, and across up to six
dimensions of motion, providing more and better information about visual
scenes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.