* 2238006
* CAREER: A Framework for Co-design and Optimization of Programmable Hardware Accelerators and Compilers
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2028
* Priyanka Raina, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 02/29/2028
* USD 400,000.00

Creating energy-efficient computing systems is essential for achieving the
societal goal of sustainability. As the semiconductor technology scaling
predicted by Mooreâ€™s law slows down, domain-specific hardware accelerators,
i.e., hardware blocks specialized to do certain tasks very well, will play an
increasingly important role in improving the performance and energy-efficiency
of computing systems. Modern mobile chips have dozens of accelerators for
applications such as image processing, video coding, graphics, neural networks
etc. to achieve low power consumption and fast processing speeds. However, with
advances in machine learning, these applications are changing at a rapid pace.
Maintaining high performance and energy-efficiency requires that hardware
accelerators, compilers, and applications evolve together in lockstep.
Unfortunately, existing methodologies to achieve this involve significant manual
effort. Large engineering teams study the accelerator architecture in detail and
modify the compiler in an ad hoc manner, leveraging low-level libraries to
target specific hardware features. Because of the large overhead in maintaining
the software stack, it remains challenging to accelerate new domains or existing
domains as they evolve. What is needed is a structured approach for generating
programmable accelerators and for updating the software compiler as the
accelerator architecture evolves with the applications. This project proposes a
design-space exploration and optimization framework that automatically generates
accelerator architectures that approach the efficiencies of hand-designed ones,
with a significantly lower design effort for both hardware and compiler
generation. This work can impact how hardware-software system design is done
today in the industry, by reducing the time to market for products and creating
more productive design teams. Moreover, the openly shared curriculum developed
as a part of this work will ensure equitable access to educational opportunities
and help create a diverse, globally competitive semiconductor workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of this project is to create a framework
for automated co-design and optimization of domain-specific hardware
accelerators and compilers. The framework will have three components: (1) an
automated accelerator processing element (PE) design space optimization tool
based on frequent subgraph mining and merging, (2) an accelerator memory element
optimization tool for both dense and sparse applications, and (3) an auto-
scheduler for automatically determining the best mapping of an application to
the accelerator. These tools will be used to design, optimize and prototype in
silicon a unified programmable accelerator for both dense application domains
such as image processing and machine learning and sparse application domains
such as graph analytics, and demonstrate energy-efficiency and performance
metrics that significantly beat general purpose architectures and approach
application-specific integrated circuits. The proposed approach uses several
techniques, distinct from prior work, to achieve automatic accelerator-compiler
co-design and optimization. First, it allows any change in the hardware
specification to automatically propagate into the compiler with no manual
effort. This unique property is the key to enabling large-scale design space
exploration of accelerators. Without it, one would have to manually update the
application compiler with every hardware change, greatly limiting the number of
design points one can explore. Second, the proposed framework for automated PE
optimization for accelerators generates efficient PE architectures from the
application graphs themselves, using frequent subgraph mining and merging. This
approach is quite different from prior work, which does not perform application-
driven optimization but rather searches over many possible PE parameter values.
As a result, this approach promises to be much more sample-efficient and faster
versus prior work. Finally, as opposed to existing commercial high level
synthesis tools and compilers for programmable accelerators which require the
user to provide low-level scheduling directives in the application code, the
auto-scheduler proposed will automatically search for the best mapping of an
application to the programmable accelerator, greatly improving user
productivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.