* 2238066
* CAREER: Optimal Experimental Design through Contact: Towards Robots that Plan to Learn
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Ian Abraham, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 06/30/2028
* USD 526,886.00

The ability of humans to adapt in new environments and learn from a few
interactions with their surroundings is long sought after in robotics. For
example, when we step on ice, it only takes a few shuffles of our feet until we
glide. Similarly, we are able to grasp and handle arbitrary objects with a few
interactions. The closest robotics has achieved requires immense amounts of
data, computation, and preexisting knowledge of the surroundings which pose
significant barriers to obtain a glimpse of human-like capabilities. What if
instead robots can plan for interactions that are beneficial for learning?
Robots would have the potential to adapt to unseen and dynamically changing
environments, broadening their utility in scenarios such as space exploration,
deep ocean expeditions, and in humanitarian services like search and rescue.
This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant seeks to develop these
capabilities for robots to quickly adapt and learn new manipulation and
locomotion skills by planning to learn through intentional interactions. Project
activities include a synergistic educational and outreach plan in line with the
PI’s goal of a well-rounded education for underrepresented, veteran, and English
as a Second Language (ESL) students in robotics. This plan includes a curriculum
for integrating theoretical and practical courses in robotics, an educational
program for literacy in science in diverse languages for ESL students, and
undergraduate research opportunities for veterans. This project will support the
PI’s goal of educating the next generation of diverse, inclusive, and capable
roboticists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Motivated by how humans learn with just a few
interactions, this project will advance how robots optimize and plan informative
interactions for quickly learning locomotion and manipulation skills. The
approach is centered on optimizing planned contact interactions that allow
robots to take an active role in learning. The project plans an optimal
experimental design formulation for reasoning about motion, contact
interactions, and learning outcomes as a unifying optimal control problem. The
effects of modeling choices in the planned formulation will be investigated. In
addition, an online, model-predictive control (MPC) approach will be developed
using repeatable dynamic learning primitives for real-time, deterministic, and
reproducible learning behaviors. Furthermore, this project will demonstrate
guarantees of reproducibility and certified learning as a result of robots
influencing their learning outcomes through motion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.