* 2238633
* CAREER: How do rhizosphere associated microorganisms and plant host interact to regulate soil microbial processes?
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Sonny Lee, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 03/31/2028
* USD 221,466.00

Plant, soil, and ecosystem function are linked to the composition of the
rhizosphere microorganisms. Nonetheless, few studies address how the plant host-
rhizobiome interaction influences ecosystem sustainability and resistance to
environmental change. Understanding these relationships is pivotal for
anticipating ecosystem responses to environmental change. The PIâ€™s goal for this
proposal is to link plant host genetic diversity to rhizosphere microbial
composition and its functional gene expression, and determine how the rhizobiome
differentially affects plant host function and resistance to drought stress. The
PI will use field surveys, greenhouse and manipulative experiments, coupled with
new sequencing technology, and use a 10-year multi-site reciprocal Big Bluestem
Garden. The PI will work with students and citizen scientists to determine the
mechanistic interaction between plant host ecotype and rhizobiome in affecting
fitness and drought resistance. Outcomes from this project will include
significant advancement in knowledge of the interactive biotic factors between
plant host and associated microbiota, and the resultant microbial mediated soil
processes. This project will advance the knowledge base to help manage
ecosystems substantially under the pressure of global climate change, and to
provide students and managers with the fundamental concepts and context to do
so. The project will Integrate education with research and extend the impact of
this research to the current and future citizens and decision-makers.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The PI will focus on how plant host genotype affects the
associated rhizobiome, which in turn has functional consequences on soil process
and the ecosystem. The PI will work with students and citizen scientists to 1)
quantify the relationship between the plant ecotype, associated rhizobiome, and
microbially-mediated soil processes; 2) determine the mechanistic interaction
between plant host ecotype and rhizobiome in affecting fitness and drought
resistance; and 3) determine if the observed plant genetic diversity in plant
populations in natural prairies across the Great Plains feeds back to affect
rhizobiome composition and soil processes. Understanding the role of ecotypic
variation within a foundation plant species on the composition and function of
the rhizobiome is critical because dominant plant species exert a strong
influence on communities and ecosystem processes. The PI will use Big Bluestem
as a model system, and coupled multiple host and microbial omics approaches with
a 10-year old reciprocal garden to understand the biotic interactions and
ecotypic-based mechanisms that regulate ecosystem processes. The PI will also
employ broad field surveys and greenhouse experiments to gain insights into the
plant host-rhizobiome interaction. In this project, the PI will integrate
ecological genomics, microbiome function, ecosystem processes, and structural
modeling, to deepen the understanding of plant host ecotypic influences on
microbial processes, and the modulation of rhizobiome in plant host resilience
to drought stress. Therefore, this CAREER award will ultimately provide a deeper
mechanistic understanding of plant-microbiota interaction; larger-scale spatial,
temporal knowledge gain; and dissemination of knowledge to a broad
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.