* 2238914
* CAREER: Surfactant Proteins that Stabilize Biomolecular Condensates: From Biophysics to Biomaterials for Biomanufacturing
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Benjamin Schuster, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 05/31/2028
* USD 118,988.00

Non-Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;Biopolymers are large, complex molecules
produced by living organisms. For millennia, humans have used biopolymer-based
materials to meet their everyday needs: wood to build homes and wool to weave
clothes are two well-known examples. In the modern era, how can we continue to
derive inspiration from nature to develop novel biopolymeric materials for
humanity’s most pressing needs? Living cells are comprised of many thousands of
different biopolymers that self-organize, giving rise to biological structure
and activity. The goal of this project is to learn how biopolymers self-assemble
in cells and then apply those insights for the development of new biomaterials.
This CAREER project will focus on proteins, a large and important class of
biopolymers. The principal investigator and his team will study biomolecular
condensates, which are protein-rich spherical droplets that spontaneously
assemble inside cells, and surfactant proteins that coat the surface of these
biomolecular condensates and impart stability and function. The investigators
will first identify and engineer surfactant proteins, then determine the
physical and chemical principles by which surfactants interact with and
influence biomolecular condensates. Based on these studies, the investigators
will develop biomaterials to address an important problem in pharmaceutical
synthesis. Many proteins are enzymes, whose function is to accelerate
biochemical reactions. Enzyme-catalyzed reactions are a powerful alternative to
traditional chemical catalysis to enable affordable, “green” pharmaceutical
manufacturing. However, purification and formulation of enzymes are major
challenges that impede advancement of the biocatalysis field. The investigators
propose to address these challenges by developing new bio-inspired materials
based on enzymatically active, surfactant-coated biomolecular condensates. Thus,
this research seeks to advance fundamental understanding of how cells build
materials, then will leverage this fundamental understanding to engineer
biomaterials for pharmaceutical biocatalysis. This research program will be
coupled with an education program, “Ethics for Biochemical Engineers.” The goal
of this education program is to train students to consider how through their
careers they can address major ethical challenges, including environmental
sustainability and equitable global access to affordable
medications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;Cells
compartmentalize their interiors to orchestrate their biochemical processes in
space and time. Biomolecular condensates are cellular compartments formed via
phase separation of proteins and other biopolymers. The cytoplasm is therefore
reminiscent of an emulsion, comprising droplets of one phase dispersed in
another phase. Emulsions used in consumer applications require surfactants to
impart stability and function, so chemical surfactants are widely used and
studied. However, researchers have devoted scant attention to intracellular
protein surfactants and their contribution to the emulsion-like organization of
the cell. To bridge that knowledge gap, this CAREER award aims to elucidate the
“surfactome” – amphiphilic proteins that self-assemble at the surface of
biomolecular condensates, stabilizing the condensates and regulating their
biophysical properties and functions. The investigators propose to identify the
physicochemical principles governing such intracellular surfactancy, quantify
the effect of such surfactant proteins on biomolecular condensate coalescence,
and conduct a bioinformatics survey to map the full scope of the surfactome.
This fundamental research inspires a solution to a vexing problem in
biomanufacturing. In the modern pharmaceutical industry, there is keen interest
in replacing traditional catalyst materials with in vitro enzyme-catalyzed
reactions to synthesize medicinal compounds more sustainably, safely, and
affordably. However, enzyme purification and stability are critical challenges
that have hindered pharmaceutical biocatalysis. Inspired by cells’ use of
biomolecular condensates to compartmentalize and regulate enzymatic reactions,
the investigators propose to develop enabling technologies for pharmaceutical
biosynthesis. Specifically, the investigators will engineer immobilized enzyme
materials comprised of crosslinked, surfactant-coated protein condensates. The
rationale is that these biomaterials will simultaneously allow facile,
chromatography-free enzyme purification via phase separation, and will optimally
display enzymes at the condensate surface for maximal enzyme activity. Together,
this research will elucidate basic principles of “surfactome” science and
develop surface-active immobilized enzyme biomaterials for pharmaceutical
biomanufacturing. The education component of this project aims to train students
in ethics-based decision making in biochemical engineering. This ethics program
will include a summer research program for underserved undergraduates, focusing
on biomaterials and sustainability; ethics training for engineering graduate
students; and a course module for senior undergraduates, featuring case studies
in biochemical engineering ethics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.