* 2238537
* CAREER: Integrating Ecological Principles of Sponge-Dominated Coral Reefs in the Education Curricula
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Andia Chaves Fonnegra, Florida Atlantic University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 04/30/2028
* USD 475,818.00

The drastic mortality of coral reefs and the low probability of recovery to
previous coral states, call for a need to understand how the “new coral reef”
community can sustain biodiversity. Recent studies demonstrate that coral reefs
shifting from complex coral-dominated communities to macroalgae dominance are
unstable and may enhance sponge-dominated reefs, a state becoming common in the
Caribbean Sea. How do sponge-dominated reefs function and change the ecosystem
structure? And how do they continue to respond to thermal stress? This project
aims to answer these questions by evaluating the persistence of sponge-dominated
reefs under thermal anomalies and their potential to sustain coral reef
biodiversity or aid local extinction. Ecological principles of sponge-dominated
reefs are integrated into education curricula to foster the growth of future
scientists and/or citizen scientists at local, regional, and global levels. A
high school curriculum on coral reef ecology principles in English and Spanish
is developed for teachers to download and use in their classrooms. The outreach
component includes open seminars for students and faculty to discuss the
competitive myth, aiming to improve the female perception of high-level jobs in
academia, research, and policy. In addition, it offers youth in foster care the
opportunity to explore career paths in marine
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Species interactions alter how each species adapts
to change and constitute one of the essential forces structuring ecological
communities. However, most theories and experiments on coral reef dynamics do
not provide enough information to predict coral reef benthos interactions,
succession and evolution. The project evaluates and predicts how current and
future Caribbean and Florida coral reefs (sponge-dominated) are changing with a
central focus on benthic interactions such as: competition for space by
evaluating current and future trends of coral reef benthic interactions under
the effect of thermal anomalies; symbiosis, by disentangling how benthic species
interactions and associated symbionts function in sponge-dominated reefs;
facilitation by discerning to what extent sponge communities serve as habitat-
forming animals and how can they sustain coral reef biodiversity; and education
by using these ecological interactions as principles to develop teaching,
mentoring, and outreach activities from high-school to post-doctoral levels with
an inclusive constructivism pedagogical approach. The project evaluates patterns
through 15 years of severe and multi-year thermal anomalies in two locations and
three years across the Caribbean Sea and Florida, from tropical latitudes in the
southern Caribbean Sea (Panama and Barbados) to subtropical latitudes in the
Florida Coral Reef Tract. Mathematical models are developed to predict future
changes at a regional level. A new technological approach, The BeamSea True-
Color Lidar and Fluorescence (TCLF) imager, is implemented in this project to
discriminate among similarly colored species and automate the collection of
species and species interactions data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.