* 2238942
* CAREER: De novo emergence of novel regulatory mechanisms that determine carbon and nitrogen resource allocations in plants
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2028
* Ling Li, Mississippi State University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 01/31/2028
* USD 312,016.00

The bulk molecular composition of biological systems is determined by complex
metabolic networks that mediate the allocation of primarily carbon (C) and
nitrogen (N) to the assembly of macromolecules such as proteins, oils, and
carbohydrates. This metabolic allocation is of major importance in determining
the nutritional quality of plant seeds, which fundamentally affects the ability
of the seed to act as the propagule and is also of major importance to
agricultural production of food, feed and bio-based feedstocks. The Arabidopsis
QQS (Qua-Quine Starch, At3g30720) gene has the potential of being a universal
novel regulator of C and N allocation to the assembly of proteins and
carbohydrates. QQS is archetypal of a class of “orphan” genes that shares no
sequence homology in any other species and is exemplary of the “dark-genome”.
When QQS is expressed in crops, it increases protein and decreases starch
content. QQS physically interacts with the C4 subunit of the trimeric Nuclear
Factor Y (NF-Y) that regulates eukaryotic transcription. The broader impacts of
the project include the intrinsic nature of the research, which could provide a
major breakthrough in our ability to systematically direct metabolism towards
the production of food and feed, and biorenewable resources. In addition, the
project will provide excellent projects for postdoctoral researchers, graduate,
undergraduate and high/middle/elementary school students and education of plant
biotechnology in Mississippi, accessible inter-disciplinary training to increase
student exposure to biology early, and to increase the number of early career
researchers who may spur innovation in STEM research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall research goal is to identify and expand the novel regulatory network
that enables QQS to control protein and carbohydrate composition in plants. The
overarching hypothesis is that protein-coding orphan genes, which have
evolutionarily only recently emerged (e.g., QQS), can be selected and maintained
in evolution by acting on existing metabolic networks to mediate responses that
confer selective advantages. This research proposes to elucidate the regulatory
network that QQS disrupts, which impacts the metabolic network determining
protein and carbohydrate content. This research will provide a paradigm for
understanding how an orphan gene can be integrated into established genetic and
biochemical networks and spur the rapid acquisition of novel traits.
Specifically, the QQS protein interacts with NF-YC4 regulatory complex,
affecting the C and N partitioning between starch and protein reserves. This
attribute is transgenically transferable across species barriers and has the
potential to regulate plant reserves to the benefit of human consumption.
Moreover, the QQS gene offers unique opportunities to fundamentally understand
the intersection between genetic and metabolic networks regulating one of the
most important traits in agriculture: seed composition
determinants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.