* 2238991
* CAREER: Developing and Testing the Integrated Youth Development Model Framework for the Future of Juvenile Justice Scholarship, Education, and Practice
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2028
* Adam Fine, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Naomi Hall-Byers
* 01/31/2028
* USD 145,258.00

In the United States, we have a separate juvenile justice system because
policymakers, practitioners, and researchers believe that children are
fundamentally different from adults in ways that requires different treatment
under the law. Specifically, we believe they are more amenable to treatment,
intervention, and rehabilitation. Indeed, when they receive the proper supports
and resources, children are remarkably resilient. However, the juvenile justice
field typically focuses on compliance and control rather than promoting positive
growth and helping youth reach their potential. To advance the health,
prosperity, and welfare of justice-involved youth and move the field into the
future, juvenile justice system policymakers, practitioners, and researchers
need a guiding framework that illuminates how interdisciplinary approaches can
be integrated to promote youth thriving and a structured set of tools and
approaches that can test the framework. We need a model framework for organizing
and guiding the field, new tools for measuring youths’ success rather than just
their deficits and recidivism, and a model program that can be replicated easily
in other jurisdictions to promote youth success. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project consists of an integrated research, education, and implementation plan
devoted to developing and testing the Integrated Youth Development Model (IYDM),
a novel theoretical framework that demonstrates how interdisciplinary approaches
can be integrated and distilled into a workable set of core tenets that promotes
thriving among justice-involved youth. Specifically, the CAREER project has four
objectives: (1) Develop the IYDM, which leverages social ecology, positive youth
development, youth empowerment, and learning science, to promote positive youth
outcomes; (2) Construct and test a “Positive Change Center Tool” for
jurisdictions to assess current practices and perspectives on IYDM-informed
principles; (3) Systematically test elements of the IYDM and positively impact
JJS-involved youth; and (4) Engage university students, youth, and their parents
in learning and participatory action research. In doing so, the investigator
will create tools that assess how much jurisdictions engage in positive youth
change, as well as enable jurisdictions to shift from assessing recidivism as
the sole outcome to using new tools that assess their impacts on positive
outcomes. Both quantitative/experimental and participatory action research
methodologies will be used, and the studies will take place within one of the
nation’s largest juvenile justice systems. Altogether, the project will yield a
new, empirically supported, sustainable, and replicable path forward for
juvenile justice scholarship, education, and practice focused on promoting
learning and growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.