* 2238358
* CAREER: Parallel Algorithms: Theory for Practice
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Yihan Sun, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 02/29/2028
* USD 156,082.00

Recent hardware advances have brought multicore parallel machines to the
mainstream. Parallelism offers the promise of high performance, and theoretical
research is important in supporting high performance. However, there remains a
significant gap between the theory and practice of multicore parallelism. First,
many simple problems in the traditional (sequential) setting become more
complicated in parallel and still remain open in theory. This creates difficulty
in teaching and popularizing parallel algorithms to a broader audience. Second,
some important practical ideas are not captured by existing theory, and
researchers need to consider theory and practice separately. As a result, it is
important to develop new theoretical results for parallel algorithms that are
simple to understand and can better capture practice. The goal of this project
is to study the theory of shared-memory parallelism, including designing new
parallel algorithms with improved theoretical guarantees, studying new parallel
models to better capture practice, as well as promoting accessibility (to a
broad audience and in education) and practicality (with good performance) for
parallel algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on two thrusts.
The first thrust is to design simple and efficient parallel algorithms from
sequential iterative algorithms by carefully analyzing the true dependencies
between iterations. A broader goal is to find conditions that make a sequential
algorithm highly parallelizable and methodologies for exploiting parallelism.
The second thrust is to design new models and algorithms to reduce
synchronization costs. Although viewed as a constant cost in most existing
parallel models, synchronizing threads is expensive in practice, and more
accurate modeling is needed. This project will study new models to
systematically understand the synchronization costs in parallel algorithms. This
project places a strong emphasis on combining theory and practice. In addition
to new theoretical bounds, the research team will also evaluate the practicality
of the results for simplicity (are they suitable in the classroom setting) and
programmability/performance (can they be implemented to achieve high
performance).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.