* 2238113
* CAREER: Manipulating Barocaloric Effects in Two-Dimensional Perovskites
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Jarad Mason, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 01/31/2028
* USD 314,670.00

Non-technical summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phase transitions (i.e., going from
a solid to a liquid) enable large changes in the properties of a material to be
triggered by a small change in an external stimulus, and thus provide a
versatile mechanism for the design of advanced, responsive materials. Despite
the tremendous importance of phase transitions, creating materials that
transition between two phases—each with a particular set of desired
properties—is a challenge. Through this award, funded by the Solid State and
Materials Chemistry program in the Division of Materials Research at NSF, Prof.
Jarad Mason aims to advance the basic science of phase transitions through a
fundamental study of the structural and chemical factors that control
transitions between ordered and disordered states within hybrid (i.e., organic
and inorganic) materials, as well as how these transitions are affected by the
application of pressure. Such phase transitions offer exciting opportunities for
addressing many critical societal challenges, including how to reversibly store
high densities of thermal energy and how to develop more sustainable cooling
technologies that do not rely on environmentally harmful volatile refrigerants.
In addition, this project aims to broaden participation in scientific research
and to facilitate public engagement in basic science and technological
innovations through curriculum development, mentorship of high school students,
and outreach to K-12 students, high school teachers, and the general public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Barocaloric
effects are thermal changes in a material that result from the application or
removal of hydrostatic pressure. These effects, which can be used to drive
solid-state cooling, heat pump, and thermal energy storage cycles, are strongest
when a material experiences a large change in volume and entropy over a narrow
temperature range, such as during a sharp order–disorder phase transition.
Although critical to realizing the full potential of barocaloric effects, it
remains difficult to predictably manipulate order-disorder phase transitions in
the solid state, and much remains to be understood about the specific structural
and chemical factors that contribute to barocaloric effects at a molecular
level. With this CAREER project, Prof. Mason will address these challenges
through a systematic investigation of barocaloric effects associated with chain-
melting phase transitions in two-dimensional hybrid perovskites. Owing to their
synthetic tunability, two-dimensional perovskites serve as a powerful platform
to establish fundamental structure–property relationships that advance the
development of barocaloric materials. Specifically, the principal hypothesis
guiding this research is that the organic bilayers and inorganic sheets in two-
dimensional metal–halide perovskites can be synthetically tuned to control the
entropy changes, enthalpy changes, volume changes, hysteresis, and kinetics of
chain-melting transitions and, consequently, their barocaloric properties. In
this project, new materials synthesis and in-depth characterization by X-ray
diffraction, calorimetry, neutron scattering, and infrared and solid-state NMR
spectroscopies are utilized to investigate the thermodynamics, kinetics, and
reversibility of order–disorder transitions in two-dimensional
perovskites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.