* 2238269
* CAREER: A Multi-layer Dynamic Network Control for Agile, Optimized, and Sustainable Supply Chains
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Shuo Wang, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 01/31/2028
* USD 396,791.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project will support an
integrated research, education, and outreach program in supply chain network
(SCN) management. The main aim is to broaden the focus of SCN management from
economic efficiency to accuracy, agility, and sustainability through dynamic
network modeling and data-driven decision-making methods. The current supply
chain analysis tool, relying on static optimization, is insensitive to non-
eligible changes such as policy changes that may cause economic turmoil. By
bridging supply chain management with the optimal network control concepts, this
work will interpret the processes of producing and distributing goods of an
established SCN in the dynamic form to capture the non-negligible changes more
rapidly and maximize the utility. In addition to ushering in the concept of
dynamic modeling for agile reaction to changes and effective decision-making on
network management, this work will further discuss supply chains involving
recycling processes through a multi-layer network model. The broad applicability
of this work will provide expert guidance to local industries for improving SCN
efficiency, profit, or recycling and will further promote awareness of the
current waste issues and facilitate the local community's engagement toward
green manufacturing and sustainability. In addition, in the long run, this
project will deliver reliable solutions for many other SCNs that are crucial for
the economic developments of many companies in related fields. This study will
also adopt dynamic planning concepts for decision-making related to STEM student
recruitment, retention, and training, which will facilitate engineering
education reform from experience-based management to data-driven strategic
planning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will address problems related to
the current poor management of SCNs that heavily rely on the power of
computational devices by modeling supply chains as dynamic systems that capture
the non-eligible changes and transforming SCN management from static
optimization to model-based dynamic control. This model enables quantitative
analysis of optimal strategies such as daily production and optimal distribution
route, where a parallel computing scheme will be developed for computational
efficiency. A demonstration metric on the feasibility and applicability of the
proposed work, based on dynamic modeling, will be introduced for evaluation,
which sets the foundation for the exploration of other complex dynamic networks.
Furthermore, a multi-layer network will be adopted to improve the efficiency of
SCNs, which will result in discussions on applications involving recycling
processes for sustainability management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.