* 2238422
* CAREER: Life after death in coral reefs: Testing the pivotal role of dead corals in ecosystem resilience
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Andrew Altieri, University of Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 03/31/2028
* USD 282,231.00

Many ecosystems including coral reefs, hemlock forests, kelp beds, and seagrass
meadows are defined by ‘foundation species’ which are the large and conspicuous
organisms that create habitat. Decades of research reveal the importance of
foundation species for sustaining the biodiversity and ecosystem functions that
underlie critical ecosystem services including water purification, storm
protection, and food provision. Although foundation species commonly ameliorate
stress, create habitat, and modify resource availability through their physical
presence rather than their actions, and many foundation species remain as
physical structures after death, we know surprising little about their
ecological role after death. The research component of this project focuses on
corals because of the conspicuous reef structures they leave behind after death
and the value of these reef structures for the resilience and function of
tropical coastal ecosystems. The education and outreach component of the project
build academic capacity and a broad understanding of the importance of
foundation species for coastal resilience among underrepresented stakeholder
groups in three ways: First, the project increases diversity of participants by
recruiting teachers and high school students from underrepresented groups for
teacher workshops that involve trips to research sites and virtual precollege
courses that connect students nationwide to researchers at the University of
Florida. Second, the project promotes globalization for effective world citizens
by leading University of Florida undergraduates in international research
experiences at Caribbean field sites, and University of Florida graduate
students in outreach activities with conservation NGOs in Panama. Third, the
project improves retention and provide networking opportunities by fostering
mentorship relationships and inviting students and teachers to participate in a
regional marine science symposium&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coastal ecosystems around
the world are changing at an unprecedented rate due to local and global
anthropogenic stressors. Among the most obvious and important changes are shifts
in the composition of the dominant, habitat-forming organisms (known as
foundation species) that define many ecosystems by driving patterns of
biodiversity and ecosystem functions. Working in coral reefs, which have been a
model system for exploring state shifts and ecosystem resilience, this project
explores how dead foundation species play a pivotal role in determining whether
and how communities recover from disturbance. The goals of the project are
three-fold: (1) Explore the traits of dead corals and how they contrast with
living corals, (2) Track the fate of dead coral in the seascape (i.e., return to
coral or shift to novel ecosystem), and (3) Test how consumers mediate the role
of dead coral in setting ecosystem trajectories. These goals are being pursued
through an international research program that employs a complementary set of
field surveys, experiments, and modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.