* 2238124
* CAREER: Neural Network Enhanced Electromagnetics and Multiphysics Simulation Methods for RF and Microwave Reconfigurable Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Su Yan, Howard University
* Continuing Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 05/31/2028
* USD 408,671.00

The rapid development of communication, sensing, and navigation systems are
driving technological advances in the next-generation reconfigurable
radiofrequency (RF) and microwave devices. These devices utilize tunable
external stimuli such as biasing voltages or currents,
electrical/magnetic/optical excitations, temperature variations, and mechanical
forces to reconfigure their working properties and achieve spectrum-agile
operations. To address the spatial, spectrum, and power limits, miniaturized and
power-efficient RF and microwave devices are of high demand. While the
reconfigurability and controllability provide unprecedented system flexibility
and reliability, the design and optimization methods for such devices face great
challenges coming from the structural and material complexities, multiscale
design challenges, multiphysics and nonlinear interactions, and high
optimization dimensionalities. This research aims at developing physics and
neural network enabled electromagnetic (EM) and multiphysics simulation methods
to address the challenges of multiscale, multiphysics, and nonlinear modeling
for the efficient evaluation and optimization of RF and microwave reconfigurable
devices. The project looks at how to develop modeling and simulation methods
that utilize advanced numerical and neural network techniques for more efficient
and reliable device modeling and assessments. In addition, the project has
extensive education and outreach plans including the involvement of African
American students and other underrepresented minority students, as well as the
development of video clips and demonstrations to disseminate the results to the
public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To develop, implement, validate, and apply
modeling and simulation methods for EM and multiphysics design of RF/microwave
reconfigurable devices, the project will conduct four major research activities:
1) A novel all-frequency stable EM formulation and its domain-decomposition
method (DDM) will be developed to address wideband and multiscale EM modeling
problems. 2) A graph neural network (GNN)-aided DDM will be developed to solve
large-scale EM problems with a superior efficiency. 3) Neural network
(NN)-assisted multiphysics simulation method and nonlinear surrogate solvers
will be investigated to address challenges in multiphysics modeling and solve
nonlinear problems without the need of traditional gradient- or Newton-based
iteration. 4) A physics-guided NN device optimizer will integrate the above
numerical evaluation techniques to provide fast parameter sweep and shape
optimization capabilities to combat the high dimensionality. The research to
seamlessly integrate physics- and NN-enabled scientific computing methodologies
will lead to a revolutionary simulation tool with enabling modeling and design
capabilities that do not currently exist.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.