* 2238000
* CAREER: Monitoring Chronic Impacts of Nuisance Floods to Enable Incremental Adaptation Against Sea Level Rise
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2028
* Hamed Moftakhari, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Jacqueline Meszaros
* 07/31/2028
* USD 549,146.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project explores the potential
for the chronic signal of nuisance floods to be used to raise community
awareness about sea-level rise impacts and motivate more appropriate levels of
investment in adaptation against extreme and non-extreme coastal floods. Sea
levels are rising at an unprecedented rate, reducing the gap between high tides
and flooding thresholds thereby increasing the frequency of nuisance floods (aka
high-tide flooding). There is a limited knowledge about the extent of
anticipated incidents and cumulative impacts of these floods as well as the
potential effectiveness of alternative measures in flood risk mitigation. This
project aims to develop a resilience assessment framework that tracks
accumulated costs of nuisance floods to serve as an ongoing indicator of sea-
level rise and support regional and individual decision making related to
investments to reduce sea-level rise related losses. The project will also
include development and deployment of a game-based learning platform that
conveys information about cumulative losses and allows users to explore
potential alternative solutions. The game will be used to engage students from
K-12 through college, as well as informal learners, in lessons about sea-level
rise, the risks it presents, and options for reducing those
risks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project the capacity of coastal
infrastructure for risk aversion will be tested using hybrid hydrologic-
hydrodynamic and statistical models, taking non-stationarity, multi-
dimensionality, nonlinearity and chronicity of sea-level rise impacts into
account. The resulting modeling platform will advance knowledge on cumulative
hazards with chronic nature of impacts and determine the underlying processes
that yield degradation of infrastructure serviceability over time. Research
outputs will help communities assess the role of recurrent flooding in
strengthening nonfinancial forms of capital and possibly support incremental
adaptation in disadvantaged communities. The research outputs will help these
communities make informed decisions on how to improve their resiliency through
incremental adaptation. The results will be used to design a novel game-based
learning platform to assess the effectiveness of risk management approaches
based on the signals from nuisance floods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
funded jointly by the Humans, Disasters and the Built Environment Program
(HDBE), The Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and
the Engineering Directorate's Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing
Innovation (CMMI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.