* 2238840
* CAREER: Two-Color, Dynamic Laser-Plasma Interactions Towards Table-Top Beam Sources
* MPS,PHY
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2027
* Navid Vafaei-Najafabadi, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Vyacheslav (Slava) Lukin
* 11/30/2027
* USD 174,790.00

This CAREER award enables investigation of a novel method for modifying plasma
waves towards generating application-quality electron beams. Particle
accelerators have provided transformative capabilities for scientific discovery,
industrial applications, and medical advancements for over 60 years. Recent
developments in the field of plasma physics have led to the emergence of plasma
waves as a promising medium for very efficient particle acceleration. This is
because these waves can sustain forces that are hundreds of times higher than
those generated in conventional accelerating structures. This project leverages
state of the art laser sources at the Brookhaven National Laboratory with the
potential for enabling a new generation of compact accelerators and radiation
sources. The project will also contribute to developing a strong pipeline of
undergraduate students, and in particular underrepresented minorities, into
graduate plasma physics programs. This will be accomplished through the
development of math and physics immersion programs, and in coordination with the
existing educational and research infrastructure currently present at Stony
Brook University, including the REU program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leveraging
advanced computational techniques and unique experimental facilities, this
project aims to demonstrate deliberate control over the dynamic modifications of
laser-plasma interactions with the goal of producing electron beams with the
charge, energy spread, and emittance comparable to the state-of-the-art
conventional accelerators. A Ti:Sapphire (λ~1 μm) laser pulse will act as an
ignitor to modify the plasma wave generated by an intense CO2 (λ~10 μm) drive
laser pulse. Controlled modification of this plasma wave is achieved by the
spatiotemporal control of the ignitor pulse via a method known as the ‘flying
focus’. Electrons ionized by the ignitor pulse within the plasma wave will then
be captured and form the accelerating beam. Because of the meticulous control
over the properties of the ignitor pulse, the properties of the injected
electrons can also be carefully controlled. Achieving the objective of this
project will have significant impact on diverse areas of science and industry.
As an enabling component for generating high-quality electron beams from
compact, plasma-based accelerators, it enables application areas such as high
energy physics, femtosecond radiation source development, as well as
medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.