* 2238498
* CAREER: Extinction Phenomena in Turbulent Liquid Dual-Fuel Flames
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2028
* Patton Allison, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 07/31/2028
* USD 475,928.00

Turbulent combustion of energy-dense, liquid fuels is at the core of aviation
applications. Dual-fuel operation with liquid fuel â€“ hydrogen blends have become
a research point of interest. There is limited knowledge from modern
experimental studies of complex liquid fuels in highly turbulent reacting flows.
The overarching research goal is to investigate extinction-based processes in
highly turbulent liquid-fueled flames with hydrogen enrichment and develop new
laser diagnostic tools to enable these studies. Educational activities are
focused on the addition of combustion physics content to undergraduate and
graduate courses and the creation of visual demonstration activities. Learning
modules covering combustion and energy science topics will be based on
experimental demonstrations designed and built by undergraduate researchers.
These demonstrator devices are transportable to classroom settings and outreach
engagements. Learning modules will be developed for online sharing, televised
delivery with PBS WKAR, and for global access on
YouTube.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary research goal is to investigate
extinction-based processes during blowoff at global and local scales in high-
Reynolds number, turbulent liquid dual-fuel, hydrogen enriched flames.
Particular emphasis will be placed on studying hydrogen enrichment effects on
local extinctions in flame structure given varying Le mixtures and potentially
inhomogeneous mixing. This study will focus on the dynamics of primarily
prevaporized flames in addition to dilute droplet-spray flames, which each have
unique dominating thermophysical properties and extinction mechanisms due to
interactions between droplets, fuel vapor, turbulence, and flame. The
experimental program has been designed to (1) address aspects on coupling
between global blowoff transients and local extinction processes, (2) advance
new diagnostic methods for CH/formaldehyde PLIF and Rayleigh scattering
thermometry in liquid fuel flames, and (3) to capture statistics on flame
structure, temperature, scalar dissipation, and curvature that can be
incorporated into advanced simulations and modelling via validation-quality
datasets. Newly developed diagnostic strategies will be used to observe
extinctions in flame structures influenced by turbulence-chemistry interactions
due to curvature and Le effects. Measurement of 2-D scalar fields in these flows
will provide joint PDF statistics on the temperature, progress variable, and
scalar dissipation which has not been experimentally reported for heavier
hydrocarbon fuels. The availability of these new tools will allow for insights
into previously inaccessible regimes of liquid fuel
combustion&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.