* 2238915
* CAREER: Biomimetic Swarm of Active Colloids with Off-Center Interaction Sites
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Amir Nourhani, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 02/29/2028
* USD 454,772.00

The field of microrobotics is growing rapidly and holds great promise for
engineering applications such as targeted therapeutics, environmental
remediation, and microscale cargo delivery. Similar to microorganisms,
microrobots harvest energy from their environment and self-propel in fluids to
perform tasks at the microscale. Microrobots are too small to host electronic
units to be programmed or be able to communicate with each other. Instead, their
structures and interactions are engineered to exploit physical inter-particle
communication and to perform or facilitate decision making. Inspired by the
dynamics of schools of fish, herds of deer, and flocks of birds, the objective
of this award is to perform the foundational research necessary to establish a
new class of microrobots as a platform for transformative functionalities that
mimic biology. Similar to the animals, these microparticles can avoid
aggregation and orient themselves in a group such that they generate controlled
directional motions. Thus, they overcome barriers that currently impede the
exploitation of microrobot swarms for transport and engineering applications
enabled by cooperative behavior. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the proposed system of
microrobots with off-center repulsive interaction sites, new interactions emerge
from the coupling of active self-propulsion with passive torques about the
particle centers. These active-passive hybrid interactions lead to biomimetic
collective motion of microrobots, even in the regime of negligible hydrodynamic
interactions. To build a foundational framework and study the emergent
biomimetic phenomena far from boundaries and under confinement, continuum
kinetic models will be developed to study large-scale systems, linear stability
analysis will be used to study phase transitions, and agent-based active
Brownian simulations are employed to analyze the relative arrangement of
particles and elucidate the emergence of motile-crystal and liquid-like states.
Educational studies will measure the contrasts between the impacts of the hands-
on experiments and augmented reality approaches on learning outcomes and self-
efficacy of high school students in exploring scientific ideas about
microrobotics and low Reynolds hydrodynamics. An interactive research-oriented
undergraduate course on biomimicry and microrobotics will be offered and its
intended impact on the career pathway selection of the students will be
examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.