* 2238428
* CAREER: Super-Quantile Based Methods for Analyzing Large-Scale Heterogenous Data
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Kean Ming Tan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 05/31/2028
* USD 83,638.00

Data-driven decision-making has become ubiquitous across many scientific
disciplines and in every aspect of life. As society relies more heavily on
statistical modeling to make decisions, it becomes imperative for statistical
methods to be able to model heterogenous data so that different decisions that
will lead to better outcomes for different subgroups can be made. This is
appealing in the big data era as data-rich settings allow statistical models to
be trained to be more flexible and robust to heterogeneous data. This project
focuses on developing a new class of statistical methods for modeling large-
scale heterogenous data based on the super-quantile (tail average), also
referred to as the expected shortfall or conditional value-at-risk. The methods
under development will have the potential to answer questions that cannot be
directly answered previously using existing tools in different fields such as
climate science, neuroscience, finance, and health disparity research. The
project will allow undergraduate and graduate students to work on cutting-edge
methods for modeling data heterogeneity. In addition, a graduate-level course on
data heterogeneity will be developed. The investigator will also engage in K-12
educational outreach in collaboration with the Center for Educational Outreach
at the University of Michigan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the
abundance of data, there has been growing interest in modeling large-scale
heterogeneous data for decision-making. Quantile regression is one
representative statistical tool for modeling heterogeneous data, but one
limitation is that it focuses on a specific quantile level and may not be the
best approach for answering scientific questions that involve aggregate
information of the lower/upper tail of the distribution of interest. The
investigator studies the development of a new class of super-quantile-based
tools to help practitioners answer such questions. There are three aims in this
project: (i) establish theoretical foundations and develop scalable
computational algorithms for fitting super-quantile regression in the big-data
regime, high-dimensional regime, and data with outliers; (ii) develop super-
quantile regression methods in the presence of unmeasured confounders; (iii)
develop a series of super-quantile-based methods for analyzing different data
types. The investigator will create a comprehensive platform, including software
and e-book tutorials, to encourage using super-quantile-based
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.