* 2238876
* CAREER: Learning from Heterogeneous Populations in Small Data Regime with Applications to Preference and Metric Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Ramya Korlakai Vinayak, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2028
* USD 223,745.00

Understanding how humans represent different concepts, perceive different
options, and make judgements based on them plays a vital role in cognitive and
behavioral sciences, consumer recommendation systems, individualized education,
crowdsourced democracy and in quantifying survey data for social sciences and
policy making. Preference and metric learning using judgment from humans have
emerged as powerful tools to learn such representations. Most of these learning
algorithms, however, are limited to studying models that are averaged over the
population and do not capture the variations among the diverse set of people
comprising the population. This project aims to close this gap by developing
novel models, analyzing their fundamental limits, and designing algorithms with
guarantees that can be learned at different scales of granularity. The results
of this project have the potential to usher in a new paradigm in preference and
metric learning. This project will also have significant educational and
outreach impact through course modules for graduate and undergraduate students,
research mentoring for undergraduate students, and public outreach
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From biological sciences to social sciences, many
scientific studies involve societal-scale datasets collected over heterogeneous
populations, e.g., different ages, demographics, etc. Such datasets also usually
have only a few observations per individual (small data regime). In general,
off-the-shelf machine learning algorithms are not built with consideration to
the statistical challenges arising from issues like heterogeneity and small
data. This project addresses the challenges that arise when learning from
heterogeneous populations in small data regimes in preference and metric
learning by developing novel models, theoretical foundations in terms of
fundamental limits, and practical algorithms with guarantees for learning from
heterogeneous data at different levels of granularity. Specifically, the project
aims to establish fundamental limits, develop models and algorithms with
theoretical guarantees for (1) learning distribution of preferences over a
population, (2) learning metrics at subgroup levels, and (3) learning individual
variability by leveraging common structures and priors learned over the
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.