* 2238600
* CAREER: Biomechanics and Mechanobiology of Vimentin Intermediate Filaments
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Alison Patteson, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 02/29/2028
* USD 668,729.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will support research to
investigate the biomechanical role of vimentin intermediate filaments in cell
motility and nuclear stability. Proper cell motility is necessary for wound
healing, development, and normal tissue maintenance. Cells must be flexible
enough to move and comply with external physical stresses yet strong enough to
maintain shape and structural integrity. Thus, while a soft cell nucleus is
conducive to cell migration through small pores in tissue, the resulting
physical stress (if not mitigated) can lead to nuclear damage and pathogenic
conditions. Vimentin is a cytoskeletal component of many migrating cells and is
important to nuclear positioning and nuclear stability. However, how vimentin is
uniquely able to protect the nucleus is still largely unknown. This research
will explore how vimentin enables cells to sense and respond to mechanical
stresses. The results of this work shed light on the mechanical and biological
signals that control cell migration. This research is complemented by an
integrated educational and outreach plan. This plan aims to broaden STEM
pathways by attracting and training students through 1) a novel open-access
traction force microscopy tool, and 2) a novel course, Public Engagement in
Physics and STEM. High school students from Syracuse City School Districts will
engage in both outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall research
goal of this project is to uncover the biophysical mechanisms by which the
cytoskeletal polymer vimentin stabilizes confined cell migration and its role in
reinforcing proper nuclear translocation. The study is organized around three
objectives: 1) determining the role of vimentin in nuclear shape and
deformability, 2) defining how vimentin establishes whole cell polarization and
traction stress during 3D migration, and 3) probing vimentinâ€™s role in
mechanotransduction pathways associated with cellular response to compressive
forces. The findings from this work will provide important new insight into
mechanisms of healthy tissue maintenance and disease progression that advance
through fundamental cell migration processes. In the longer-term, project
outcomes will suggest new strategies to aid cell motility during wound healing
as well as disrupt abnormal cell motility and nuclear damage in pathological
contexts, such as fibrosis and cancer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.