* 2238686
* CAREER: Design and validation of a novel part-brain-part-engineered gas sensor for noninvasive detection of lung cancer
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Debajit Saha, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 01/31/2028
* USD 431,220.00

It is well known that the presence of cancer changes the volatile chemical
composition of human exhaled breath (i.e., changes its “smell”), and this can be
used to detect cancer noninvasively. This project aims to develop a lung cancer
detection device based on a biological chemical sensory array and biological
neural circuitries from insects. Neuronal voltage responses evoked by the smell
of lung cancer will be used to classify lung cancer vs. noncancer and to
differentiate between different types of lung cancers. This study will be
performed using lung cancer cell cultures over multiple days. When completed,
this novel gas sensor for noninvasive detection of lung cancer will add a
powerful new dimension to biosensing. This project will advance the science of
complex ‘smell’ processing in the brain and has potential to improve human
health by advancing the development of biosensors for diverse medical
applications. This project will also address the critical need to provide early
and authentic research exposure to historically underrepresented students by
providing research exposure to high school students and personalized research
experiences to freshman undergraduates. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator's
long-term career goal is to employ insect brain-based sensors in clinical
settings for early detection of different cancers from exhaled breath samples.
Towards this goal, the objective of this CAREER project is to develop an
olfactory neuronal response-based gas sensor for sensitive, robust, and real-
time detection of lung cancer. An antennae-attached ex vivo insect (locust)
brain will constitute the central gas sensing device, which will be coupled with
a miniaturized and implantable electrode array, a multi-channel amplifier, and
biological neural computation schemes for developing the part-brain, part-
engineered gas sensor. This gas sensor will utilize cancer volatiles-evoked
neuronal spiking (voltage) responses for classifying human lung cancer from
noncancer. The sensor’s ability to distinguish between human small cell lung
cancer (SCLC) and non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cell lines will be
systematically tested using volatile organic compound (VOC) signatures of
individual cell cultures. The sensor’s performance will be compared with the
detection performance of gas chromatography mass spectrometry (GC-MS)
technology. Finally, this sensor will be optimized for one-shot and real-time
detection of human lung cancer by increasing the recording electrode numbers and
by implementing a recurrent neural network (RNN) model for data analysis. When
completed, this novel technology will incorporate fully functional biological
chemosensory arrays, neuronal signal transduction, and neural circuit
computations all together in one single VOC sensing device for sensitive and
real-time detection of lung cancer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.