* 2238467
* CAREER: Countering Emerging Software Threats with Adaptive Hardening, Debloating, and Hardware-assisted Protection
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Vasileios Kemerlis, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2028
* USD 123,508.00

Today's large and complex software systems are plagued with vulnerabilities that
allow perpetrators to exploit it for profit. Of all the different kinds of
exploitable software weaknesses, memory errors -- i.e., bugs that can be
(ab)used by attackers, via crafty inputs, to corrupt or leak memory contents --
have been particularly pernicious to deal with. Developers and security
engineers are unable to keep up with the sheer number of security errors (e.g.,
memory errors) being exploited that need patching. The focus of this project is
on adapting software defenses to the specific deployment environment, as that
environment changes due to new functionality and new threats. The project will
produce open source prototypes of tools to automate the adaptation of defenses,
thereby increasing the effectiveness of the defenses while radically reducing
the human effort involved in defending against new threats as they arise. The
objective is to enable more effective, sophisticated defenses by automating the
customization of defenses to fit the deployment environments. The resulting
techniques and tools will contribute to the next-generation security
architecture that enables software defenses to be constantly in flux to provide
robust software protection mechanisms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
consists of three synergistic thrusts under the umbrella of adaptive security:
adaptive hardening, hardware-assisted adaptive protection and adaptive
debloating. The project will investigate techniques to enable software systems
to dynamically adapt their defenses and functionality along several dimensions.
Techniques for binary rewriting and program hardening will be enhanced to
support adaptability. Adaptive hardening will equip binaries with rich metadata
including call graphs and types. Static binary rewriting performs install-time,
load-time, and runtime adaptations. Hardware-assisted adaptive hardening uses
hardware features such as Intel's CET for adaptive hardening; Finally, unused
code is removed by automating debloating. There are several benefits of an
adaptive approach to software security. First, the capability to be agile in
software hardening creates a diversified and unpredictable environment, which
hinders the ability of adversaries to use canned recipes to bypass exploit
mitigations. Second, hardening rectification allows software to make the best
use of the hardening capabilities that a particular setting offers, while
dynamically adapting the deployed defenses to meet changing needs. The outcomes
of this research will improve the state-of-the-art in defense against emerging
software threats, and alleviate the concerns of the broader security community
regarding hurdles (e.g., performance, compatibility) that until now have
prevented the deployment of protections with guaranteed security properties. The
project will develop and share new knowledge through cybersecurity and computer
science curricula, and more broadly thought workshops and seminars for high
school students and science educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.