* 2238040
* CAREER: Synthesis and Application of Bioorthogonally Degradable Polymers
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Justin Kim, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 03/31/2028
* USD 455,009.00

With support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Justin Kim of the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute is studying chemical processes
for the reversible assembly and functionalization of polymers relevant to
biology. The processes of interest are designed to be compatible with biological
systems (so-called 'bioorthogonal reactions') and are expected to enable the
generation of new functionally adaptable biomaterials with many potential
applications, including eventually as vehicles for drug delivery and as tissue
adhesives for wound closure. The results of this interdisciplinary research are
anticipated to lead to important advances in polymer design, synthesis and
deployment in biological systems. As part of the broader impacts of the funded
project, the PI and other members of the Kim research group will engage in
educational outreach activities to help broaden participation in science fields
by individuals from groups that have been traditionally underrepresented. A
highlight of these efforts will be an interactive workshop for local area high
school students that will demonstrate important concepts such as bioorthogonal
chemistry (an exciting frontier in science that was recently recognized by the
2022 Nobel Prize in Chemistry) and reversible gelation in materials
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funded project will explore the use of
associative and dissociative bioorthogonal click reactions based on enamine
N-oxide motifs with allylic functionalization, to assemble and degrade hydrogels
in biologically relevant contexts in a precise stimulus-induced manner.
Hydrolytic or enzymatic degradation pathways are commonly used to dissociate
polymers or hydrogels from their biological substrates in applications of
synthetic biomaterials; however, the reliance on such spontaneous
environmentally-driven mechanisms for degradation means that the physical
properties of the biomaterial steadily deteriorate over time. This work instead
focuses on the synthesis of permanent covalently linked polymer networks whose
structural integrity remains intact and uncompromised until such time that
removal of the biomaterial is desired: degradation is then triggered by a
bioorthogonal chemical reaction. The research explores synthetic methods for
accessing enamine N-oxide polymer crosslinkers of varying properties (typically
formed by pericyclic group transfer between hydroxylamines and alkynes),
strategies for the assembly of step- and chain-growth polymers containing these
moieties, and the development of bioorthogonal chemical reactions to reductively
cleave the covalent crosslinks. Methods to induce functional changes to the
biomaterials of interest through the attachment and removal of various ancillary
groups will also be investigated. Efficient chemical reactions that make and
break molecular connections in complex biological environments are powerful. As
such, the fundamental findings of this work have the potential to impact both
academic and industrial science in areas ranging from chemical biology to
bioengineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.