* 2238327
* CAREER: Coding for Composite DNA Storage
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Zhiying Wang, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 01/31/2028
* USD 204,788.00

DNA, with remarkable properties of high density and stability, is an appealing
storage medium. The DNA storage system involves encoding the binary information
to DNA strands, synthesis (producing DNA molecules), storage, sequencing
(reading DNA strands), and decoding the binary information. Among them,
synthesis is a major bottleneck for its high cost, which is approximately $0.10
per nucleotide position. Conventionally, information is represented by the four
types of DNA nucleotides, namely, adenine (A), cytosine (C), guanine (G), and
thymine (T); hence synthesis requires at least $0.05 per bit of information. An
emerging technology called composite DNA storage, on the other hand, represents
information by probabilities of all four types of nucleotides, leading to higher
information density and lower synthesizing cost per bit by several orders of
magnitude. This project investigates coding for composite DNA storage that seeks
efficient methods to represent binary information by composite DNA letters so as
to enable cost-effective, reliable, secure, and large-scale information storage.
The activities in this project will be an important step towards the ubiquitous
application of DNA storage in a broad range of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In composite DNA storage, a composite DNA
letter constitutes a mixture of all four standard nucleotides (A, C, G, T) in
the same position among multiple strands obeying a predetermined probability
mass function. In this project, the fundamental limit on the information density
and the corresponding achievable schemes will be established considering the
choice of the composite DNA symbols and the various factors of the storage
channel. Moreover, information-theoretic security will be explored to combat
adversarial attacks. As a unique feature, secret information can be potentially
decoded by reading only the mixed DNA strands of multiple storage vessels,
instead of reading all vessels for standard DNA. In addition, the identification
of a given composite DNA strand from a storage vessel containing many composite
strands will be inspected in order to facilitate large-scale storage. Finally,
the theoretical schemes will be simulated and verified by writing software tools
and conducting experiments. Accordingly, theoretical models including channel
characteristics and composite DNA symbol choices will be further
improved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.