* 2238620
* CAREER: UAV-Based Radar Suite for Bulk-Snow Characterization and Risk Management
* GEO,OPP
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Jay McDaniel, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Roberto Delgado
* 07/31/2028
* USD 130,547.00

Snow is a crucial component of the earth’s climate system due to its extensive
surface coverage and the critical role it plays as part of the cryosphere.
Seasonal snowpack runoff profoundly influences the distribution of meltwater in
watersheds, which constitutes roughly one-sixth of the freshwater needs
globally, and the majority of water resources in mountainous regions. Moreover,
snow acts as a thermal blanket between the atmosphere and underlying ice, that
leads to impacts on freshwater lake ecosystems and has socioeconomic
implications given its critical role in transportation (e.g., ice-road duration)
and ice-jam flooding. Therefore, studying this hydrological cycle is crucial,
especially with model projections suggesting a low-to-no snow future due to
persistent emissions of greenhouse gases and globally rising temperatures.
However, there are large uncertainties in capturing the fine details of this
cycle and the hydrological consequences. This is partly because there are not
enough measurements of distributed bulk-snow characteristics in important areas
such as inaccessible mountainous regions. These observational gaps limit our
ability to accurately develop robust modeling and forecasting techniques for
improved risk management and hazard mitigation proposes. This CAREER project
addresses this data need by equipping a small unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) with
an advanced radar suite to produce fine spatial and temporal resolution
measurements of snowpack properties such as snow depth, snow water equivalent,
relative density, and liquid water content. The integrated research and
education project also involves preparing, training, and exciting the next
generation of remote sensing engineers to engage in multi-disciplinary careers.
Beyond providing research opportunities to undergraduate and graduate students,
this project will integrate research concepts into the teaching and laboratory
curriculum, providing academic and experiential learning
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project would encompass both the
development of a new UAV-based custom snow-penetrating sensor technology and
enable research on the snow hydrology and snow-loading on freshwater lakes and
river ice. The technological research will produce fine spatiotemporal data
using intelligent monitoring capabilities that allow mapping of snow loading and
ice thickness on freshwater lakes and rivers through 3D echogram formation and
wind redistribution of snow using coherent change detection. These data would
support actionable risk management strategies that drastically improve
residents’ lives and socioeconomic resiliency. The CAREER project will also
incorporate aspects of this research in graduate and undergraduate courses,
includes experiential laboratory exercises through design-build projects, and as
part of the RISING STudent Ambassador Research (RISING STAR) program will
involve Native American and first-generation students to increase diversity and
interest in STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.