* 2238196
* CAREER: Mapping and Manipulating Lattice Relaxation in Moire Superlattices of Group VI Transition Metal Dichalcogenides
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Daniel Bediako, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 03/31/2028
* USD 267,381.00

Non-technical description:&lt;br/&gt;Structural distortions have a significant
impact on the properties of atomically thin materials. Understanding how two-
dimensional (2D) lattices deform on an atomic scale and how these deformation
processes can be manipulated is essential for tailoring their behavior in next-
generation device technologies and developing material systems with new
functionalities. Moiré superlattices, comprised of vertically stacked 2D sheets
with a small rotational offset or lattice mismatch, are a class of 2D structures
in which natural lattice relaxation processes and resulting strain are closely
linked to changes in observed optical, electronic, and photonic properties. This
project aims to elucidate the structural mechanisms driving moiré superlattice
relaxation and to investigate how relaxed moiré architectures and their emergent
physics can be precisely modified by external stimuli, such as an electric field
or mechanical force. These research efforts are integrated with education and
outreach initiatives that seek to broaden participation in STEM education and
scientific research, including the expansion of funded research opportunities
for undergraduate transfer students at the University of California at Berkeley
and the development of scientific discussion sessions for incarcerated students
at Mount Tamalpais College at San Quentin State
Prison.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description:&lt;br/&gt;The unique,
tunable electronic band structures and resultant properties of two-dimensional
moiré superlattices are highly sensitive to intrinsic structural relaxation
processes and corresponding accumulation of intralayer strain. Precise
structural characterization of these materials and thorough understanding of
their relaxation mechanisms are therefore critical to harnessing their potential
in novel (opto)electronic device platforms. Efforts to probe the structure of
moiré materials have previously been complicated by the fact that the layers of
interest are often buried within complex multi-component heterostructures, as
required for device fabrication. As such, existing descriptions of lattice
relaxation are largely qualitative and mechanistic pictures are based purely on
simulations. To address this challenge, the research aims in this CAREER project
utilize interferometric four-dimensional scanning transmission electron
microscopy (4D-STEM), a diffraction-based imaging methodology developed by the
PI’s research group specifically for measuring mechanical deformations and
strain in moiré structures, including those in typical device architectures. The
primary goals of this work are (1) to quantitatively map out mechanical
deformations that govern relaxation in moiré bilayers composed of semiconducting
group VI transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) and (2) to perform operando
measurements on the perturbation of relaxed TMD moirés and their intrinsic
strain fields in the presence of an external electric field or uniaxial
mechanical strain. A combination of photoluminescence spectroscopy, electronic
transport measurements, and theoretical calculations supplement the imaging
experiments to correlate the observed structures with emergent optical and
electronic properties. This work deepens the understanding of fundamental
structure–property relationships in TMD moiré superlattices and provides a
framework for leveraging structural distortions and strain as tuning knobs for
modifying the (opto)electronic behavior of these
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.