* 2238608
* CAREER: SHF: Rethinking the Control Plane for Chiplet-Based Heterogeneous Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Matthew Sinclair, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 08/31/2028
* USD 142,718.00

Modern monolithic computing systems ranging from smartphones to supercomputers
contain a heterogeneous mix of conventional CPUs and a variety of specialized
accelerators each tuned to run specific subsets of applications at high
efficiency. Sadly, the underlying technology is changing, making continued
scaling difficult. Thus, recent work has examined combining multiple smaller
chips (chiplets) into a larger, aggregated system. Chiplet-based heterogeneous
systems avoid the challenges of modern, large monolithic heterogeneous systems,
enable continued performance and energy scaling, and allow closer integration of
components than was previously possible. Unfortunately, chiplets also introduce
new challenges: how to schedule computation across the computational resources
and how to coordinate data movement between resources. The control plane in
modern, monolithic heterogeneous systems utilizes a centralized embedded,
programmable core, a command processor (CP), to perform these tasks. However,
chiplet-based heterogeneous systems introduce an additional layer of hierarchy,
causing indirection and non-uniformity that clash with the centralized CP. This
project will fix these problems and advance science by creating a distributed,
fully featured, programmable, programmer-transparent control plane that will
significantly improve the efficiency of future chiplet-based heterogeneous
systems. Moreover, this project will open new areas of research and enable chip
designers to efficiently design and integrate future chiplet-based heterogeneous
systems. To broaden the community and reduce barriers to entry the project will
(1) release the developed software artifacts, hardware designs, and interfaces,
(2) work with industry collaborators to influence subsequent products, (3)
develop new courses to teach the next generation of students how to use and
accelerate chiplet-based heterogeneous systems, and (4) work with
underrepresented communities in Madison to help increase their STEM
participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To realize these opportunities, this project
partitions the centralized CP into local, per-chiplet CPs which, in concert with
a global CP, coordinate communication and computation across accelerators. The
local CPs provide dynamic, microsecond-scale information about the current
behavior within each chiplet, while global CP possess a global view across
chiplets by synthesizing information from the local CPs. Given this partitioned
design, the projectâ€™s key tasks include improving accelerator utilization by
identifying and harnessing algorithmic parallelism in the global CP, creating
novel local and global CP schedulers that transparently and efficiently divide
work across chiplets to meet real-time deadlines and retain data locality and
placement benefits, and designing an innovative coherence protocol that monitors
and tracks dependence information in the local and global CPs, and performs
expensive inter-chiplet implicit synchronization operations only when
necessary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.