* 2238441
* CAREER: Tracking mantle carbon through the life cycle of Large Igneous Provinces
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2027
* Benjamin Black, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 12/31/2027
* USD 210,377.00

Throughout Earth’s history, enormous volcanic eruptions known as Large Igneous
Provinces (LIPs) coincide with mass extinction and climate warming events.
Tracking CO2 release from these eruptions is key to resolving links between
magmatism and observed climatic changes. However, because CO2 tends to leak out
of magmas, measuring CO2 from past eruptions is challenging. This CAREER award
will investigate distinct LIP sources using carefully selected samples from
three LIPs that may record past CO2 concentrations. The goal of this work is to
clarify how, when, and why some LIP eruptions cause major disruptions in climate
and life on Earth but others do not. New approaches will track CO2 deeper in the
Earth, inform estimates of past climate, and help to project future climate
change. The project uses peer mentoring in undergraduate course to integrate
research, public engagement and teaching. The work also supports graduate and
undergraduate student training at a public institution with a diverse student
population. Part of the project includes collaboration with a film-maker to
convey lessons from past climate disruptions through a new documentary and
outreach at the New York Virtual Volcano Observatory. The film and outreach will
make the experience of exploring a volcano accessible to thousands of visitors
each summer. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two primary scientific objectives of this
work are to find the most faithful records of magmatic CO2 in LIP magmas, and to
control for different mantle sources to understand mantle carbon release through
the life cycle of LIPs. Accordingly, this project frames a series of natural
experiments that contrast: 1) different types of melt inclusion volatile and
trace element records, and 2) samples from oceanic and continental LIPs that tap
distinct and evolving mantle sources. These natural experiments will reveal the
strengths and weaknesses of various petrologic archives of CO2 in basaltic
magmas, including a range of melt inclusion host crystals and geochemical
proxies for original CO2. The results will be used to test the hypothesis that
it is the evolving mantle reservoirs tapped during LIP melting—rather than
sedimentary country rocks as is commonly assumed—that determine the severity and
pace of climatic warming and carbon cycle disruption in response to magmatism.
If successful, this project will elucidate the volatile systematics of poorly
understood reservoirs in the mantle including the continental mantle
lithosphere, recycled material in plumes, and high 3He/4He primordial mantle—in
the process demonstrating how the origins of LIPs in the mantle can set the
blueprint for surface CO2 release and climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.