* 2238147
* CAREER: Continuous Flow Chemistry of Microelectronics Polymers via Combined Physics-based and Machine Learning Models
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Mona Bavarian, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Continuing Grant
* Catherine Walker
* 06/30/2028
* USD 462,591.00

Microelectronics polymers are essential in the development of semiconductor
technology. Precise microchip manufacturing hinges on high-quality polymer
inputs. However, current methods for producing microelectronics polymers do not
satisfy all the requirements of high throughput manufacturing due to challenges
with scale-up, process control, purity, quality control, and production time. To
tackle some of these challenges, the PI plans to create a platform for data-
driven design of polymer materials and their manufacturing processes, as well as
optimal operation and control of these processes. The PI’s unique approach is to
replace the current practice of high-volume batch reactors with continuous flow
reactors that allow for the precise control of polymer properties and structure.
The proposed platform is eco-friendly, as it promises to reduce the carbon
footprint, decrease operating costs, and limit the amount of inferior, unusable
materials generated during the manufacturing. The program will also advance
knowledge across several other fields, as the modeling and manufacturing
knowledge gained from this project will be applicable to other specialty
polymers. In addition to training graduate and undergraduate students in
research, the project will contribute to the development of course materials on
advanced manufacturing and will involve outreach activities in the form of high
school teacher trainings focused on advanced manufacturing and
microelectronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address several
fundamental research problems related to microelectronics polymers
manufacturing. Researchers will investigate the effect of reaction conditions,
process parameters, and quality of raw materials on the microelectronics
polymers properties, and quality attributes. Experimental and
theoretical/computational studies will be performed to enable the continuous
flow chemistry of microelectronics polymers. Combined physics-based and machine
learning process models will be developed to predict the dynamics of the
processes that produce these polymers. These models will account for heat, mass,
and momentum transfer and reaction kinetics to predict process variables such as
polymer molecular weight and polymer compositions. These models will also
provide better understanding of reaction mechanisms and structure-property
relationship of microelectronics polymers synthesized in flow reactors.
Therefore, it is expected that the models will reduce the chemical dimensional
space to expedite the discovery of new microelectronics polymers that meet the
required molecular structure-property relationships. A deliverable of this
project is a manufacturing platform that uses online information from reaction
monitoring and in operando spectroscopy for feedback control of polymer quality
attributes, allowing for the efficient continuous and autonomous production of
microelectronics polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.