* 2238431
* CAREER: Data Management for Exploratory Video Analytics
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Joy Arulraj, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 03/31/2028
* USD 163,834.00

Computer vision has gone through a seismic shift over the last decade, with the
availability of machine learning models capable of tackling diverse vision tasks
like object detection and action localization. However, these models take a lot
of time to process a video, and leveraging them for analyzing videos involves a
non-trivial programming effort. There is a growing interest in the database
community in designing video database management systems to tackle these
efficiency and usability challenges. This project seeks to develop novel
techniques for speeding up queries over large video datasets like retrieving the
gameplays that lead to a touchdown in a football game. It will reduce the human
labor cost of analyzing videos in a wide range of applications, ranging from
urban planning to astrophysics. A close collaboration with domain scientists and
industry practitioners will be pursued to help transfer the ideas to scientific
and enterprise applications. The proposed work includes an integrated education
plan related to video database systems in the database courses offered at
Georgia Tech.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project tackles the outstanding problem
of accelerating video analytics from a new standpoint. Recently proposed video
database systems have two key limitations. First, their optimizers are not
tailored for offline, exploratory video analytics, wasting system resources at
scale and raising the cost of query processing. Second, they support a limited
range of queries related to detecting objects and are unable to support richer
queries like localizing actions or re-identifying objects. The goal of this
proposal is to address these limitations of state-of-the-art video database
systems. This work will generate knowledge of how to construct accuracy-driven
optimization for complex vision pipelines. It will address the paucity of large
datasets due to privacy concerns, by developing techniques for generating
synthetic datasets. The innovation is not in creating new vision models, but in
new database-style techniques to better optimize exploratory query workloads and
to broaden the range of queries supported by video database systems. Overall,
this work innovates upon the field of database systems to start a new line of
research on optimizing exploratory video analytics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.