* 2238245
* CAREER: Scalable and Ubiquitous Millimeter-Wave Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Omid Abari, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2028
* USD 112,193.00

Advancement in computing has enabled emerging applications such as telesurgery,
online education, robot automation, and digital twins which require high-data-
rate, low-latency, and reliable wireless connectivity. Modern wireless networks
(such as 5G and 6G) have promised to enable such connectivity. However, these
networks have faced two major problems which prevent them from becoming scalable
and ubiquitous. First, they have limited coverage. Specifically, to enable high
data-rate connectivity, these networks use very high-frequency signals for
communications. Unfortunately, these signals experience high path-loss, and also
get easily blocked by obstacles, the human body, or walls. Therefore, these
networks do not provide reliable high-data-rate links in remote areas, or
environments with static or mobile obstacles. Second, their radios consume
higher power than lower frequency radios (e.g. WiFi). Hence, devices with
limited energy sources (such as sensors with small batteries) cannot benefit
from these networks. This project tackles the above problems, enabling high
data-rate, low-latency, and reliable wireless connectivity wherever and whenever
is needed. Moreover, developing new wireless technology is strategically
important for setting the US as the leader in 5G/6G and its applications. The
proposed research is interdisciplinary in nature and will have a significant
impact on different aspects of the society such as education, smart environment,
health, agriculture, and emergency response.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this project is to make millimeter Wave (mmWave) networks scalable and
ubiquitous. To achieve this, it develops novel repeaters and surfaces which can
extend coverage and reliability of mmWave networks. The design is low-cost and
low-power while supporting multiple users and mobility. The project also
develops a new scheme enabling energy-constrained devices to harvest energy from
mmWave networks, and use it to power up their mmWave radios. The research takes
a holistic view, and innovates across all layers of the wireless stack. To this
end, the researchers will design and build novel antennas and hardware that
enables passive beamforming and steering, novel algorithms that enable low-power
link establishment, and networking protocols which enable end-to-end systems.
Finally, the system will be integrated into the Smart Home application, to
demonstrate its superior capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.