* 2238927
* CAREER: Probing and Understanding Nonreciprocal and Topological Radiative Heat Transport in Many-Body Magnetized Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Linxiao Zhu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 02/29/2028
* USD 556,384.00

Radiative heat transfer is everywhere, ranging from sunlight and incandescent
lighting to thermal imaging. Controlling radiative heat transfer is critical for
creating efficient solar energy harvesting, cooling, lighting, and imaging.
However, experiments of radiative heat transfer have been limited to non-
magnetic materials. Systems containing magnetized objects are expected to
support many new effects of radiative heat transfer, with potential applications
such as efficient heat exchange and energy conversion. To create these
revolutionary technologies, it is essential to experimentally study and
understand radiative heat transfer among at least three magnetized objects and
to explore the use for improving heat exchange and energy conversion. Here, the
Principal Investigator will develop a novel technique that will enable the study
of radiative heat transfer among magnetized objects. The knowledge obtained in
the proposed work points to applications such as thermal switches, energy
harvesting, cooling, and magnetic sensing. The insights obtained in this work
will make it possible to improve heat exchange for energy conversion, such as
for harvesting sunlight, waste heat, and cooling. Educational and outreach
activities include organizing "Thermal Emission for Energy with Nanoscience"
workshops to train secondary precollege teachers for low-cost, hands-on
activities that can be readily integrated into their classes. Micro-
credentialing activities will be organized to introduce advances in radiative
heat transfer to undergraduates. These multi-level educational and outreach
activities increase involvement in science and engineering, promote STEM
education and educator development, and motivate students to address critical
global challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Radiative heat transport is
essential for solar energy harvesting, radiative cooling, lighting, and imaging.
However, experiments of radiative heat transport have been fundamentally limited
by the time reversal symmetry. By breaking the time reversal symmetry, many-body
magnetized systems (MBMS) consisting of at least three bodies made of magnetized
semiconductors or magnetic quantum materials are expected to support vastly new
phenomena of radiative heat transfer, with potentials for various technological
applications. To create these revolutionary technologies, it is essential to
probe and understand: 1) nonreciprocal radiative heat transport, 2) topological
radiative heat transport, and 3) their use for improving heat exchange and
energy conversion. A novel technique that will enable the study of radiative
heat transport in MBMS will be developed in this project. Using this technique,
for the first time, experiments will be conducted to probe nonreciprocal and
topological radiative heat transport. Further, the use of MBMS for improving
heat exchange and energy conversion will be explored. This program points to
opportunities in the new research fields of nonreciprocal and topological
thermal transport. The knowledge obtained in the proposed work points to
applications such as dynamical control of heat flux, energy harvesting,
refrigeration, and magnetic detection. The insights obtained in this work will
make it possible to improve heat exchange for energy conversion, such as for
harvesting sunlight, waste heat, and cooling. A multi-level educational and
outreach plan includes: (1) organizing "Thermal Emission for Energy with
Nanoscience" (TEEN) workshops to train secondary precollege teachers for low-
cost, hands-on activities that can be easily integrated into their classes, in
regions with a high percentage of prospective first-generation college students;
(2) organizing micro-credentialing activities to introduce advances in nanoscale
thermal radiation to undergraduates; (3) creating a new graduate course on
nanoscale thermal radiation, which will be made available to the national and
international community through the NSF-supported "nanohub", an online
repository of courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.