* 2238865
* CAREER: Gas-Phase Molecular Polaritons: A New Platform for Chemistry under Strong Light-Matter Coupling
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2028
* Marissa Weichman, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 01/31/2028
* USD 260,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Marissa Weichman of Princeton University
is studying how gas-phase chemical processes proceed under strong interactions
with light. When molecules are enclosed within an optical cavity, that is, in a
device built from reflective mirrors that create a strong confined light field,
new states called polaritons can form. These systems exhibit some of the unusual
wave-like properties of light and also appear to demonstrate reactivity and
photochemistry distinct from ordinary molecules. The principles governing the
chemistry of polaritonic molecules are not currently well understood. The
Weichman Lab is studying the low-temperature chemistry of isolated, gas-phase
molecules under strong cavity coupling to elucidate how the simplest molecular
polaritons behave. These discoveries have the potential to inform practical
applications for polaritonic technologies in chemistry, materials science, and
quantum information science. Professor Weichman is also reforming undergraduate
quantum chemistry coursework at Princeton with the goal of broadening
participation in the quantum science research community and
workforce.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Weichman Lab will focus on pristine gas-
phase measurements wherein polariton reaction dynamics can be studied with
quantum-state-specificity and without the complications of solvation. While
molecular polaritons are now well established in liquids and in solid-state
systems, attaining sufficiently strong light-matter interactions for gas-phase
molecules has remained a challenge. The Weichman Lab accesses the regime of gas-
phase strong coupling at cryogenic temperatures where molecular partition
functions are small and inhomogeneous linewidths are narrow. A cryogenic buffer
gas cell allows for the preparation of cold, dense molecular ensembles. This
source is combined with a feedback-stabilized Fabry-Pérot optical cavity and
precision laser scheme to engineer strong coupling of individual rovibrational
transitions in gas-phase molecules. The Weichman Lab will harness this apparatus
to investigate how benchmark chemical processes, including bimolecular
reactions, photodissociation, and photoisomerization, occur under cavity
coupling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.