* 2238191
* CAREER: A Laboratory Test of Radiation Belt Electron Acceleration and Diffusion by Whistler Chorus
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* James Schroeder, Wheaton College
* Continuing Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 06/30/2028
* USD 126,830.00

Beyond Earth's atmosphere is a universe where plasma is far more abundant than
solid, liquid, and gas. At the dawn of the space age, Explorer 1 unexpectedly
discovered ions and electrons in space plasma traveling at nearly the speed of
light. These high-velocity particles are found in two donut-shaped regions
around Earth called the Van Allen Radiation Belts. Understanding variations of
the radiation belts have continued urgency as actionable space weather
predictions are needed to protect critical infrastructure in space and on the
ground. Measurements in the plasma of the outer belt commonly detect intense
electromagnetic waves called whistler-mode waves, along with dramatic changes in
the number of high-velocity electrons. Electrons are sometimes accelerated
rapidly, in less than a second, and sometimes over hours. Models suggest that
whistler-mode waves can produce these varied outcomes. The amplitude of
whistler-mode waves and the angle between wave crests and Earth's magnetic field
are predicted to determine the nature of interactions with electrons. The
scientific objectives of this grant include a series of laboratory experiments
in conditions relevant to the outer belt to study the interaction between
whistler-mode waves and electrons. Work will consist of developing a new antenna
array to generate whistler-mode waves while controlling the angle between wave
crests and the magnetic field. Educational objectives focus on increasing
participation in space plasma physics research with an early-undergraduate
pathway to research that will allow students to be recruited from more diverse
groups. Research students will be supported by an introductory seminar, and
seminar materials will be distributed freely to help cultivate early
undergraduate research across the space plasma physics
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With frequencies below the electron cyclotron
frequency and resonant velocities often comparable to characteristic electron
velocities, whistler-mode waves have potent wave-particle interactions with
electrons that are central to descriptions of radiation belt dynamics. Theory
and simulation indicate the amplitude of whistler-mode waves and the wave-normal
angle are important variables in determining the character of interactions with
electrons. A limitation of earlier lab work was the absence of high-resolution
and high-precision measurements of electron velocity distribution functions
(evdf's) needed to diagnose whistler-mode wave-electron interactions. This work
will combine laboratory experiments with recent diagnostic advances to make
definitive measurements of whistler-mode wave-electron interactions relevant to
Earth's radiation belts. Experiments will use Thomson scattering evdf
measurements and a whistler-mode wave antenna array to define the launched wave
vector. Laboratory tests will answer three questions: how conditions determine
whether whistler-mode waves produce rapid electron acceleration or slower
diffusion; how the onset of nonlinear wave-particle interactions varies with
wave-normal angle; and how quasilinear interactions responsible for diffusion
vary with wave-normal angle. Answers to these questions are required to
effectively model critical radiation belt processes, including the lifetime of
trapped particles, the diffusion coefficients prevalent in numerical models, and
the rapid variations leading to pulsating auroras and associated microbursts of
relativistic electrons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.