* 2238895
* CAREER: Active Feedback to Control Dynamic Quantum Phases
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Justin Wilson, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 06/30/2028
* USD 297,750.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early Career Development
(CAREER) award supports the development and integration of theoretical condensed
matter ideas into dynamic quantum phases for innovative research, outreach, and
an educated, critical-thinking quantum workforce. Controlling quantum phases of
matter is an important theoretical and practical problem in quantum information
science and quantum condensed matter physics. Even in classical physics,
steering a system, as it dynamically changes, into a particular phase is a
complicated and challenging problem. Take, for example, the weather as a
classical example. The chaotic dynamics of weather means that it becomes
inherently unpredictable (after roughly 14 days). However, if, through some
great feet of global engineering, one could make slight modifications to the
planet, then one might hope to control the weather. While this is impractical on
such large scales, such theoretical control of chaos leads to sharp phases where
the physical system is either controlled or uncontrolled (i.e., chaotic). In his
recent studies, the PI has found the first hints that the analogous quantum
systems host dynamic phases of quantum information, but there is a wide frontier
to explore. The new concept that this connection reveals is that feedback based
on information gathered about a physical system can control the quantum phase
and steer it into a desired state. This allows experiments to immediately
witness the phases, and it opens the prospect that we can choose interesting
states to control that could help us solve other problems in condensed matter
and quantum information sciences. In this project, the PI and his team will
develop and apply new algorithms, employ high-performance computing resources
and artificial intelligence methods to uncover new dynamic quantum phases and
control chaotic systems onto specific, desired states of
matter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education and outreach activities supported by
this award include (i) creating a podcast series on quantum science and
releasing it on major podcasting platforms, (ii) the development of an open-
source course at the intersection of quantum information and condensed matter,
aimed at teaching students about the quantum technologies currently being used
in industry, and (iii) working with the Erdos institute to bring industrial
career development opportunities to graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award supports research and education activities that are aimed at
integrating theoretical condensed matter ideas into dynamic quantum phases for
innovative research, outreach, and ideas to build a critical-thinking quantum
workforce. The PI will use feedback to uncover new dynamic quantum phases and
control chaotic systems onto specific states. The specific objectives of this
proposal are to (1) develop hybrid dynamic models (with measurements, unitary
dynamics, and feedback) that have a controlled phase transition onto specific
states of the system and (2) learn about existing dynamical phase transitions
and institute a form of control with prescribed feedback and machine learning.
The PI and his team will develop new algorithms, employ high-performance
computing resources, and develop a theoretical understanding of these
transitions in quantized classical models, random quantum circuits, and quantum
simulation of Hamiltonians such as the one-dimensional Hubbard model. The goal
is to understand dynamic, ergodic, quantum phases, uniting theoretical condensed
matter with quantum information sciences in the context of quantum control
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The education and outreach activities supported by
this award include (i) creating a podcast series on quantum science and
releasing it on major podcasting platforms, (ii) the development of an open-
source course at the intersection of quantum information and condensed matter,
aimed at teaching students about the quantum technologies currently being used
in industry, and (iii) working with the Erdos institute to bring industrial
career development opportunities to graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.