* 2238038
* CAREER: Design Under Uncertainty in Combinatorially Expanding Spaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Ramin Bostanabad, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 03/31/2028
* USD 574,200.00

The goal of this Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award is to develop a
framework to optimally design a materialâ€™s composition at the small length
scales and, in turn, quantify its effects on the component properties.
Composition optimization of engineered materials is essential to many
applications that are crucial to our national health, prosperity, and welfare.
This type of design optimization, however, has two major challenges that
dramatically reduce the efficiency of designers: (1) co-existence of multiple
uncertainty sources (e.g., lack of data, inaccurate simulations, unknown
parameters), and (2) existence of a vast disjoint design space that has both
categorical and quantitative features. To address these issues and accelerate
the design process, this project will convert the design problem into a
statistical learning one. This conversion uniquely leverages machine learning
and enables designers to make informed decisions for resource allocation,
uncertainty quantification, and anomaly/novelty detection. The impact of the
framework will be demonstrated on optimal design of complex concentrated alloys,
which have shown great potential in critical applications involving energy
storage, cryogenic operating conditions, and more. The research outcomes of this
project will be tightly integrated with multiple educational and outreach
activities to benefit educators and students (at both high school and university
levels), as well as businesses. These activities will produce educational
content (including codes and video tutorials) and a user-friendly app that small
businesses and high schoolers can leverage for design optimization under
uncertainty. These activities will collectively demonstrate to students and
practitioners that engineering design and machine learning can dramatically
increase our capabilities in solving complex engineering
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hypothesis behind this research is that with
appropriate conversion operators and learning mechanisms, the combinatorial
design space and associated uncertainties can be encoded via a set of low-
dimensional and interpretable manifolds, each of which is a compact
representation of high-dimensional objects (e.g., an uncertainty source). This
hypothesis will be tested in four research thrusts to make the following
contributions: (1) Developing an uncertainty representation method that improves
uncertainty quantification capabilities and also provides visually interpretable
diagnostic measures for detecting model form errors and existence of non-
Gaussian uncertainties; (2) Establishing a design representation methodology for
encoding a vast combinatorial design space in a compact manifold that designers
can leverage to identify promising combinations; (3) Introducing new optimality
metrics for probabilistic metamodeling and resource allocation; (4) Developing a
multi-fidelity multiscale modeling framework that enables homogenization-based
multiscale simulations to dynamically and automatically adjust the fidelity (and
hence, cost) and calibration parameters of the nested simulations. These
methodological contributions are generic and can benefit a broad range of
applications, such as multi-disciplinary systems analysis. The education and
outreach components of this project include developing a design optimization and
calibration app that can be used by high school students, educators, and local
small businesses; transferring the technology on materials optimization to the
manufacturing industry; and developing educational materials and summer workshop
series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.