* 2238641
* A New Multi-tracer Approach for Dating Groundwater on 10,000-year Timescales Applied to a Southern Californian Aquifer
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Peter Barry, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 01/31/2026
* USD 638,899.00

Groundwater is a crucial source of drinking and irrigation water in the United
States and around the globe. Much of the groundwater in the upper kilometer of
Earth’s crust is considered to be “fossil” – meaning it first entered (i.e.,
recharged into) the subsurface before the Holocene period around twelve thousand
years ago. As demand for groundwater increases, and newly drilled wells tap into
deeper aquifers, our reliance on fossil groundwater will likely grow. This
research project is focused on applying independent, state-of-the-art
geochemical tracers to understand residence times (i.e., the time water spends
in the subsurface) of an aquifer system dominated by fossil groundwater. By
gaining insight from new tracers, the objective of the proposed work is to
refine applications of traditional age tracers, test conceptual models, and
ultimately improve the ability to accurately determine residence times of fossil
groundwater in aquifers worldwide, which will aid in sustainable groundwater
management. The project involves training of a postdoctoral scholar, who will
make novel high-precision tracer measurements in labs at Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution and Argonne National Lab, and a high school student,
who will apply these same techniques to a groundwater-fed pond to learn about
mixing and circulation timescales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurately determining
groundwater residence time is important for understanding groundwater flow and
mixing, with key implications for sustainable groundwater management. However,
on the 10,000-year timescales that characterize fossil groundwater, the
geochemical tools most commonly used to “date” groundwater (e.g., radiocarbon
and helium) are prone to large sources of systematic error. This research
project combines new high-precision measurements of 81Kr (1% precision; via Atom
Trap Trace Analysis at Argonne National Lab) with radiogenic 40Ar (0.01‰
precision; via dynamic noble gas mass spectrometry at Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution) with traditional dating tools (14C and 4He) to constrain
groundwater residence time distributions in dozens of scientific monitoring
wells in the San Diego aquifer system (California). The key objectives are to
gain quantitative insight into helium and radiocarbon conceptual dating models
(e.g., by evaluating assumptions about fossil carbon addition and helium
accumulation rates), employ new constraints to determine optimal residence time
distribution functions, and develop these new tracers for application in other
fossil groundwater systems worldwide. This project will include multiple field
campaigns, training of a postdoctoral scholar who will take on a major
leadership role in the project, and support for a hands-on, paid summer
internship opportunity for a high school student.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is co-funded by the Hydrologic Sciences and Geobiology &amp; Low-
Temperature Geochemistry programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.