* 2238139
* CAREER: The Lassa Virus Fusion Domain - A Cyclic Approach to Revealing the Molecular Chemistry behind Membrane Fusion
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Jin Woo Lee, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Christine Chow
* 03/31/2028
* USD 492,000.00

With the support of the CLP program in the Division of Chemistry, Jin Woo Lee
from the University of Maryland, College Park is studying the molecular
chemistry behind the initiation of Lassa Virus (LASV) membrane fusion. LASV is a
member of the Arenavirus family that is currently endemic to West Africa, and
there is an increasing incidence of LASV infection reported worldwide. The
pandemic potential of LASV has already been noted by the World Health
Organization (WHO) in 2018, which stated that the virus requires urgent and
prioritized research. Membrane fusion is a key component of the LASV lifecycle
that allows the virus to deliver its genetic information into the target cell
through a chemical process that is not well understood. The process is thought
to be facilitated by specialized fusion machinery that undergoes structural
transitions triggered by specific environmental conditions. One such example of
this machinery is the fusion domain (FD), which is predominately associated with
the initiation of membrane fusion. The research aims to identify, on a molecular
level, exactly how the FD initiates the process of membrane fusion. Such
information is often a prerequisite for novel therapeutic design that may serve
to arrest the viral lifecycle and prevent and/or treat LASV infection.
Simultaneously, an educational outreach program will be implemented focused on
providing opportunities for incoming transfer students as well as local high
school students to gain practical scientific research experience. The aim of the
program is to improve both the retention and enrollment of students within the
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM)
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The initiation of LASV membrane fusion relies on
the FD, which resides within the viral glycoprotein found on the viral surface.
This domain is well conserved across the Arenavirus family and is also
structurally distinct, containing both an N-terminal fusion peptide (FP) and an
internal fusion loop (FL). The overarching goal of the research is to understand
how the underlying chemistry of the FD contributes to the initiation of membrane
fusion. Specifically, the structural and functional roles of multiple fusogenic
regions within the LASV FD and the impacts of environmental conditions will be
examined. A cyclic approach will be employed utilizing solution nuclear magnetic
resonance (NMR) spectroscopy to elucidate the structural rearrangement of the
LASV FD. The NMR work will be complemented by thermodynamic and kinetic
investigations through isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC) and in vitro lipid
mixing fusion assays. The framework mentioned allows the investigation of the FD
as both a peptide and within the context of the full viral glycoprotein. The
latter requires a novel approach involving specific labeling and incorporation
into a lipid bilayer, both of which will be implemented in order to provide more
physiological relevance. Upon conclusion of the research, a major knowledge gap
regarding LASV membrane fusion will be filled and a framework for studying other
viral FDs will be established.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.