* 2238195
* CAREER: Next generation onsite wastewater treatment system for nitrogen management
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Xinwei Mao, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 07/31/2028
* USD 444,503.00

Millions of households in the United States and worldwide rely on onsite systems
for wastewater treatment and disposal. Conventional onsite wastewater treatment
systems (OWTS) consist typically of septic tanks connected to leach fields to
enable the transport and disposal of liquid effluents in the surrounding soils
via networks of drainage pipes. OWTS are predominantly designed to provide
primary treatment during which organic wastes and suspended solids in household
sewage settle to the bottom of septic tanks where they are partially degraded by
microorganisms. Because OWTS are not designed to effectively remove nutrients,
the liquid effluents of septic tanks are among the largest sources of nitrogen
(N) pollution for shallow groundwater aquifers as they leak into the surrounding
subsurface soils. The overarching goal of this CAREER project is to explore the
development and validation of the next generation of biofiltration systems for
nitrogen (N) removal from OWTS. To advance this goal, the Principal Investigator
proposes to test the hypothesis that biofiltration systems based on the
integration of anaerobic ammonium oxidation (anammox) microbiomes with sorbents
such as biochar could provide efficient and cost-effective solutions for N
removal from the liquid effluents of septic tanks. The successful completion of
this project will benefit society through the generation of new fundamental
knowledge to support the development and deployment of more efficient and
sustainable solutions to manage and mitigate N pollution from households and
other facilities that are not connected to centralized wastewater treatment
systems. Additional benefits to society will be achieved through student
education and training including the mentoring of one graduate student and one
undergraduate student at Stony Brook University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soil-based
biofiltration systems have emerged as promising add-on modules to onsite
wastewater treatment systems for the removal of nitrogen (N) from the effluents
of septic tanks. However, current soil biofilters require a large footprint and
an external carbon source (e.g., woodchips) to stimulate and support the growth
and metabolic activity of denitrifying microorganisms. This CAREER project will
explore the development of novel soil biofilters for N removal based on a hybrid
physical/chemical and biological treatment process that integrates biochar
sorbents with anaerobic ammonium oxidation (anammox) microbiomes. The proposed
research builds upon the results of previous investigations that have
established that anammox microbiomes play a critical role in the conversion of N
compounds to dinitrogen (N2) gas in soils, wetlands, and marine/freshwater
sediments. The specific objectives of the research are to: 1) investigate the
partial denitrification/anammox (PDN/An) of N compounds in model biofiltration
units using biochar as sorbents and microbiome carriers; 2) evaluate the effects
of operational changes and environmental parameters on the efficiency of PDN/An
biofiltration units and, 3) investigate and optimize the operation of a modular
biofiltration system for efficient N removal and evaluate the systemâ€™s long-term
performance using molecular tools and kinetic modeling. The successful
completion of this project has the potential for transformative impact through
the generation of new fundamental knowledge to advance the development and
implementation of more efficient soil-based biofilters for removing N from the
liquid effluents of onsite wastewater treatment systems. To implement the
educational and outreach activities of this CAREER project, the Principal
Investigator (PI) proposes to leverage existing programs and resources at Stony
Brook University (SBU) to develop and deliver new learning opportunities in
environmental engineering (EE) for K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students
with a focus on engaging female students. The proposed education and outreach
activities will include 1) a one-week summer program to provide Long Island
middle school students (7-9th Grade) with hands-on learning activities in
engineering and technology and 2) a 10-week outreach program during the academic
year to host 5-10 female students and introduce them to the science and
engineering of soil-based biofiltration systems for onsite wastewater treatment.
In addition, the PI plans to develop and host a monthly environmental
engineering seminar designed to expose SBU students to a broad range of
perspectives and expertise to increase their breadth and depth of knowledge in
EE&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been
deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual
merit and broader impacts review criteria.