* 2238859
* CAREER: A Multiscale Computational and Experimental Framework to Elucidate the Biomechanics of Infant Growth
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Victor Huayamave, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 06/30/2028
* USD 577,370.00

Musculoskeletal disorders and diseases are the leading cause of disability in
the United States and account for more than one-half of all chronic conditions
in people over 50 years of age in developed countries. This Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) award supports research to build a better understanding of
these disorders and diseases, through the development of a novel framework to
evaluate growth and development of the hip joint in infants. The outcome of the
study will be to identify major factors that drive and regulate growth early in
life that may have long-term benefits for prevention of early arthritis. This
project will address a wide class of problems involving mechanics, computational
morphometrics, movement science, and mechanobiology. The research is integrated
with an educational plan to expose high school, undergraduate, and graduate
students to novel joint growth and development concepts using hands-on
activities, 3D printing, and 3D visualizations. These activities will encourage
high school students, including females and underrepresented minorities, to
pursue STEM careers and will help educate the next generation of engineers. This
study aims to reduce the physical, social, and economic burden for children
affected by developmental disorders by increasing awareness among the public,
and improving treatments for better outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
CAREER project, the PI will use experimental motion capture data, finite element
analysis, statistical shape modeling, and multi-scale musculoskeletal
mechanobiological modeling to develop a framework that provides non-invasive
approaches to examine the dynamics of human movements. Infantâ€™s spontaneous
movements generate forces that are constantly acting on the joints, which can
affect the morphology and development of the soft bone. Using combined
experimental and computational tools, this research will predict the complex
adaptation of the joint to biomechanical factors, thus providing a basis for
improved prevention and treatment of developmental disorders. Specific tasks
include establishing a lower limb atlas of infant morphology using statistical
shape modeling, using pediatric movement science to quantify physiological joint
forces and moments, and applying sensitivity and uncertainty analyses to
systematically evaluate how inputs to this framework affect predictions of
growth and development. Results from the research will: (1) Provide experimental
data and computational models that can serve as the basis for developing
innovative solutions for infant developmental disorders; (2) Develop innovative
tools to aid clinicians, pediatricians, and physical therapists when managing
joint disorders; (3) Identify major factors that quantify morphogenesis early in
life that may have long-term benefits for prevention of early
arthritis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.