* 2238931
* CAREER: The Role of Light Environment and Genetics in Shaping Visual and Behavioral Plasticity
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Erica Westerman, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 02/29/2028
* USD 239,816.00

Many animals rely on visual cues to guide behaviors such as finding food,
finding mates, and avoiding predators. The detectability of visual cues is
influenced by environment, as habitats have different amounts and qualities of
ambient light. Due to habitat-specific variation in ambient light, it is
hypothesized that the eyes of species that share the same habitat are adapted to
be most sensitive to the colors of light in that habitat. This visual tuning may
be the result of genes underlying vision as well as responses to environmental
cues, such as induced changes in sensory system development and adult vision.
However, it remains unclear how genetics and environmental cues work together to
produce the diverse adult visual systems we see. Using butterflies, an
ecologically and economically important group of pollinators, the project will
determine the genetic mechanisms underlying the responsiveness of animal visual
systems to changes in light environment. The project will then examine the
downstream effects of variation in vision on pollinator food selection and mate
selection, thus connecting genes, habitat, and both foraging and mate selection
behavior. To enhance public understanding of the effects of environment on
animal behavior and pollinator abundance, the researcher will utilize the
charismatic nature of butterflies to engage hundreds of students of all ages and
backgrounds in a Community Science Research project. This project examines the
seasonal behavior and light responses of butterflies in collaboration with a
local non-profit botanical garden, faculty in the humanities, and college
students from both science and humanities courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will identify the role of genetics and ambient and developmental light
environments in shaping visual ability and subsequent flower preference and mate
selection in butterflies, a prominent group of pollinators. Ambient light
environment is known to influence what colors of light are easiest for animals
to see, yet the ability of animals to modify their vision to match changes in
light environment in response to developmental cues remains poorly understood.
Neither the environmental cues inducing visual tuning nor the genes underlying
these processes are well described. Using an integrative approach that combines
developmental and genetic manipulation, transcriptomics, behavior, and field
ecology, the proposed research will address the following questions: 1) Does the
developmental light environment influence visual system development and
subsequent foraging and mating behavior in butterflies? 2) What genes are
associated with developmental and behavioral responses to variation in light? 3)
Do conspecific visual signals vary with light environment, improving
detectability and visual tuning? 4) Do pollinator communities exhibit visual
tuning corresponding to seasonal changes in ambient light and background color?
By characterizing the role of light environment in shaping visual systems and
determining whether seasonal species assemblages exhibit shifts in visual tuning
that match seasonal shifts in light environment, this work will enhance the
scientific and agricultural communitiesâ€™ ability to predict pollinator
behavioral responses to changes in land use and light
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.