* 2238138
* CAREER: Theory for Dynamic Graph Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Thatchaphol Saranurak, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 08/31/2028
* USD 287,367.00

Graphs are one of the most natural representations of relationships between data
and are, hence, used in nearly every branch of science. Unfortunately,
traditional graph algorithms are often no anymore viable because graphs in
modern applications likeâ€ the internet/traffic/social networks are always
evolving. To address this issue, dynamic graph algorithms research aims to
design efficient methods for maintaining useful information (e.g., connectivity,
shortest paths, matching) on graphs undergoing updates through time without
wastefully recomputing answers from scratch after each update. In the last few
years, several breakthroughs in dynamic graph problems reveal promising
connections to other areas which are still unexplored and only known among
experts. The goal of the project is to deepen, broaden, and popularize the
theory of these connections, and continue attacking fundamental barriers in the
field, as they will likely lead to even more exciting tools and connections.
This research direction goes hand-in-hand with educational plans, such as
developing a new undergraduate course on the principles of dynamic algorithms,
publishing online educational videos, and bringing together researchers from
related areas to exchange ideas and techniques through workshops.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More concretely, this project aims to investigate the
following connections between dynamic graph algorithms and other areas. The
first direction is to develop generic techniques for dynamic algorithms robust
against an adaptive adversary by using connections to differential privacy,
cryptography, and fine-grained complexity theory. The second direction is to
develop new sublinear time algorithms, graph sparsification, and graph
decomposition techniques that will lead to breakthroughs in dynamic algorithms.
The third direction is to dynamize continuous optimization methods and develop
optimization tools for dynamic problems. Via these connections, the investigator
aims to obtain optimal algorithms for fundamental dynamic graph problems,
including dynamic matching, max flow, and reachability problems. These are the
holy-grail problems that have exponential upper and lower bound gaps. Hence,
even partial progress should advance our understanding of the field and be
useful as a subroutine for future algorithms. The multi-disciplinary approach
above should naturally make impacts beyond dynamic graph
algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.