* 2238724
* CAREER: Static, Dynamic and Kinematic Analysis and Optimization of Tensegrity Structures through Cellular Morphogenesis
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Landolf Rhode-Barbarigos, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 07/31/2028
* USD 589,845.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award supports research that will
focus on the generation, analysis and optimization of tensegrity structures.
Tensegrity represents a class of structures composed of members in compression
and tension in a self-equilibrated state. In this project, tensegrity systems
are studied to conceive rapidly erected structures for traditional civil
applications. However, the outcomes of this award extend beyond architecture and
structures as tensegrity systems have been explored for a wide variety of
engineering applications including metamaterials, planetary landers, soft
robotics, as well as to model the mechanical behavior of biological cells.
Although tensegrity structures have received significant interest among
scientists and engineers, there is still no unifying theory on their generation
and behavior. This research project thus seeks to develop a morphological
framework that integrates design criteria with assembly and kinematics while
providing architectural design freedom. The framework enables control over the
behavior of tensegrity structures by decomposing complex systems into elementary
tensegrity units. Inspired by tensegrity’s artistic origin, the research will
also be complemented by developing learning modules centered on objects at the
intersection of art, science, and engineering, exploring object-based learning
in collaboration with educational experts and students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of the research project is to develop a theoretical understanding of how
morphology can be used to define the stability, equilibrium, deployability,
structural response, sensing, and control in complex tensegrity structures.
Specifically, the research approach includes a) understanding the relationship
between cellular composition and mechanical behavior in tensegrity structures,
b) enhancing the construction, analysis, sensing and control of tensegrity
structures, and c) deriving a morphological framework for the generation and
optimization of tensegrity structures with predefined and transformable forms,
as well as tunable mechanical behaviors. To accomplish these objectives, a
method that links topology identification and form finding through the cellular
composition of tensegrity systems with cells being elementary tensegrity units
will be explored. It is hypothesized that tuning the cellular composition of
tensegrity structures along with their structural parameters can lead to desired
shapes, optimized mechanical performance, and advantageous control methods. This
project will allow the PI to advance the knowledge base in tensegrity systems
and establish his long-term career in structural
morphology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.