* 2238960
* CAREER: Fair and Efficient Market Design at Scale
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Christian Kroer, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 06/30/2028
* USD 117,514.00

Markets are an ancient institution that enables society to efficiently allocate
resources by matching supply to demand. Most people think of markets as
involving money, for example the stock market. Yet even in problems without
money, market design principles play a key role in shaping efficient outcomes.
Example problems include medical residency matching, matching students to
schools, matching donors to kidneys, fair course seat assignment, housing
allocation, and sharing compute resources. Market equilibrium is a key concept
in economic theory, specifying how goods, such as course seats or compute
resources, can efficiently be distributed among individuals, by finding prices
that clear the market. This applies even in settings without money, by giving
each individual a budget of faux currency in order to induce a market. Yet, for
these ideas to have practical applications, we need methods for computing market
equilibria, potentially at large scales. This project will develop an AI and
optimization-driven approach to large-scale market equilibrium computation. This
will lead to new and fairer algorithms for problems such as matching blood
donors to donation sites, course seat allocation, public housing allocation, and
fair recommender systems. This project also includes a substantial educational
component, including writing a book on modern AI and optimization-based methods
for game theory and market design. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project develops a
general AI-driven approach towards operationalizing large-scale market
equilibria. This requires the development of new online learning methods that
account for real-world structure and machine-learning-based predictions.
Concretely, the project makes contributions along the following four technical
challenges: 1) Online fair allocation and dynamic markets: The project proposes
new algorithms for online fair allocation, based on online learning and first-
order methods, with a focus on algorithms that are robust to many types of input
models, and the extension of recent advances in optimistic and predictive online
learning to the fair allocation setting. 2) Two-sided preferences: A frequent
real-world complication not captured by market-equilibrium-based fair allocation
is that both sides of the market correspond to agents that we wish to treat
fairly. The project develops a new class of two-sided Fisher market models and
algorithms. 3) Combinatorial preferences: Combinatorial preferences abound in
practice, yet these are not captured by standard models. The project develops
new utility classes and associated optimization models and algorithms for
handling a wide array of combinatorial utility structures. 4) Statistical
inference in Fisher markets: The project will initiate the study of statistical
inference in Fisher markets, including questions such as the normality of Fisher
markets sampled from an underlying model, as well as a new theory of
counterfactual inference in markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.