* 2238204
* CAREER: Understanding Microstructure Evolution and Deformation Mechanism of Strong yet Ductile Nanolamellar High-Entropy Alloys Produced by Additive Manufacturing
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2028
* Wen Chen, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 08/31/2028
* USD 100,118.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additive manufacturing, also called
3D printing, is a new paradigm to produce net-shaped components layer by layer
for a broad range of technological applications in automotive, aerospace,
biomedical and other industries. In addition to vast design freedom, the rapid
laser melting during additive manufacturing can produce highly refined
structures at the nanoscale in metals for achieving high strength. However,
high-strength nanostructured metals often suffer from limited ductility, which
is an ability to be stretched without breaking. This strength-ductility tradeoff
has been a long-standing challenge in materials science and the quest for
materials that can simultaneously enhance strength and ductility has been a
long-sought-after goal. High-entropy alloys (HEAs) are a new class of materials
that contain high concentrations of five or more different elements in near
equal atomic proportions, in contrast to traditional alloys that are primarily
based on one major element with some minor alloying elements added. This Faculty
Early Career Development (CAREER) award supports fundamental investigations into
additive manufacturing of HEAs towards strength-ductility synergy beyond current
benchmarks. This project is helping to understand the microstructural origin and
deformation mechanism that govern the mechanical properties of 3D-printed HEAs
by integrating microstructural characterization, mechanical testing, and
computational modeling. The knowledge being established in this project will
guide the development of strong yet tough metal alloys for various applications
such as advanced energy systems, transportation, and defense. This CAREER award
also includes a significant educational component that engages students in
research across high school, undergraduate and graduate levels. Through
broadening participation of underrepresented groups, this project is
diversifying the next generation of researchers and STEM leaders in materials
science and advanced manufacturing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3D-printed metal alloys usually involve highly
localized melting processes, strong temperature gradients, and fast cooling
rates. These extreme printing conditions result in far-from-equilibrium states
that enable microstructural refinement to the nanoscale for achieving high
strength. However, high-strength nanostructured metal alloys often suffer from
limited ductility, known as the strength-ductility tradeoff. Through harnessing
the extreme printing conditions of laser additive manufacturing and favorable
compositional effect of HEAs, a unique type of hierarchical microstructure in
the form of dual-phase nanolamellae embedded in microscale eutectic colonies is
achieved in 3D-printed eutectic HEAs. This process gives rise to an exceptional
combination of strength and ductility. This CAREER award is investigating the
fundamental processing-structure-property relationship in these strong yet
ductile nanolamellar EHEAs produced by additive manufacturing. The scientific
objectives in this study are to: 1) Understand how laser printing protocols
affect the solidification microstructure and mechanical properties of 3D-printed
eutectic HEAs. Process-sensitive thermal modeling will be developed to unveil
the physical link between the complex printing parameters and the solidification
microstructure and resulting mechanical properties. 2) Unravel the deformation
mechanism and micromechanical response of 3D-printed eutectic HEAs by in situ
neutron diffraction and transmission electron microscopy. 3) Elucidate the phase
transformation pathways in 3D-printed eutectic HEAs upon post-printing heat
treatment. A fundamental investigation of the phase transformation pathways and
kinetics during annealing of the far-from-equilibrium 3D-printed HEAs are being
performed to expand the palette for materials design. The mechanistic insights
and design motifs being provided by this CAREER project have broad implications
for the development of hierarchical, multi-phase, nanostructured alloys with
excellent mechanical properties. This award also encompasses an educational and
outreach plan to advance research training and education of next-generation
students and underrepresented groups. New outreach initiatives such as 3D
printing workshops and a summer-enrichment program will be developed to inspire
women and underrepresented minorities and increase the diversity of our future
workforce in materials science and advanced
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.