* 2238476
* CAREER: Timeliness as a Controllable Dimension via Knowledge-driven System Management
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Renato Mancuso, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 04/30/2028
* USD 246,643.00

The modern lifestyle is permeated and largely defined by a symbiotic interaction
with computing systems. These are expected to take meaningful actions (logical
correctness) at the right time (timeliness). Timeliness is crucial in safety-
critical autonomous systems such as driverless vehicles and aircraft,
manufacturing and power plants, and devices for intensive care and life support.
Similarly, quality-of-service in enterprise and cloud systems primarily
encompasses the temporal characteristics of application workloads.
Unfortunately, the intense push for intelligent systems over the last decade has
caused an explosion in the complexity of software and hardware layers. In turn,
the sharp rise in system complexity has significantly weakened our ability to
reason about, predict, and control the timeliness of application workloads. This
Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project aims to reconcile the critical
need for timeliness with the growing complexity of modern intelligent systems
with an integrative research and education plan. The research focuses on turning
timeliness into a dimension that can be directly and explicitly managed in high-
performance platforms. It does so by recognizing the importance of gathering and
acting upon precise knowledge about the low-level interplay between software and
hardware components. Systemic paradigms to collect, retain, and leverage such
knowledge are studied, with a specific focus on practical technology that can be
immediately employed on commercial platforms. In a complementary way, the PI has
devised educational activities to introduce timeliness as a fundamental design-
time dimension in computer science curricula, with a number of outreach
activities designed for pre-college students to explore challenges in time-
sensitive systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through a coordinated plan to rethink
the role of hardware and platform-software components, the PI will lay down the
blueprints for knowledge-driven system management with explicit control over
timeliness as a goal. Emerging commercial-off-the-shelf platforms that include
traditional processing elements and reprogrammable logic provide a unique
opportunity to practically instantiate said blueprints. Three orthogonal
research thrusts comprise the pillars of this research effort. The first thrust
focuses on designing and developing a set of enabling mechanisms to observe and
control performance-critical hardware resources with minimal overhead. In
particular, observation mechanisms are designed to collect insights into micro-
scale application-platform interactions. Conversely, control mechanisms are
devised to enforce fine-grained resource provisioning decisions at a micro-
architectural level. The second thrust tackles the challenge of extracting
knowledge from fine-grained data. This entails contextualizing the acquired data
streams to construct a notion of timely application progress. Timely progress
information is leveraged to detect past under-/over-provisioning and perform
allocation/reclaiming accordingly. Simultaneously, strategies to accurately
predict the impact of resource provisioning policies over future application
progress are explored. Finally, the third thrust concerns the criticality-aware
composition of multiple application workloads with specified timeliness
requirements, profiled demand for hardware resources, and known temporal
behavior in response to changes in resource provisioning. The significance of
this project is threefold. First, direct control over the timeliness of complex
applications via knowledge-driven system management provides the necessary
principled foundations for data-driven real-time decision-making. Second, the
methodologies and techniques developed as part of this effort will serve as a
reference for future hardware platforms to achieve control over timeliness by
design. Third, cross-cutting activities targeting pre-college, undergraduate,
and graduate students at Boston University aim to bring temporal behavior
analysis and timeliness into the foreground of computer science
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.