* 2238373
* CAREER: Long-Run Determinants of Racial Inequality in the US
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Ellora Derenoncourt, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 02/29/2028
* USD 281,842.00

Economic disparities between Black and White Americans remain one of the most
striking forms of inequality in the US today. Much of the economics literature
on racial inequality focuses on the role of discrimination, yet this framework
explains a declining share of the gaps between Black and White Americans. This
CAREER research uses three projects and a historical perspective to identify the
determinants of racial disparities and shed light on the channels through which
these gaps occur and persist. The project combines original data collection with
natural experiments and focuses on historical and institutional determinants of
racial income and wealth inequality. The first project studies the effects of
political disenfranchisement of Blacks in Jim Crow South on Black wealth
accumulation while the second project studies the role of US social insurance
and labor policy design in generating and perpetuating racial wealth inequality.
The third project will study the link between the Great Migration North and mass
incarceration policies in the North that disproportionately affected Black men,
putting them at a severe disadvantage in the labor market. Each of these
projects involves the collection and digitization of large original historical
data. The results of this research project will provide important inputs into
policies to reduce income and wealth inequality as well as generate equitable
growth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER research uses three
projects to advance the literature in economic history and labor economics. The
first project explores the determinants of slow racial wealth convergence from
the abolition of slavery to the present, testing for the effect of political
dis-empowerment on wealth accumulation by studying the growth of Black wealth
under Jim Crow. It digitizes annual, county-level records of Black and White
wealth for six southern states and uses the staggered rollout of state laws
limiting Black franchise to assess the impact of franchise restrictions on
economic mobility. The second project explores the role of US social insurance
and labor policy design in the evolution of racial inequality. The project
digitizes state-level unemployment insurance policy from 1937 to 2020 and
examines the role of demographic change on state policies as well as the impact
of changes in eligibility and generosity on racial gaps. The third project
investigates the link between the Great Migration North and the phenomenon of
mass incarceration, which disproportionately affected Black men and placed them
at serious disadvantage in the labor market. The project constructs causal
jurisdiction severity measures from criminal court records from dozens of
northern states as well as data on municipal ordinances spanning the 20th
century. It uses these data to investigate the link between the Great Migration
North and increased reliance on punitive social policy in American cities that
leads to mass incarceration of Black men. The results of this research project
will provide important inputs into policies to reduce income inequality as well
as generate equitable growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.