* 2238834
* CAREER: Ring-Opening Polymerization-Induced Crystallization-Driven Self-Assembly
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Joe Patterson, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2028
* USD 149,081.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polymers are essential for
our everyday lives. However, the problem of global plastics waste is a critical
one. In addition, the polymer industry generates a large amount of greenhouse
gases due to its high energy demand. This project will aid our transition
towards a sustainable polymer industry by developing and studying energy-
efficient chemistries to create biodegradable, biocompatible, and renewably
sourced polymeric materials. To achieve this goal, this project will study how
polymer molecules assemble and organize themselves into different structures as
they are created through polymerization methods. This is important because the
properties of polymeric materials are dependent on how they organize at the
nano-, micro- and macro- scales. Highly advanced electron microscopic techniques
will be utilized in this project to watch the polymers organize into structures
in real time. This knowledge will help us to understand why different
chemistries and different polymers form into different types of structures.
Ultimately, this knowledge will help us to design polymers with useful
properties using sustainable chemistries. Through this project, the next
generation of polymer scientists will be trained on advanced analytical tools to
provide a fundamental understanding across the field. Furthermore, the diversity
and retention in polymer science will be impacted by using inclusive teaching
and mentoring practices throughout the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective for this CAREER project is to develop
methods to understand and control the mechanisms that drive ring-opening
polymerization-induced crystallization-driven self-assembly of block copolymers.
Investigation of the mechanisms and structures will be achieved by developing
reactions to control the thermodynamics and kinetics of polymerization and self-
assembly and by utilizing liquid and cryogenic electron microscopy and X-ray
scattering methods. To provide a link between the polymer chemistry and the
formation of hierarchical structures, the project will study the relationship
between reaction rates and self-assembly mechanisms. The research themes are
tightly integrated into educational activities, including the development of a
new, joint graduate-undergraduate level course, which will be developed into an
online course through the UCI OpenChem program. Additionally, active learning
methods in general chemistry and K-12 polymer-based outreach modules will be
developed. The integrated educational and research plans meet the urgent needs
of transitioning towards a sustainable materials economy and training diverse
students in the fundamentals of analytical polymer science, preparing them to
enter and lead the future STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.