* 2238488
* CAS: CAREER: Light-Initiated C-H Functionalization by Metal Oxo Complexes for Sustainable Light Hydrocarbon Upgrading
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2028
* Matthew Chambers, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Tong Ren
* 04/30/2028
* USD 442,287.00

With the funding from the Chemical Catalysis (CAT) Program of the Division of
Chemistry (CHE) and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR) office, Matthey Chambers of the Louisiana State University (LSU) will
work to develop methods to employ solar energy (light) as a renewable energy
source to drive the conversion of hydrocarbons to commodity chemicals.
Hydrocarbon functionalization is the cornerstone of the chemical industry and
the energy economy, but methods for generating value-added commodity chemicals
and fuels today typically rely on high temperatures, high pressures, and
environmentally hazardous reagents. This has the consequence of dramatic energy
usage, as steam reforming and related processes account for 1-10% of global
energy consumption. Motivated by biological systems that efficiently use special
molecular cofactors containing metal-oxygen active sites, this project will
investigate the manner in which interactions with light can actuate these motifs
to selectively mediate the catalytic conversion of inert hydrocarbons to
products. As the director of LSU’s ChemDemo program, Dr. Chambers will actively
engage communities and provides hands-on science experiences to underserved and
underrepresented K-12 students throughout the region. This project has potential
long term broader impacts related to sustainable catalysis of relevance to the
chemical industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Matthew Chambers and his group will
investigate the factors that underpin early transition metal oxo photochemical
properties (light absorption, emission energy, and lifetimes) and reactivity
patterns. Photochemical characterization will be achieved via steady-state and
transient luminescence spectroscopy and product distributions will be determined
by NMR spectroscopy and GC-MS analysis. An emphasis will be placed on more
oxophilic platforms as, upon excitation, these systems may efficiently activate
C–H bonds while allowing the activated substrate to undergo a diverse array of
follow-up reactivity to achieve a broad range of products. The selectivity of
these transformations is related experimentally and computationally to the M–OH
bond dissociation energies of the intermediates as this is thought to be the
critical parameter influencing product selectivity. Also under investigation
will be methodologies to achieve efficient and stable photocatalytic platforms.
Kinetic studies will aim to identify the key steps during the reoxidation of the
metal oxo photocatalyst while ancillary ligand field variations are directed at
developing an understanding of the critical features impacting photocatalysis.
Collectively, these aims are expected to lead to enhanced understanding of metal
oxo photochemistry and the parameters that underpin selectivity. Understanding
the factors that influence the catalytic reactivity of photoexcited metal oxos
would constitute enabling technology, with potential applicability to the
development of new petrochemical technologies and fuel-forming
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.