* 2238359
* CAREER: Data-driven Multiscale Modeling of Complex Traffic Systems Utilizing Networked Driving Simulators
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Subhradeep Roy, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 06/30/2028
* USD 556,507.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award supports research that will
investigate human driving behavior and interactions among traffic participants,
with the aim of empowering technological advances in autonomous and connected
vehicles. Understanding human driving behavior is vital for engineering
connected and autonomous vehicles that safely share roads with humans. This
award supports fundamental research about human driving behavior, including
their physiological and cognitive engagement with other drivers and the
environment. To ensure a safe and cost-effective approach, the project will
utilize an immersive virtual reality driving simulator. Controlled and
repeatable experiments will be conducted in this environment by systematically
exposing drivers to a variety of traffic scenarios. The project will integrate
educational activities that introduce students, including students from
underrepresented groups, to STEM topics, as well as outreach activities to raise
awareness of the general public to traffic safety, secondary crashes, and
impaired driving. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project will study
multiscale traffic interactions, at the vehicle, driver, and cognitive levels.
Using brain scans for multiple interacting participants, this project will
investigate whether brain coupling characteristics emerge among drivers at the
group level, and how cognitive level engagement relates to other driving
behaviors. The research findings have potentially transformative implications
for cognitive and behavioral neuroscience and technological advancement in
driver assistance systems. The project will generate rich multiscale datasets,
identify experimentally-informed modeling parameters, and discover
experimentally-validated traffic models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.