* 2238881
* CAREER: Mechanistic Insights Facilitate the Development of New Bond Forming Processes
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Andy Thomas, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 05/31/2028
* USD 770,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms-B Program of
the Chemistry Division under this CAREER award, Andy Thomas of the Department of
Chemistry at Texas A&amp;M University is using newly developed rapid injection
NMR (RI-NMR) systems to investigate the fundamental reactivity patterns of
unstable intermediates. These new reaction monitoring systems have provided new
avenues to explore organolithium (Thrust I) and ozonide (Thrust II)
intermediates. The ability to investigate the fundamental reactivity patterns of
various systems is providing new and, at times, unexpected mechanistic insights
to be obtained, allowing for new reactions to be developed. The newly found
mechanistic data are being applied to answer several open synthetic challenges
that have considerable importance to the field. Specifically, Thrust I is
focused on exploring how chiral Lewis bases can create new avenues for the
asymmetric construction of carbon-carbon bonds with organolithium reagents; and
Thrust II is developing new oxygenation reactions with ozone by exploring the
reactivity patterns of primary ozonides. In addition, this program is well
suited to impart a broad set of skills to students as the research requires
extensive training in organic synthesis, kinetic analysis, and advanced
spectroscopic techniques such as rapid-injection NMR spectroscopy. The crux of
the research program has been integrated into an education plan that seeks to
expand the scientific literacy of all citizens and places a special emphasis on
engaging low-income areas. A chemistry workshop has been established to expose
3rd , 4th, and 5th graders to chemistry early on and inspire them to seek
careers in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By using unique RI-NMR reaction
monitoring systems, this project is focused on the following two objectives:
(Thrust I) development of new asymmetric deprotonation substitution sequences
with separated ion pairs and (Thrust II) development of asymmetric constructive
ozonolysis for carbon-oxygen bond formation. In Thrust I, a variety of chiral
Lewis bases will be synthesized and investigated for the asymmetric capture of
carbanions. Specifically, the proposed work endeavors to elucidate the key
structural features of chiral Lewis bases and organometallic reagents that
engender essential activating and controlling functions for the development of
highly general and selective carbon-carbon bond forming reactions. Thrust II of
this proposal seeks to gain a detailed mechanistic understanding of the steric
and electronic control elements that influence the formation of primary ozonides
and their subsequent diversification. Specifically, Thrust II addresses the
long-standing synthetic challenge of functionalizing oxygen after it is
installed into a carbon skeleton â€“ pursuing new modes for alkyl ether
formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.