* 2238165
* CAREER: Assembly and Function of Viral Immune Complexes
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Michael Vahey, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Ishita Mukerji
* 12/31/2027
* USD 244,560.00

PROPOSAL NUMBER: 2238165&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: CAREER: Assembly and Function of Viral
Immune Complexes&lt;br/&gt;PI: Michael
Vahey&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
improve understanding of how the immune system recognizes and responds to viral
infections. This project will determine how the molecular properties of a virus
contribute to this immune response, paving the way for advances in public health
that range from the development of better vaccines to improved viral vectors for
gene therapy. When viruses enter the body, proteins present in saliva, mucus, or
blood attach to the viruses and modify them. Although these modifications are
known to be important, understanding how they are established and how they
contribute to the progression of infection and anti-viral immunity remains
challenging. In addition to the training of graduate and undergraduate students,
in collaboration with local teachers, this project will develop curricula and
establish intuitive and engaging visualization tools to promote understanding of
immune recognition in middle school and high school students.&lt;br/&gt;A
central goal of this research is to understand how heterogeneity in the
molecular organization of viruses and the antibodies that bind these viruses
leads to the formation of macromolecular complexes with a wide range of physical
and functional characteristics. A combination of chemical biology, fluorescence
microscopy, and cellular engineering will be used to investigate how viral
immune complexes form and how they engage with antigen-specific B cells at the
single-virus level. The project will identify mechanisms through which the
structure and organization of virions influence anti-viral immunity, providing
insights into the evolutionary pressures that shape the molecular topography of
the virion surface. The projectâ€™s research objectives will be integrated with
educational objectives aimed at engaging students in grades 6-12 with principles
of antiviral immunity and immune recognition though teacher-researcher
partnerships and mesoscale molecular visualization
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.