* 2238344
* CAREER: GLOW: The Long-Term Histories of Geologically Active Solar System Moons from Isotope Geochemistry
* MPS,AST
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Katherine de Kleer, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Martin Still
* 08/31/2028
* USD 564,583.00

The investigator, Dr. Katherine de Kleer of the California Institute of
Technology, has developed experiments to measure gases released from the
interiors of bodies in the outer Solar System. When the Earth and our planet
neighbors are viewed within the Solar System today, we see only a snapshot of
their full lifetimes. In order to put this snapshot in context, the investigator
would like to understand their long-term histories, or how they got to be the
way they are today. On worlds, like Earth, that have active geology (plate
tectonics, volcanism etc), the signatures that we might use to study their past
have been erased. Measurements of chemical elements with slightly different
masses provide a rare opportunity to study the more distant histories of
planets. With new telescopes, these measurements are only now becoming possible
for the outer part of the Solar System. The investigator and her research group
will use new telescope observations study the evolution of Solar System moons
and dwarf planets. By combining these observations with models, this work will
advance understanding of the heat flow and mass loss histories of these worlds.
The program will involve students from undergraduate to PhD level, as well as
postdoctoral scholars. It will additionally train young scientists in producing
innovative, interactive science content for the public, tailored to a range of
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project applies established techniques in
isotope geochemistry to geologically-active moons observed with astronomical
methods, thus bridging the disciplines of astronomy, geology, and geochemistry.
It will specifically provide insight into: the longevity of tidal heating at the
galilean satellites; the mass loss and surface-interior exchange processes at
Enceladus; and the formation and migration histories of captured moons. The
project will utilize new observations from the Atacama Large (sub-)Millimeter
Array, which will be interpreted using models that will consider all isotope
reservoirs and exchange rates for the relevant species, enabling robust bounds
on formation and evolutionary scenarios. The results will address fundamental
open questions about these objects, and will establish the abiotic isotope
background for Solar System moons, an important first step towards using
isotopes as biosignatures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-funding was provided by the
Division of Astronomy and Division of Earth Sciences through a partnership
focused on Geoscience Lessons for and from Other Worlds
(GLOW).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.