* 2238874
* CAREER: Understanding 2D confinement driven phase transitions of non-polar liquids
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Prathima Nalam, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 07/31/2028
* USD 251,939.00

Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Friction and wear are ubiquitous
phenomena which often lead to significant energy losses and adverse
environmental impact. For instance, automotive applications alone account for
approximately 4-5% of global energy consumption due to friction losses.
Inefficient mechanical systems also result in shorter lifecycles, increasing
material wastage and environmental burdens. To address these challenges, the
lubricant industry requires efficient, low-pollutant lubricants. Two dimensional
(2D) materials, such as atomically thin layers of graphite and molybdenum
sulfide, have emerged as promising lubricant additives to protect engine walls.
The layered structure of the 2D materials allows intercalation of small
molecules, such as hydrocarbon oil, which can modify interfacial interactions
and tune mechanical and frictional properties. In this project, we aim to
advance and utilize the atomic force microscopy and vibrational spectroscopy
techniques to investigate the physical behavior and viscoelastic properties of
the intercalated liquids at the buried interfaces. The goal is to tune the
intercalant phase for achieving highly lubricious surfaces. This project will
also provide a training in interdisciplinary and integrative for undergraduate
and graduate students, fostering skills that enable acceleration of material
discovery and development across diverse applications. Additionally, this
project aims to promote dialogue and outreach in the tribological community to
facilitate accessible and curated data for data-driven advancements in
tribology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal aims to investigate how the phase behavior of liquids, specifically
alkanes, is influenced by structural and thermodynamic parameters when
intercalated within the confinement generated by a 2D material. The impact of
the chemistry of confining walls, intercalant alkane structure, and the
substrate morphology on the intercalation process and their interfacial
properties will be explored. Through this study, advances in the methodologies
of force spectroscopy and vibrational spectroscopy will be made to quantify the
physical properties of sub-nanometer intercalant layers at the buried interface.
By integrating experimental results with simulation methods, a mechanistic
understanding of the mechanical and tribological behavior of intercalated
interfaces will be achieved. The outcomes of this research will advance the
applications of 2D materials as interfacial coatings in gear and engine
lubrication, as well as in nanofluidics. Furthermore, summer research training
opportunities will be developed to encourage underrepresented undergraduate
students to engage in interdisciplinary research for the development of next-
generation advanced materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.