* 2238446
* CAREER: Family Support, Pressure, Disengagement, and Marginalization: Facilitating or Hindering STEM Interest and Career Participation among Diverse Women
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Elizabeth Dorrance Hall, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Elsa Gonzalez
* 04/30/2028
* USD 501,215.00

The Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) program is a National Science
Foundation-wide activity that offers awards in support of early-career faculty
who have the potential to serve as academic role models in research and
education, to lead advances in the mission of their department or organization,
and to build a foundation for a lifetime of leadership in integrating education
and research. This CAREER project investigates how parental messages facilitate
the resilience of girls and women from diverse ethnic/racial backgrounds in STEM
career development. The project explores the idea that family support is
critical for encouraging interest in STEM and sustaining career progress through
adulthood. However, parents may also communicate messages (e.g., pressure,
marginalization, disengagement) that make it difficult for girls and women to
persist and thrive in STEM careers. The results of this study will be integrated
with education goals to teach families about effective communication and STEM
career options. The study will include a conversation-based card game that
engages the family in discussion and stimulate learning about career
trajectories, support, and messages in a workshop for parents of high school
girls interested in pursuing STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
consider intersectional identities and diverse lived experiences to understand
how different types of family STEM communication influence STEM interests and
persistence. Three mixed-methods studies will employ in-depth interview and
survey methodologies to identify effective parental messages that facilitate
STEM interest and support underrepresented women in STEM throughout their
careers. Interviews with Black, Hispanic, and White STEM and non-STEM majors and
a survey of parents will identify types and predictors of family STEM
communication. The empirical findings and educational activities of this CAREER
project will illuminate and disseminate how family dynamics influence the career
trajectories of Black, Hispanic, and White women at multiple life stages. This
project is funded by the Directorate for STEM Education Core Research (ECR)
program, which supports work that advances fundamental research on STEM learning
and learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.