* 2238656
* CAREER: New Challenges in Statistical Genetics: Mendelian Randomization, Integrated Omics and General Methodology
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Jingshu Wang, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 04/30/2028
* USD 58,527.00

With the rapid development of genetic technologies and the continuing collection
of large-scale biobanks, scientists are provided with unprecedented
opportunities to predict, prevent, and treat common diseases in a personalized
and efficient way. In the meantime, analyzing such data presents many new
challenges as 1) data come from multiple sources and can suffer from various
biases and confounding; 2) scientific questions need an understanding of not
only associations but also causal relationships among different risk factors and
diseases. This project will address a range of statistical challenges in
performing the integration of different omics data types to elucidate potential
genetic changes that lead to disease development or relate to the discovery of
treatment targets. The project will bridge statistics, machine learning,
genetics, and medical research from an analytical perspective. In addition to
helping young generations develop independent thinking, the educational
activities will help them develop the ability to form objective opinions on
social events and to analyze data to form an unbiased judgment on news stories.
The PI will develop software and share research results on social media that can
be useful to scientists and clinicians, doctors, and industrial professionals.
This project also supports graduate students in the research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the project, the PI plans to develop three aspects of
research for modern statistical genetics. For Mendelian Randomization, which
uses genetic mutations as natural experiments to understand risk factors for
disease progression, the PI will focus specifically on adjusting for confounding
and evaluating the temporal causal effects of clinical risk factors with new
frameworks. For analyzing gene regulation with single-cell multi-omics data, the
PI will work on a widespread regulation mechanism called alternative
polyadenylation, building new statistical models to understand its functional
roles with data from new technologies such as spatial transcriptomics and
single-cell CRISPR screens. Furthermore, the PI will also investigate new
statistical ideas motivated by recent methodological developments in genetics
that can help to solve general problems in hypotheses testing and Bayesian
inference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.