* 2238346
* CAREER: Generating Domain-Specific Systems at Scale
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Yakun Sophia Shao, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 05/31/2028
* USD 126,990.00

In the era of diminishing returns from technology scaling, hardware acceleration
is one of the most promising approaches to deliver improved performance and
energy efficiency for future computing platforms. However, state-of-the-art
accelerator research has largely focused on individual accelerator development
for a handful of algorithms, without a systematic understanding of how to
holistically generate many accelerators at scale while improving the overall
execution quality. To address the limitation, the goal of this project is to
develop a quality-driven accelerator design flow that enables the holistic
simulation, design, and integration of domain-specific accelerators at scale for
end-to-end applications. It will especially benefit emerging real-time
applications, such as robotics and self-driving vehicles, which feature a range
of computationally demanding kernels. In addition, the integrated education
activities will broaden participation in computing at all levels with outreach
activities to engage K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students in exciting
opportunities in the hardware industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
advance the state of knowledge in computer architecture on how to effectively
generate domain-specific systems at scale to achieve end-to-end acceleration.
Toward this goal, the project investigates the following three synergistic
research thrusts: 1) design a hardware-software co-simulation infrastructure to
quantitatively evaluate the end-to-end performance of closed-loop autonomous
systems; 2) develop a holistic design-space exploration framework to efficiently
construct, represent, and navigate the complex design space of entire systems-
on-chip; and 3) build an adaptive contention management system through hardware-
software co-design to dynamically partition shared resources between
accelerators. The methodology and framework the project develops will be open-
sourced and enable accelerator integration at a greater scale than what can be
done today, fundamentally advancing the field of heterogeneous system
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.