* 2238179
* Collaborative Research: Visual Information about surface curvature from patterns of image shading and contours
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* James Todd, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 03/31/2026
* USD 287,219.00

Our ability to perceive the 3D shapes of objects is generally taken for granted
in our day-to-day experiences, but a detailed explanation of how that is
possible has eluded researchers in both human and computer vision. Whereas
objects are composed of tangible substances such as wood, glass or metal, our
perceptions of them are based on patterns of light. Thus, an adequate theory of
perception must be able to explain how patterns of light can uniquely specify
the 3D structure of the visual environment. This research project will study the
visual perception of object shape, with a focus on understanding how the human
visual system processes and interprets information about the three-dimensional
properties of objects. A better understanding of 3D vision could provide many
practical applications. For example, it could lead to dramatic improvements in
the design of visually guided robots or autonomous vehicles. It could also be
important for building prosthetic devices for the blind to avoid potential
obstacles during locomotion or to detect the presence of slippery surfaces that
create a danger of falling. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The computational analysis of
3D shape from shading has been studied for over 50 years but despite the broad
interdisciplinary scope it has had relatively minimal success. One possible
reason is that researchers have typically simplified the problem by making
unrealistic assumptions about how light behaves in the natural environment. This
makes it easier to derive mathematical solutions, but severely limits the
generality of the resulting analyses. In the present work, the investigators
will include many of the optical effects that have typically been ignored in
this domain, including cast shadows, surface inter-reflections, anisotropic
reflections, light transmission, and multiple patterns of illumination. They
will also perform detailed measurements of the luminance field in each condition
to discover properties that are relatively invariant over changes in scene
parameters. The work will focus primarily on qualitative surface features, such
as bumps, dimples, ridges, valleys, and saddles, and how they correspond to
similar qualitative patterns of image shading. Numerous psychophysical
experiments will be conducted to document 1) how observersâ€™ judgments of 3D
surface structure are influenced by the pattern of image shading; 2) the
stability of these judgments over changes in surface materials and patterns of
illumination; and 3) how smooth variations of light intensity on the eye provide
information about 3D shape, even when all other aspects of shading have been
removed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.