* 2238516
* CAREER: Advancing Atomic-Level Understanding of Kinetically Driven Solid-Solid Phase Transitions from First Principles and Machine Learning
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Liping Yu, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 02/29/2028
* USD 308,804.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical
and computational research to advance the fundamental understanding of solid-
solid phase transitions. Most materials have several different stable
crystalline structures, each with a characteristic set of physical, chemical,
and mechanical properties. Carbon, which can form graphite (flaky, black
material used in pencils) or diamond (hard, colorless gemstone) structures, is a
well-known example. Solid-solid transitions that occur between different
crystalline forms of the same compound are ubiquitous and important phenomena.
They can lead to a wide variety of technologically important applications such
as diamond and steel production, synthesis of ceramic materials, thermal energy
harvesting and storage, rewritable optical data storage, and nonvolatile
electronic memories. Historically, considerable progress has been made in
understanding solid-solid transitions from thermodynamics concerning the
relative phase stability (the “driving force” for the phase transition),
regardless of transition paths between the initial and final structures.
However, the kinetics that dictates whether or not the transition can occur in
practice under given environmental conditions and which path the transition
likely takes place remain poorly understood. This project will advance the
atomic-level understanding of kinetics underlying solid-solid transitions
without using empirical data and develop an advanced artificial intelligence
method for the fast and accurate prediction of kinetic barriers that control
solid-solid transition in various environments. The data and methods acquired
will be broadly disseminated to the scientific community and the general public
through open-source distributions and
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education and outreach activities are
integrated in this project with the goal to inspire and develop a diverse,
globally competitive next generation STEM workforce in computational materials
science that will benefit the State of Maine as well as the nation. The research
team will (i) develop a “kinetics-driven phase-change materials by design”
module for high school students in collaboration with the Maine Center for
Research in STEM Education, (ii) develop an advanced courses in “computational
materials physics and modeling” for seniors and graduate students in science and
engineering departments at the University of Maine, (iii) expand the partnership
between the University of Maine and Oak Ridge National Laboratory to provide
students the opportunity to take advantage of facilities and computational
resources in the national laboratory to expand their experiences beyond the
traditional university setting, and (iv) create a summer research fellowship
program to provide opportunities for talented undergraduates majoring in
science, engineering, and mathematics to conduct computational materials
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award supports theoretical and computational research to advance atomic
level understanding of solid-solid phase transitions. Solid-solid phase
transitions are ubiquitous phenomena that play key roles in diverse technologies
across physics, chemistry, biology, materials science and engineering. Despite
having been studied for over a century, the fundamental understanding of phase
transition kinetics remains largely qualitative or phenomenological; the
atomistic mechanism of such transition processes and design rules for
controlling kinetics are still crucially missing. This project will advance
atomic-level understanding of kinetics of solid-solid phase transitions using a
combined method of modern first-principles electronic structure theory
calculations, quantitative chemical bond analysis, and machine learning. The
specific objectives are to (i) identify physical principles and structural
motifs that control kinetic barriers of polymorphic transitions from first
principles, and (ii) develop a bottom-up physics-driven machine learning method
for the fast and accurate prediction of transition barriers. The study will be
carried on a set of select well-known phase-transition materials that are
technologically important for energy and electronic applications. The research
will accelerate the design and discovery of new functional phase-change
materials where kinetics is essential.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Education and
outreach activities are integrated in this project with the goal to inspire and
develop a diverse, globally competitive next-generation STEM workforce in
computational materials science that will benefit the State of Maine as well as
the nation. The research team will (i) develop a “kinetics-driven phase-change
materials by design” module for high school students in collaboration with the
Maine Center for Research in STEM Education, (ii) develop an advanced courses in
“computational materials physics and modeling” for seniors and graduate students
in science and engineering departments at the University of Maine, (iii) expand
the partnership between the University of Maine and Oak Ridge National
Laboratory to provide students the opportunity to take advantage of facilities
and computational resources in the national laboratory to expand their
experiences beyond the traditional university setting, and (iv) create a summer
research fellowship program to provide opportunities for talented undergraduates
majoring in science, engineering, and mathematics to conduct computational
materials research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Division of Materials Research through the Condensed Matter and Materials Theory
program, and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.