* 2238088
* CAREER: Towards Programmable Social Robots for Everyone: A Teacher-in-the-Loop Learning from Demonstration Framework
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Wing-Yue Louie, Oakland University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 04/30/2028
* USD 181,058.00

Social robots have demonstrated significant positive impacts across a range of
application areas including delivering K-12 education, therapy for autism
spectrum disorder, and older adult care. Although they are intended to provide
much needed support in these areas, social robots remain inaccessible to
individuals (e.g., healthcare professionals, educators, and service industry
workers) who could best use the technology to produce the greatest impact to our
society. This is because social robots still require significant technical
expertise to be deployed and there is currently no clear pathway for laypeople
to utilize social robots for their desired applications. This research will
bridge the gap between social robots and individuals with no
robotics/programming experience so that social robots can be made accessible to
everyone. This will be accomplished by developing approaches and technologies
that empower laypeople to teach and customize social robots for their desired
applications, thereby transforming our emerging healthcare and education
workforce by increasing their capacity for delivering services previously not
possible. Project outcomes will also broadly impact education by supporting
interdisciplinary workforce development and broadening participation in STEM for
individuals from diverse backgrounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address these
goals, this project will investigate fundamental approaches and techniques that
enable a layperson to teach a social robot via demonstration. Teaching is often
an iterative process that requires a teacher and learner to coordinate their
efforts towards the mutual goal of knowledge transfer but there currently is
minimal effort in engaging a layperson during the robot teaching process beyond
providing data or examples the robot can learn from. This research will keep
teachers-in-the-loop throughout the entire robot learning process by: 1)
developing interfaces that enable a teacher to prepare high-quality
demonstrations, 2) developing approaches that improve a teacher's understanding
of models learned by a robot, and 3) developing approaches that enable teachers
to integrate domain knowledge while they teach a robot. Project outcomes will
both advance knowledge on enabling laypeople to independently teach a social
robot and our fundamental understanding on how humans transfer social knowledge
to machines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.