* 2238273
* CAREER: Implantable multimodal bioelectronics for high-performance gastrointestinal monitoring and modulation
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Yi Zhang, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 04/30/2028
* USD 394,197.00

Neurological disorders affect the quality of life of more than 100 million
people worldwide. Historically, neurological disorders were viewed as brain-
centric processes. Recent studies, however, have found that the physiological
and biochemical factors in the gastrointestinal tract also influence the
function of the central nervous system, so-called gut-brain axis. Despite its
importance, there is a limited understanding of where, when, and how these
physiological and biochemical factors in the gastrointestinal tract modulate
diverse behavioral outputs of the brain. This is, in part, because of the
limited technologies available for the high-performance modulation and
monitoring of various information in the gastrointestinal tract. This project
will create a new route to understand gut-brain bidirectional communication and
associated neurological disorders by providing urgently needed technologies. The
research will closely interact with the neuroscience community and actively
translate the technology from the research bench to commercialization. The
education program will attract underrepresented minorities and female students
for bioelectronics research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
investigate a set of foundational materials, device design, and system
integration problems for high-performance modulation and monitoring in the
gastrointestinal tract of freely moving small animal models. This project
includes three research objectives: (1) develop soft physiological and
biochemical sensors for gastrointestinal monitoring, (2) study the water and ion
transport properties of a new class of device encapsulation materials, and (3)
establish and validate a wireless multimodal bioelectronic system for high-
performance gastrointestinal monitoring and modulation. The research will
significantly advance our currently limited knowledge of the design and
development of multimodal bioelectronics for high-performance modulation and
physiological and biochemical monitoring in the gastrointestinal tract. The
bioelectronics design and new knowledge are expandable to other fields,
including bioelectronics for wound healing, cardiac health, and urinary tract
diseases, where continuous monitoring and modulation are
needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.