* 2238752
* CAREER: Large-Scale Theoretical Capabilities for Exploring the Limits of Nuclear Stability
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Kevin Fossez, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 06/30/2028
* USD 450,000.00

This project will develop new theoretical capabilities to understand and predict
the properties of exotic nuclei living at the edges of nuclear stability and
playing an important role in violent astrophysical events such as supernovae.
Exotic nuclei, characterized by large imbalances in their proton-to-neutron
ratios, are short-lived and magnify less known aspects of nuclear forces by
exhibiting new emergent phenomena. Currently, a comprehensive theory of the
atomic nucleus connecting quantum chromodynamics to their properties is still
missing. In the coming decade, the Facility for Rare Isotope Beams (FRIB) will
produce for the first time thousands of new isotopes in the unexplored neutron-
rich part of the nuclear chart and provide a trove of new data, which will
require enormous theoretical support. This project will address the current
disconnect between theory and experiment and advance our understanding of atomic
nuclei through key theoretical advances. The broader impacts of this project
concern the training of graduate and undergraduate students using integrated
education and research activities. Outreach by the PI to local high school
students through a summer camp organized at Florida State University is also
integral to the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the density matrix
renormalization group method for open quantum systems will be extended to
systematically test nuclear forces in light exotic nuclei and improve
predictions in larger systems; a new ab initio method exploiting the in-medium
similarity renormalization group method will be devised to extend the predictive
power of ab initio methods in exotic medium-mass nuclei explored by the FRIB;
and the effective field theory framework will be used to study many- body
resonances and emergent phenomena in exotic nuclei from the nuclear shell model
picture. If successful, this research will provide new and valuable insight into
the physics of exotic nuclei, and help guide experiments at the FRIB and related
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.