* 2238839
* CAREER: Differentiable Programming for Visual Computing
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Tzu-Mao Li, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 02/29/2028
* USD 113,858.00

Deep neural networks are a modern machine learning method that is known to
produce excellent results for processing visual data such as images and 3D
content. However, deep neural networks have some known limitations. They usually
do not model the underlying physical process (e.g., light transport or dynamics)
directly, they require significant computational resources for training and
inference, and they are difficult to debug and control. On the other hand, while
classical visual computing algorithms that explicitly model the formation of
visual data (e.g., how a camera captures a picture or how objects move
physically) suffer less from these issues, they often do not apply as broadly as
modern machine learning methods because they do not learn from a large amount of
experience. This research will bridge the gap between the two approaches by
creating classical visual computing algorithms that are differentiable. That is,
the functioning of these algorithms depends smoothly on a set of internal
parameters that can be tuned automatically using deep learning approaches. The
project will optimize these domain-specific differentiable visual computing
programs using data to get the best of both worlds. Project outcomes will have
broad impact in applications such as enabling self-driving cars to make better
decisions, training robots to interact with the environment using physical
information, creating more realistic virtual worlds, designing buildings with
better lighting, designing physical objects with desired appearance and
functionality, and allowing movie artists to create better film shots. The
systems developed through this research will be incorporated into new
programming courses and tutorials, and the PI is committed to working with early
career scholar programs to promote participation in visual computing and
differentiable programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project pursues a
synergistic plan that includes the design of differentiable programming systems,
algorithms, and applications. To these ends, it will be necessary to adapt
domain-specific algorithms and compute their derivatives in correct and
efficient manners, to design new visual computing algorithms that leverage both
data-driven priors and domain-specific knowledge, and to parameterize the
problem for optimization to avoid local minima and satisfy constraints. Neither
traditional automatic differentiation nor modern deep learning systems address
these challenges. The algorithms, systems, and applications will evolve together
to help each other. Concretely, this project will develop differentiable
programming languages that can properly handle discontinuities, and
automatically optimize code performance to efficiently process millions or
billions of pixels, particles, or triangles by exploiting structured sparsity in
visual computing programs. It will also develop new domain-specific
differentiable visual computing algorithms with improved efficiency and accuracy
in image processing and physical simulation, by retaining the structures of
classical algorithms while replacing hand-built heuristic components of the
algorithm with data-driven elements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.