* 2238609
* CAREER: Investigating the Noun Bias in Early Language Acquisition
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2028
* Marisa Casillas, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Paster
* 03/31/2028
* USD 102,005.00

Human languages are staggeringly diverse, and yet children around the world
display some striking similarities in the process of language learning. It is
important to identify similarities that occur across diverse learning contexts
because such similarities provide evidence for the evolutionary basis of
language - what makes humans (but not other animals) capable of learning human
languages. And yet diversity among languages and cultures implies that human
infants must considerably adapt their language behaviors to their home
environments. This CAREER project investigates how consistencies in learning are
flexibly adapted in context by examining early word learning in two unrelated
languages. The findings contribute to the development of detailed theories of
child language learning that apply to children from diverse cultural and
linguistic backgrounds in educational and clinical settings. The project
advances the training of the next generation of scholars to conduct comparative
cross-linguistic research and creates educational resources for use by the
community and the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Across multiple
languages, children’s first words are more likely to refer to objects than
actions, a cross-linguistic similarity that is colloquially called the “noun
bias”. This project investigates the source and strength of this bias across a
highly noun-centric language and culture and a more verb-centric language and
culture. The results shed light on what experiences make children more or less
likely to focus on nouns and noun-like words during early development. On the
one hand, a language itself can be structured in a way that points children’s
attention to nouns. On the other hand, the ways that adults communicate with
children may also point their attention to nouns. By using a comparative cross-
linguistic approach that includes spontaneous conversation, eye tracking, and
tests of new word learning, this research pinpoints the nature of the noun bias
and deepens understanding of how it is adapted for the specific language and
culture of a child’s home environment. The findings yield insight into a key
part of the evolutionary basis for language: how children are biased to
understand and label the world around them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.