* 2238744
* CAREER: Live and Direct Programming Environments
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Cyrus Omar, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 04/30/2028
* USD 225,022.00

Modern programming environments promise to make coding a less cognitively
demanding activity by providing contextualized feedback, suggestions, and
editing affordances. However, they can suffer from catastrophic gaps in service
when the program being edited is incomplete, i.e., when there are missing pieces
or errors. The programmer is left to simulate program behavior on their own in
these situations -- a difficult and error-prone task even for professional
programmers, and a major barrier to entry for novices. This project's novelties
are that it develops a new generation of programming environments that achieve
maximal liveness, i.e., that never suffer from these gaps in service. Maximal
liveness is achieved by developing a novel direct manipulation code editing
interface, tile-based editing, that automatically inserts program holes to
maintain a sensible syntactic and semantic structure, even when the program is
incomplete. The project's impacts are expected to be measurable decreases in the
cognitive demand of educational, professional, and creative coding tasks, which
will contribute to lowering the barriers to entry into
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key mechanism, tile-based editing,
fundamentally restructures code editing to allow for direct manipulation of the
linearized projection of a program tree, while maintaining maximal liveness by
automatically managing holes and delimiter matching obligations to continuously
maintain a syntax tree internally. From there, this project scales up the
language-theoretic foundations developed in recent work by the investigator,
integrating liveness with modern language features like pattern matching (in
languages like Haskell and Elm) and borrowing (in languages like Rust). These
target languages feature in the investigator's programming languages courses and
in educational resources targeting diverse creative communities, where the
research is evaluated. In support of these educational efforts, the project
develops novel live tutoring and authoring services that leverage the maximal
liveness invariant to provide several novel forms of live, contextualized
feedback, assistance, and direct manipulation editing
affordances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.