* 2238388
* CAREER: Learning, Estimation, and Control of Networked Epidemic Processes
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Philip Pare, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 01/31/2028
* USD 405,171.00

Current approaches for controlling diseases spreading through populations employ
techniques that rely solely on mathematical models or only depend on data, with
no clear connection between these two extremes. The proposed research will
establish a set of fundamental theories, tools, and algorithms to model, learn,
and control real-time epidemic spreading processes by leveraging multiple live
data streams while evaluating the trade-off between model-based and data-driven
approaches. The proposed research consists of three thrusts. The first thrust
will encompass the design of a set of novel models to characterize epidemic
spreading under different settings, providing tools for connecting and comparing
models at different resolutions. The next thrust will include algorithm design
and development aimed at selecting the appropriate models and identification of
model features by leveraging multiple live data streams. The last thrust will
incorporate the multi-resolution models from the first two thrusts within a
data-driven predictive control framework, studying model-based vs. data-driven
approaches. This research will help provide insights for decision makers, such
as politicians, public health officials, administrators, and business leaders,
to better mitigate future disease outbreaks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will develop a class of multi-resolution models that enable nonlinear
control design that spans and adapts along the model-based vs. data-driven
spectrum and is focused on the application of networked epidemic processes. The
project will identify fundamental bounds on achievable performance in the
presence of corrupted data sets and provide theories and algorithms with
performance guarantees. The proposed research will lead to a greater
understanding of the fundamental factors that affect the modeling, learning, and
control of networked systems with multiple online data streams; establishing
systematic procedures for model selection, estimating parameters and structure
from uncertain and biased data; and developing realizable real-time control
strategies for and across different model resolutions. The research plan will be
integrated into education through a software platform to serve as an educational
tool, giving students hands-on experience with data, exponential growth, dynamic
modeling, and control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.