* 2238414
* CAREER: Redesign of Ancillary Services via Aggregation and Disaggregation of Information, Flexibility, and Capability
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Liang Du, Temple University
* Continuing Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 02/29/2028
* USD 404,037.00

This NSF CAREER project aims to provide the theoretical foundation of
aggregating and disaggregating nodal generation capacity, flexibility, and
information, which will allow exploiting the full potential of distributed
energy resources and electrified transportation in future decarbonized power
grids. The project will transform the conventional energy and ancillary service
co-optimization-based power grid operation scheme into a novel capacity-
flexibility dispatch and redispatch control framework. This will be achieved by
converting existing resource planning problems with system-wide requirements
into granular control problems with multi-scale, multi-domain nodal
requirements. The intellectual merits of the project include developing nodal
demand, capacity, flexibility composite models and computationally efficient
aggregation algorithms with guaranteed characteristics under uncertainty. The
broader impacts of the project include promoting the integration of research and
education for students with diverse backgrounds. Pre-college and undergraduate
students, especially from underrepresented groups, will benefit from resulted
summer research programs, workshops, capstone projects, and open-access
curriculum materials. If successful, this project will also provide power system
operators with technology advancements to integrating large-scale renewable
energy and enhancing grid resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Uncertainties by
fast-growing penetration of distributed energy resources, proliferation of
electrified transportation, and climate change intertwine and amplify challenges
posed on power system reliability. Consequently, widespread and prolonged power
outages have been occurring increasingly more frequently and severely in recent
years, which illustrates the inadequacy of existing ancillary services provided
by reserving unloaded capacity on generation resources. The proposed project
will redesign conventional resource planning-based ancillary services into a
novel capacity-flexibility dispatch/redispatch control problem through three
major technical innovations: (1) Mathematical models and effective aggregation
of nodal flexibility provided by both distributed energy resources and
electrified transportation through novel cost-aware, multi-period optimization
techniques. (2) Computationally effective, granular control policies for the
proposed nodal level co-dispatch are established as theoretical co-optimization
problems converted through transformations and information aggregation, which
will be solved both precisely with guaranteed performance and approximately as a
data-driven problem. (3) Aggregating nodal information to determine nodal
ancillary service requirements by extended Minkowski sum of polytopes, which
will be further integrated into a unified theoretical framework by Difference of
Convex programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.