* 2238979
* CAREER: Learning from demonstrations and beyond -- consolidating imitation and reinforcement learning
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Guni Sharon, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 05/31/2028
* USD 119,549.00

Recent advancements in deep reinforcement learning (RL) hold unprecedented
potential for automating and optimizing control of real-world tasks such as
autonomous driving, traffic management, medical procedures, robotic
manufacturing, and energy management. Unfortunately, it is common for RL
algorithms to exhibit unstable and/or inefficient learning, which limits their
applicability. Seeking to address this critical concern, this CAREER project
leverages imitation learning (IL), or behavior copying, which is better
understood and typically more stable. The project targets the unification of IL
and RL into a holistic paradigm that can safely and effectively learn from, and
outperform, existing solutions. This project will address outstanding knowledge
gaps in both types of learning through a novel curriculum decomposition of the
tasks, where simplified demonstrations are used to bootstrap the learner’s
behavior. The project will also foster education and outreach activities.
Specifically, it will enhance undergraduate STEM training by providing students
with exposure to scientific research and knowledge discovery processes relating
to safety-critical AI applications through an original multidisciplinary
undergraduate engineering program. Moreover, it will facilitate a unique K12
outreach activity within a large minority (Hispanic/latino) community (Bryan,
TX). The project will support and advance an existing research collaboration
with an industrial partner in the context of defense technology. This
collaboration, in turn, is expected to advance the US national
defense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will form the basis for a new
research thrust in ML---one that combines IL and RL toward a holistic, robust,
and safe learning framework. It will define and prove a no-regret bound on the
training process within the Markov-Decision Process formalization. The approach
is to reduce an IL problem to an RL one that includes a domain-independent
curriculum-learning trajectory. The resulting algorithms and solutions are
expected to achieve state-of-the-art performance in complex control domains as
well as to deepen theoretical understanding of the potential and limitations of
the resulting solutions. Specifically, the research seeks to prove conditions
guaranteeing policy convergence and monotonic improvement during training.
Moreover, the project will develop domain-specific adaptation to and analysis of
real-world applications (autonomous driving and robotics testbeds) while
providing stable and efficient RL from demonstrations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.