* 2238667
* CAREER: Identifying emergent dynamics in stochastic systems
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Evelyn Tang, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvio May
* 05/31/2028
* USD 260,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The letters O and D can be transformed
into each other without having to cross, cut, or connect lines. Similarly for K
and X, or for the letter B and number 8. These examples reflect properties that
are known in mathematics as topological invariants. Recently, the research field
of topological invariants has emerged as a powerful method to characterize
global properties of materials, irrespective of details such as impurities and
defects. Currently, this framework largely describes systems at equilibrium,
with identical atoms that are arranged in an orderly manner. In contrast,
biological systems are often far away from equilibrium and consist of many
different components that exhibit disorder and noise. This CAREER award supports
research to establish a theory of topological invariants for biological systems
and for synthetic materials that mimic biological systems. The PI will use an
interdisciplinary approach, employing theoretical methods from mathematics,
physics, and biology, to identify general principles that render biological
functions robust, maintaining the same type of behavior over long periods of
time even if external conditions change. The award also supports educational and
outreach activities that aim at increasing interest in science among under-
represented groups through nurturing the interplay between physics with dance
and movement. Specific efforts include the development of an interdisciplinary
class on dance and physics, teaching modules on dance and movement for use in
high schools, and demonstrations on the physics of
dance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding
how the underlying components of proteins, RNAs, metabolites and other
biologically relevant molecules give rise to biological function would enable
precise targeting of interventions to enhance health. However, there still does
not exist a good theory for these complex and noisy systems. As just one
example, despite successful sequencing of the human genome, it remains
challenging to predict the behavior of resulting proteins and macromolecules due
to the large phase space of possible reactions and configurations. The goal of
this project is to develop a generalizable theory based on physical principles
that can predict stable and evolving function in living systems. Specifically,
the PI will use an interdisciplinary approach that draws on recent theoretical
developments in topology, molecular biology, and non-equilibrium physics to
achieve this goal. Topological invariants have proved useful for analyzing
emergent function as they characterize a property of the entire system, and are
insensitive to local details, disorder, and noise. They support edge states,
which reduce the system response to a lower dimensional space and offer a
mechanism for the emergence of global cycles within a large space of reactions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research effort will inform an educational platform
about the underlying principles of dynamics and physical movement, towards
making physics more tangible to students traditionally under-represented in
science. At the scale of human interactions, this interdisciplinary work will
foster inclusion and diversity through the interplay between physics with dance
and movement with the objective of increasing interest in science among under-
represented groups. This effort will comprise the following three efforts.
First, the PI will create a new interdisciplinary class on dance and physics at
Rice to draw students who may not be initially interested in science. Second, in
collaboration with the Rice Office of STEM Engagement, the PI will work with
Houston teachers to develop teaching modules on dance and movement for use in
high schools, towards integrating existing student groups into discussions on
science. Third, the PI will work with a non-profit black, indigenous and people
of color organization to design demonstrations on the physics of dance in
afterschool activities and public events for underserved communities, in order
to foster public scientific literacy. These educational efforts will bring
different worlds together to inspire new knowledge in existing communities and
increase the pipeline of under-represented students in STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.