* 2238815
* CAREER: Robust Online Decision Procedures for Societal Scale CPS
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Abhishek Dubey, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* David Corman
* 01/31/2028
* USD 88,985.00

This research project will study novel methods for designing sequential, non-
myopic, online decision procedures for societal-scale cyber-physical systems
such as public transit, emergency response systems, and power grid, forming the
critical infrastructure of our communities. Online Optimization of these systems
entails taking actions that consider the tightly integrated spatial, temporal,
and human dimensions while accounting for uncertainty caused due to changes in
the system and the environment. For example, emergency response management
systems (ERM) operators must optimally dispatch ambulances and help trucks to
respond to incidents while accounting for traffic pattern changes and road
closures. Similarly, public transportation agencies operating electric vehicles
must manage and schedule the vehicles considering the expected travel demand
while deciding on charging schedules considering the overall grid load. The
project's proposed approach focuses on designing a modular and reusable online
decision-making pipeline that combines the advantages of online planning
methods, such as Monte-Carlo Tree Search, with offline policy learning methods,
such as reinforcement learning, promising to provide faster convergence and
robustness to changes in the environment. The research activities of the
proposed project are complemented by educational activities focusing on
designing cloud-based teaching environments that can help students and operators
with prerequisite domain and statistical knowledge to design, manage, and
experiment with decision procedures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The societal-scale CPS
that we study have spatial-temporal properties. The spatial aspect refers to the
location-specific state variables such as traffic congestion, transportation
demand, and the frequency with which incidents occur at a location. The temporal
aspect refers to the dynamic nature of these systems---traffic congestion
evolves over time. Non-myopic decisions entail selecting actions over time under
uncertainty while accounting for future impact and demand for resources. The
combined research and education efforts proposed in the project focus on
answering the following critical questions for these systems - first, how do we
solve the challenge of sampling future state/ environmental actions across a
high-dimensional space while also tackling the challenge of non-stationarity?
Second, how do we address the need for robust, fast non-myopic planning that
also tackles potential non-stationarity? And third, how do we make it possible
to engage non-computer science students and community partners with the
solutions built using approaches pioneered in the project? The proposed approach
involves investigating novel machine learning methods, such as normalizing flows
for designing generative models and an innovative approach to design planning
algorithms using a policy-augmented hybrid Monte-Carlo Tree Search approach. A
significant effort of the project will focus on complementing fundamental
research with the design of a cloud-based visual domain-specific modeling
environment that can help explain the design, operation, and introspection of
methods by using a block-based compositional approach. The work will be
augmented with course modules and online tutorials accompanying the cloud-based
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.