* 2238314
* CAREER: Culture, Context, and Development Policy: An Interdisciplinary Research and Training Program
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Sara Lowes, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2028
* USD 350,998.00

This CAREER proposal uses four projects to study how culture interacts with
policy to affect development outcomes. Culture has important implications for a
wide variety of outcomes, including governance, human capital investment, and
the scope and extent of cooperation. Economists have sought to understand the
drivers of variation in culture, and the consequences of various cultural
practices for key economic outcomes. The theme of this CAREER project is that
insights from anthropology, culture, and local context can help explain
differences in development policy success across countries and if appropriately
used, may improve the design and effectiveness of development policies. The
first project studies how to improve accountability and performance of local
leaders; the second studies how a mismatch between indigenous institutions and
development initiatives hinders the success of such initiatives, while the third
project studies how social structures affect insurance and cooperation. The
final project digitizes a new, large, and innovative ethnographic data for many
developing countries that will be one of the few data sets of its kind. The
results of this project will improve the efficiency of development policies,
hence reduce poverty around the world. In addition, the results will help
improve the effectiveness of US foreign aid programs, hence help the US maintain
its global leadership in poverty reduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
consists of four projects to study how culture interacts with policy to explain
the heterogeneity in development outcomes across countries as well as contribute
to the literature in evolutionary anthropology. The projects combine a variety
of methods: randomized controlled trials, lab-in-the-field experiments, original
surveys, and digitization of archival and ethnographic data. The first project
uses RCT to investigate whether social structures that increase accountability
of local leaders can be leveraged to improve the provision of public goods. The
second project provides new evidence on the ecological origins of private,
relative to communal, land rights and explores how traditional property rights
structures affect efforts to title land. The third project studies how
matrilineal kinship systems affect cooperation and insurance in the extended
family, expanding the traditional focus within economics on the nuclear family
to extended kinship. The fourth project is an innovative data digitization
effort to provide access to new ethnographic data for several developing
countries. The results of these projects will provide insight into how culture
affects the efficacy of development policy, and how greater understanding of
local context can improve development initiatives. Besides improving development
policy outcomes, the results will also help improve the effectiveness of US
foreign aid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.