* 2238685
* CAREER: Understanding past and present biogeochemical cycle of potassium (K) and its implications for the global carbon cycle: proxy development based on stable K isotopes
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Xinyuan Zheng, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 02/29/2028
* USD 195,373.00

The weathering of silicate rocks is an important part of Earth’s natural
“thermostat.” Silicate weathering can scrub carbon dioxide out of the atmosphere
and is considered a natural feedback that can counter the rise in global
temperatures, thus maintaining a habitable climate. The analysis of the
potassium (K) isotopes in silicate rocks has been closely linked to
understanding past silicate weathering rates. However, recent research suggests
that formation of new silicate clay minerals from the byproducts of silicate
weathering may reverse the chemical reactions of silicate weathering thus making
the processes less effective in cooling the planet. The formation of clays from
byproducts, a process termed “reverse weathering”, is challenging to study as it
occurs in remote sectors of the deep ocean and the reaction rates are slow.
Thus, this presents a fundamental knowledge gap in our understanding of the
long-term silicate and carbon cycles impacting what we know about past, present,
and future climate. This project develops stable potassium isotopes as a novel
proxy, or tracer, to help quantify modern and past silicate weathering rates.
Via analyzing potassium isotopes in Earth materials, this project investigates
the modern and past potassium cycle and its relationship to silicate weathering
and the global carbon cycle. The study will quantify changes in marine potassium
isotopes, helping to provide robust estimates on the global significance of
marine clay formation and its impact on climate. Through a comprehensive plan
integrating research and education, this project (1) supports geochemistry
infrastructure to fulfill research and education missions of the university; (2)
provides laboratory training for undergraduate and graduate students along with
educational opportunities for primary and secondary students; (3) extends
accessibility of a modern geochemical laboratory beyond the campus boundary to
attract and build a diversified workforce in geochemistry-related fields; and
(4) raises public awareness of the societal relevance of geochemistry research
and of the environment and climate of our planet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research aims to advance understanding of the marine stable potassium (K)
isotopic cycle to develop a robust proxy for silicate weathering. This project
applies controlled laboratory experiments and analysis of purposefully selected
natural marine samples to constrain key uncertainties in the modern marine
potassium isotopic cycle, including potassium isotope fractionation during
seawater–basalt alterations and clay formation. Isotope mass balance models are
being applied to quantitatively estimate the global significance of present-day
clay formation or reverse weathering. Additionally, laboratory experiments,
supplemented by spectroscopic characterization and a modeling approach, will
advance knowledge on potassium isotope exchange kinetics and fractionation
pertinent to derivation of seawater potassium isotope compositions from relevant
geologic archives such as marine evaporites. Deliverables include development of
an interpretative framework that will enable the use of geological archives to
reconstruct potassium isotope signatures in ancient oceans and to assess their
implications to the long-term carbon cycle. Through the integration of research
and education, this project advances interdisciplinary research in potassium
isotopes and expands application of the developing tool to the complex
plant–soil–climate feedbacks in the context of changing
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.