* 2238482
* CAREER: Requirements at Development Time
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Alicia Grubb, Smith College
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 08/31/2028
* USD 93,530.00

When creating or maintaining software systems, developers must ensure that the
working system aligns with the needs of users. These needs are documented as the
"requirements" for the system. Thus, requirements engineering (RE) is the term
used to describe the techniques and methods deployed to capture and concretely
define users' needs. Software industry experts and academics agree that accurate
and well-defined requirements are essential for the development of quality
software; however, the rate of adoption of RE techniques is still low among
practitioners and RE is still considered separately from software design and
development. One of the objectives of this project is to create a framework that
integrates RE techniques with development activities (e.g., coding, testing). By
linking requirements with the documentation of development activities,
researchers make it easier for developers to engage with the requirements for
their project, to ensure that software developers remain faithful to the
original goals and needs of their user base. While this framework will apply to
all software development, this project focuses on the low-computation needs of
small and independent software companies. Further, the project is designed to
simultaneously improve both the teaching and practice of RE, as there are not
enough individuals trained in RE, even with the expansion of the software
workforce. A second objective of this project is to create educational methods
that embed requirements within development activities in the classroom. By
empowering future software developers with better access to the requirements
they implement, this award aims to increase the adoption of RE by practitioners
and students. Through this project, the participation of women in computer
science will be increased by supporting and mentoring 20-30 female
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific objective of this award is
to explore to what extent streamlining requirements management into existing
development workflows will improve students' engagement with requirements in the
classroom and achieve greater adoption of RE approaches among the software
workforce. Researchers will create a framework that integrates software
requirements into normal software development activities. This framework will be
realized through the development of an open-source git-based solution consisting
of three functions: importing and parsing natural language requirements,
creating traceability links between requirements and git issues and pull
requests, and engaging developers in a feedback loop to evaluate the requirement
traces. The the resulting tool will create appropriate nudges for just-in-time
checking of specification documents and validation of software changes. This
project promises to improve practices in the field of requirements traceability
and parsing by seeking a computationally efficient approach for incrementally
creating traceability links between requirements and git development artifacts.
The project will advance the field of requirements engineering education by
embedding requirements within development activities in the classroom.
Researchers will measure the impact of requirements considerations in the
students' development process and the rate of studentsâ€™ voluntary use of
requirements to establish the effectiveness of RE activities and their impacts
on software quality. By iteratively studying course projects, researchers will
fine tune the git-based framework and mitigate any
weaknesses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.