* 2238109
* CAREER: Molecular Assemblies of Multidomain Signaling Protein on Membrane Surface
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Jean Chung, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Wilson Francisco
* 12/31/2027
* USD 367,475.00

Many proteins that carry out critical life processes are modular in structure,
i.e., composed of multiple independent domains, and the intra- and
intermolecular interactions among these domains determines function. Often,
changes in these structural organization that leads to activation occurs at the
cellular membrane, which remains experimentally inaccessible. This project will
develop a technology that can elucidate the molecular interactions on membrane
surfaces using Bruton’s tyrosine kinase (Btk) as a model system. The project
will develop experimental tools for elucidating structural details for
biomolecular assemblies on membranes, as well as the understanding of Btk and
other similar multidomain proteins. Integrated with this research strategy, the
education plan seeks to instill the concepts of microscopy and single-molecule
imaging in the public, in collaboration with the Colorado State University Spur
Campus. The plan is based on the idea that aesthetic appreciation for scientific
imageries can facilitate the understanding and affinity towards science.
Artistic actives that combine natural concepts will be incorporated into
creative activities in which artistic techniques illustrate the
concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bruton’s tyrosine kinase (Btk), a key signaling
protein in both innate and adaptive immunity, is a multidomain protein that
maintains an autoinhibited state at rest but undergoes a dramatic structural
change upon membrane recruitment where it becomes active. However, it is very
difficult to study membrane-specific structural changes and molecular
interaction such as oligomerization or clustering that can play a critical role
in the functional outcome of cellular signaling. In this project, synthetic
membrane reconstitution will be combined with quantitative spectroscopic methods
to systematically probe the membrane-specific supramolecular assemblies of Btk,
with the following specific objectives: (1) determine the multimerization state
of the full-length Btk on membranes, and the specific molecular interactions
responsible for the multimerization, (2) evaluate the molecular assembly’s
impact on Btk’s activation and catalytic activity, and (3) identify the material
state of the macroscopic Btk lipid binding domain clusters. Overall, the project
will advance our knowledge in cellular signaling, particularly those with
emergent properties specific to cellular membranes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.