* 2238718
* CAREER: Cryptographic Proofs, Outside the Black-Box
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Dakshita Khurana, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 01/31/2028
* USD 92,369.00

Cryptography has advanced far beyond its original goal of securing communication
and today, allows us to compute on data in provably secure ways. Users regularly
depend on untrusted service providers to perform an array of services like
statistical analysis and learning over outsourced, distributed private data. In
these settings, it is important to ensure security against adversaries that
behave arbitrarily and deviate from protocol specifications. Cryptographic
proofs form the bedrock of security against such adversaries, and have
facilitated a multitude of powerful capabilities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project tackles fundamental goals in the theory of cryptographic proofs: Can we
efficiently verify the results of inefficient computation? Can we write proofs
of statements that hide all secrets about them? Despite decades of research,
there are crucial gaps in our understanding of these problems. Existing
solutions either rely on external sources of trust or point to unknowns in our
understanding due to heuristic security analyses in idealized models. This
project overcomes these issues by improving how we reason about security. This
involves investigating new reasoning techniques that meaningfully relax
definitions and use the code of an adversary against the system. The project
also builds a research community through workshops as well as training graduate,
undergraduate and K-12 students in the foundations of cryptography and
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.