* 2238208
* SCC-IRG Track 1: Smart Connected Oral Health Community: Using AI and Digital Technologies to Close the Gap in Oral Health Disparity
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Jin Xiao, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 05/31/2026
* USD 1,500,000.00

Tooth decay is a pandemic disease that affects 35% of the global population, or
2.4 billion people. Dental caries (tooth decay) particularly impacts children
and adults living in poverty, who have poor access to dental care. Current
biomedical approaches to controlling dental caries have had limited success.
This project is creating a smart, connected oral health community with improved
access to care and greater oral health equity. The investigators aim to develop
and test a community-based infrastructure that combines use of artificial
intelligence (AI) technology, facilitated by home use of smartphones, with
community engagement through interactive oral health community centers, mobile
vans, and community health workers. The project has the potential to reform the
oral health care delivery system, empower communities with digital tools, and
overcome barriers to oral health equity. Beginning with a focus on families with
young children, the model could also be adopted by other underserved
populations, such as the elderly and refugees, who face similar challenges in
accessing oral health care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team is refining
the underlying technology with AI-powered oral disease screening and management
with cloud surveillance, and data collection facilitated by a dentistry
smartphone app for at-home self-monitoring. The team is also investigating the
social dimensions of the problem. It is establishing oral health community
centers supported by community health workers who apply established methods of
human motivation to reach and empower families in the community, and to teach
and motivate them to use the new AI apps. The team will be assessing community
outcomes of the project, with a focus on the use of technology tools for caries
detection and treatment prioritization, and community engagement with services
in oral health community centers. Outcomes will be measured by the perceived
competence of providers and patients, and the technology's acceptance,
usability, and effectiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.