* 2238093
* CAREER: Cryo-electron tomography derived multiscale integrative modeling of subcellular organization
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Min Xu, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Gao
* 05/31/2028
* USD 100,698.00

Cryo-Electron Tomography (Cryo-ET) enables the 3D visualization of subcellular
structures and their spatial arrangement inside single cells in close-to-native
state at submolecular resolution. This Faculty Early Career Development Program
(CAREER) project aims to develop computational methods to integrate cryo-ET and
fluorescence microscopy in order to learn which proteins are present in
different cell structures and how these structures are arranged relative to each
other. The research component of this proposal will contribute novel
computational methods and open-source software that are applicable to
understanding complex cellular processes in a broad range of biological studies.
The educational objective of this proposal is to advance and promote the
teaching and training of computational analysis and understanding of biological
Images (also referred to as bioimage informatics). The research activities and
outcomes will be integrated into classroom teaching, public online education,
and outreach programs for various students, including underrepresented students.
The broadening participation efforts will provide important training in bioimage
informatics for a diverse population to meet the fast-increasing demand in this
important area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator’s long-term research goal
is to develop computational methods for cryo-ET derived multiscale integrative
modeling. This CAREER project will develop computational methods for
constructing multiscale subcellular organization models of cell populations by
integrating information from cryo-ET and fluorescence microscopy. The Research
Plan includes three objectives: 1) constructing generative models of subcellular
organization from cryo-ET images of cell populations; 2) multiscale modeling by
spatial pattern matching between cryo-ET and fluorescence data; 3) inferring
protein composition of macromolecular structures identified in cryo-ET. It will
bring unprecedented opportunities for using Cryo-ET as a faithful and spatially
precise data source for modeling subcellular organization from the submolecular
scale to the cellular scale. Such modeling is essential for connecting
morphology to the mechanisms that produce it. The project outputs will be
available at “https://github.com/xulabs/modeling”.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.