* 2238748
* CAREER: Designing topological superconductivity and correlated phases in Van der Waals materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Yi-Ting Hsu, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 07/31/2028
* USD 222,017.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical
research and education with the aim to identify and design
&lt;br/&gt;superconducting materials that possess a new state of matter,
topological superconductors. Superconductivity is a collective quantum
mechanical state of electrons that can conduct electricity with zero electrical
resistance. Topological superconductors additionally possess special quantum
mechanical states on their surfaces called Majorana modes. Owing to these
Majorana modes, topological superconductors could be a platform for quantum
computing that is highly resistant to the environmental noise that spoils the
quantum states leading to errors. However, a key challenge that hinders
experimental progress is the difficulty in discovering actual superconducting
materials that unambiguously exhibit Majorana modes. To predict new topological
superconductors, the PI aims to harness recent experimental breakthroughs that
provide new opportunities to realize predicted topological and other quantum
phases through manipulating stacked atomically thin layers of materials known as
van der Waals materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI and her group will develop
fundamental guiding principles for identifying and designing materials and
materials systems exhibiting topological superconductivity and various quantum
phases self-organized through strong electron interactions. In particular, the
PI will focus on how to achieve targeted phases in Van der Waals material
systems using experimentally accessible “knobs”, such as the relative
orientation between layers and the structure and composition of the individual
layers. Guiding principles will be derived from mathematical frameworks
describing the targeted phases and demonstrated on realistic materials-based
models with analytical and numerical methods. The impact of the proposed
research will be to help guide experimental efforts through collaboration to
find Van der Waals materials that are topological superconductors or host
interesting quantum phases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports an
effort aimed to initiate new outreach programs that aim to (1) foster interest
in science for pre-K children through their parents, and (2) support the pursuit
of an academic career for women of child-bearing age or with young children. To
advance (1), the PI will launch a public multi-media channel that provides
explanations for physics- related “popular” questions kids often ask using
toddler friendly language. To advance (2), the PI will form support groups for
female students, postdocs, and faculty who are of child-bearing age, are
expecting, or have children in the South Bend area. The overarching goal for the
support groups is to reduce the “leaky pipeline” problem of women in academia by
providing emotional and career support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports research and education on theory-
guided material design for first- and higher-order topological crystalline
superconductors as well as correlated quantum phases in Van der Waals systems.
The rareness of materials that are topological superconductors has been one of
the key challenges in the field, which hinders experimental investigations and
applications of first- and higher-order topological superconducting phases in
two and three dimensions. Recent experimental breakthroughs in engineering few-
layer Van der Waals systems provide new opportunities to realize topological and
correlated phases. Nonetheless, the huge multi-dimensional parameter space of
material species, lattice structures, twist angle, and other experimental tuning
knobs invites theory guidance for designing target-oriented new systems. The
proposed research seeks to obtain theory derived guiding principles and predict
concrete candidate systems hosting topological superconducting and correlated
phases in few- layer Van der Waals materials. To achieve these goals, the PI
will employ or develop mathematical frameworks for higher order topological
superconductivity protected by crystalline symmetries, techniques treating
single particle and many-body moire physics, as well as novel machine learning
methods. This research is aimed to mobilize experimental efforts by (1) deriving
comprehensive recipes for material design of higher-order topological
superconductivity in Van der Waals systems, (2) developing a systematic four-
stage approach for searches of topological superconductors using material
databases and machine learning methods, and (3) proposing new twisted and
untwisted Van der Waals systems that could host various correlated phases by
designing renormalization group flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
education and outreach programs that target parents of pre-K children, academic
mothers, and female researchers. Activities include initiating the programs:
&lt;br/&gt;1. A Hundred Thousand Whys in Nature: a public multi-media channel
for parents of pre-K children. &lt;br/&gt;This channel will publish podcasts
that provide short and correct explanations for physics-related “popular”
questions kids often ask using toddler-friendly language. Polls and
questionnaires will be held to collect suggestions and feedback from the
parents.&lt;br/&gt;2. Coffee Breaks for Mothers in Academics: Support groups for
female researchers. &lt;br/&gt;Support groups will be formed for female
students, postdocs, and faculty who are of child-bearing age, are expecting or
have children in the South Bend area. The mentor-mentee relationships and
experience of sharing are aimed to provide emotional and career
support.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.