* 2238433
* CAREER: Acoustic Ambient Computing: Algorithms, Architectures, and Prototypes
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Nirupam Roy, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 06/30/2028
* USD 263,743.00

Acoustics play a crucial role in connecting humans to computing infrastructure.
Voice assistants have created a natural means of interacting with IoT devices;
smart earphones are emerging with sensing and assistive skills; and acoustic
augmented reality is around the corner. This proposal envisions a new frontier
in this computing space by enabling advanced acoustic sensing and inference on
low-power, battery-free computing platforms embedded in everyday environments —
creating a paradigm called acoustic ambient computing. The paradigm aims to
comprehend human activities, motions, gestures, and behavior through ambient,
infrastructure-embedded sensing. Target applications include data-driven health
technologies and physical recovery tracking in hospitals, immersive assistance
at workshops, positive behavioral reinforcement in offices and collaborative
workplaces, and even integration in open spaces such as parks or bus stops. This
research focuses on developing theoretical building blocks, algorithms, and
hardware-software prototypes to realize low-cost, scalable, and sustainable
solutions for sensing human activities and interactions using sound as a
ubiquitous sensing modality. The project efforts are organized as three research
thrusts: (a) The first thrust enables sensing of large-scale gestures and
movements near everyday surfaces, like walls, floors, and tabletops. It is
realized through a novel coded signal projection method using passive micro-
structures at the physical layer and an adaptive intermittent computing
architecture. (b) The second thrust zooms into micro-meter level motion and
micro gesture detection. This research module explores novel cross-spectrum
sensing and localization techniques and a lightweight neural attention-based
selective resolution approach for processing. (c) The final research thrust
introduces the notion of physical context to voice and speech interactions
across indoor and outdoor movements, gestures, and micro-activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will establish the critical components of a
wearable-free paradigm to interweave sensing and inference within everyday
environments so that computing services can be effortlessly blended into
people’s daily lives. The developed platforms and prototypes will foster a range
of new applications in interactive home automation, assistance and healthcare,
collaborative workspaces, and home security. It will help create frameworks for
retrofitting existing buildings and augmenting new indoor and outdoor
environments to turn them into interactive smart spaces. The proposed research
examines the interplay of embedded intelligence, wireless sensing, low-power
networking systems, and human-computer interaction. Insights from this project
will also lead to new learning modules used to teach the fundamentals of device-
free computing to students. Moreover, this project will introduce the concepts
of low-power embedded intelligence to undergraduate and K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.