* 2238071
* CAREER: Integrating brain-behavior evolution with real-world science impacts through neuroscience of working dogs
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Erin Hecht, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 02/29/2028
* USD 225,291.00

Some species of animals have innate predispositions to acquire particular
collections of learned skills. This is particularly apparent in working dog
breeds, which provides the opportunity to understand this general phenomenon in
detail. For example, border collies have an innate interest in sheep and can
easily be trained to herd livestock, but this is not the case for pointers,
retrievers, and sled dogs, who instead each have their own, different behavioral
predispositions. How does this occur? The proposed research explores this
question using noninvasive neuroimaging in 220 dogs of 4 breeds, including
groups of nonworking companion dogs and working dogs in the real world. The
research will examine dogs practicing historical working skills like herding and
hunting, as well as more modern skills that directly impact human society,
including guide dogs, service dogs, and scent detection dogs. Rigorous analyses
of these brain images will identify changes related to innate skill
predispositions as well as brain plasticity resulting from learning. Integrated
with this research, the project will support coordinated education and research
experiences for students at Harvard and elsewhere. In a unique new undergraduate
course, students will design and carry out their own dog behavior experiments.
Course materials and video data will be made publicly available to extend
educational and student research impact beyond the host institution.
Additionally, data from the research project will support a variety of
independent student projects. Open-access datasets and data analytic tools from
the project will support further research at other institutions. Outreach
activities will leverage dogs as public-interest “ambassadors for science,”
including knowledge exchange with canine professional
sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Feedback loops between behavior and evolution have
been posited since the time of Darwin, but surprisingly little behavioral
neuroscience research has probed this topic. This proposal addresses the
critical central question, “What is the interplay between plasticity and
adaptation in brain evolution?” It explores three distinct hypotheses about how
such change could occur in the brain. Working dogs offer a uniquely well-
controlled “natural experiment” on this question, because strong and rapid
artificial selection by humans has created different breeds with different
early-emerging predispositions for learned behaviors. The project’s aims will
identify neural correlates of innate predispositions for particular categories
of learned skills accrued across generations of evolved change, brain plasticity
resulting from learning these skills within a lifetime, and differences between
neural correlates of selection for historical and more recent skills.
Additionally, the performance ratings of working dog organizations will be used
to identify markers of individual variation in real-world working skills, which
may have direct applied impacts for breeding and training efforts. These goals
will be accomplished using canine-optimized neuroimaging sequences from the
Human Connectome Project, including T1- and T2-weighted MRI, diffusion-weighted
imaging, and resting state functional connectivity. Comprehensive, whole-brain
analyses will examine gray matter morphometry using a priori general linear
models and a data-driven multivariate analysis; white matter microstructure; and
white matter connectivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.