* 2238375
* CAREER: Score-Based Diffusion Models for Probabilistic Forecasting of Weather and Climate
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2028
* Peter Sadowski, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2028
* USD 424,293.00

This project will develop machine learning methods for estimating the risk of
adverse weather and climate events. Estimating the probability of rare events in
high-dimensional data is a fundamental problem in data science. Advances in
generative artificial intelligence will be used to develop new data-driven
computational methods for modeling risk and apply these methods to weather
applications. In particular, these models will be applied to forecasting solar
irradiance and precipitation, two applications that are particularly important
for tropical islands such as Hawaii. Estimating the risk of rapid changes in
solar power generation (ramp events) is necessary for managing energy grids that
are seeing a rapid increase in variable renewable sources, and floods claim
hundreds of lives and billions in property damage each year in the United States
alone. This research will be paired with an educational outreach program that
includes a summer data science course for high school students and a workshop to
share data science teaching materials with local K-12
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Generative artificial intelligence methods have
led to rapid progress in text-to-image models, image super-resolution, and video
prediction. The key development is in the neural network models used to learn
joint probability distributions over high-dimensional data such as images and
video. These include score-based diffusion models, which solve many of the
limitations of previous generative models including other flow-based models,
autoregressive models, variational autoencoders, and generative adversarial
networks. This project will investigate and improve the ability of score-based
diffusion models to efficiently learn the probability of rare events from finite
training data. Applications to solar irradiance and precipitation forecasting
will serve as motivating case-studies, as these problems require modeling the
joint distributions over spatiotemporal weather data. Experiments will leverage
existing data from numerical simulations of atmospheric variables and
observations from satellites and ground-based sensor networks. The machine
learning methods developed by this project will complement existing physics-
based numerical weather prediction models by providing location-specific
forecasts with increased computational speed, spatiotemporal resolution, and
probabilistic prediction accuracy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.