* 2238650
* CAREER: Peptidic Natural Products in Research and Education
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Vinayak Agarwal, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 07/31/2028
* USD 420,000.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Vinayak Agarwal from Georgia Institute of Technology is studying the
enzymatic modification of peptides into bioactive organic molecules. The
importance of modified peptidic organic molecules in chemistry, pharmacology,
and agriculture cannot be overstated. These peptidic molecules are typically
produced by genetically encoded enzymes acting upon a substrate peptide. The
proposed project is aimed at the discovery and biochemical study of peptide
modifying enzymes, and understanding how these enzymes recognize and bind to the
substrate peptides. This pursuit will allow graduate students to gain valuable
training in genetics, biochemistry, molecular biology, and analytical chemistry
procedures. This project also aims at integrated curriculum innovation at the
host institution wherein undergraduate students will receive theoretical and
hands-on training in microbiology and analytical chemistry experiments with the
aim to motivate their retention in postgraduate programs in science, thusly
enriching the nationâ€™s future technically trained
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The enzymatic modification of peptides and
proteins continues to furnish new chemical reactions. Starting with the mining
of bacterial genomes and metagenomes, this project will reconstitute the
biochemical activities of biosynthetic enzymes and query the reactions catalyzed
by and the substrate scope for the peptide modifying enzymes. Of particular
interest is the atomistic-level understanding of intermolecular peptide-protein
interactions that underlie the above-mentioned chemical modifications. Using a
variety of biophysical techniques, the mechanism of interactions between
purified substrate peptides and purified modification enzymes will be queried.
The biophysical studies will be corroborated with biochemical experiments, with
the aim to develop a deeper understanding of the rules of intermolecular
recognition. These efforts have the potential to provide new general-purpose
biocatalysts that allow for tailored modification of peptidic substrates.
Concomitantly, with material and personnel support from the host institution,
new coursework for undergraduate students will be developed which will provide
instruction in state-of-the-art mass spectrometry-based workflows aimed towards
the discovery of peptidic natural products from bacterial sources, together with
training in scientific communication and writing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.