* 2238060
* CAREER: Risk-Based Methods for Robust, Adaptive, and Equitable Flood Risk Management in a Changing Climate
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* David Johnson, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 06/30/2028
* USD 500,000.00

Many natural hazards (e.g., floods, heat waves, etc.) are expected to become
more frequent and severe under climate change. However, there is still
considerable uncertainty about the rate and extent of contributing factors like
sea level rise and the resulting changes in the hazards themselves, such as
increases in the average intensity of tropical cyclones. This uncertainty leaves
policymakers unsure of what conditions to plan for, leading to the possibility
of catastrophes if the future turns out to be more extreme than expected. On the
other hand, preparing for a worst-case scenario that never comes to pass may
require overinvestment of scarce resources that could have been allocated to
other societal and economic concerns. Research also shows that socially
vulnerable and marginalized communities bear a disproportionate share of risks
associated with natural hazards. The goal of this Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) grant is to improve decision-makers' ability to manage risk
from extreme events by (i) better quantifying natural hazards risks and (ii)
identifying risk-informed, adaptive, and equitable management
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the tools and methods developed during
this project will be applicable to multiple natural hazards, the scope and
motivation of the project are to develop, validate, and apply them in the
context of storm surge, riverine, and pluvial (i.e., rainfall) flooding in
coastal Louisiana. Unique datasets and state-of-the-art modeling capabilities
will be leveraged to better characterize the joint risk of flooding from these
sources and predict how the hazard will evolve over time under shifting
landscapes (e.g., land subsidence, erosion, changes to vegetation associated
with saltwater intrusion) and climate change-related environmental forcings
(e.g., sea level rise, changes to tropical cyclone characteristics). A multi-
resolution, multi-model framework and artificial intelligence will permit
estimation of compound flood hazard in a large ensemble of future scenarios,
which will then be applied to an existing structure-level risk model used in
Louisianaâ€™s Coastal Master Plan. Adaptive risk management strategies that
balance economic efficiency and equity, and which are robust to uncertainties
and varied operational definitions of equity, will be identified using methods
for decision-making under deep uncertainty (DMDU). Educational components of the
project will focus on increasing the adoption of DMDU methods and risk analysis,
and helping STEM students and practitioners to translate natural hazards
research into real-world policy impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.