* 2238412
* CAREER: Towards a Comprehensive Theoretical Framework to Predict Multiscale and Multicomponent Electrolyte Transport in Porous Media
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Ankur Gupta, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 01/31/2028
* USD 409,876.00

To combat climate change and work towards a sustainable future, advancements are
crucial in energy and environmental technologies. These technologies include (i)
electrochemical capacitors (ECs), which are energy storage devices that only
require a few seconds to charge, and (ii) capacitive deionizers (CDIs), which
are desalination devices that remove salt from water by applying electricity.
Both ECs and CDIs employ porous electrodes to maximize performance. These
electrodes consist of a complex network of pores through which ions move when
voltage is applied. While materials research on these technologies has
proliferated, understanding of the factors controlling the performance of EC and
CDI remains limited. By combining applied mathematics techniques with modern
computing capabilities, this award will develop and experimentally validate
computer simulations to understand how multiple ionic species move through pore
networks. The results from this award will accelerate the design and scale-up
ECs and CDIs, for instance, through optimal design of 3D-printed electrodes. The
integrated education program will incorporate research outcomes to create web-
based interactive simulations that are available for everyone, design an open
online course, to prepare the future sustainable economy workforce, and broaden
the participation of first-generation middle and high school students through
scientific workshops. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Fundamental challenges in
multicomponent electrolyte transport are that the systems consist of multiple
lengthscales and timescales, and the transport of species is coupled through an
electric field. Existing modeling approaches are unable to capture experimental
trends observed in porous electrodes because they focus on binary electrolytes
in unconfined geometries and overlook the impact of multiple electrolytes and
confined geometries. This award aims to bridge this major knowledge gap in the
field of electrokinetics. By exploiting the thinness of the pores, this award
will develop a new theoretical framework based on perturbation expansions, akin
to lubrication theory in fluid mechanics, that will overcome the limitations of
existing approaches. Specifically, the work will (i) model transport of an
arbitrary number of ions inside a charged cylindrical pore for an unrestricted
combination of ion valences, diffusivities, size, and relative Debye length,
(ii) formulate and experimentally validate a new theoretical framework that
predicts ion transport through a complex network of pores, and (ii) investigate
the combined effect of redox reactions and double layers in porous media to
characterize structure-property-performance relationships for EC and
CDI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.