* 2238904
* CAREER: Ultrafast Dynamics of Vibrational Energy Transfer and Redistribution in Interfacial Water
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Abdelaziz Boulesbaa, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Continuing Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 06/30/2028
* USD 496,562.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms A (CSDM-A)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Abdelaziz Boulesbaa of California State
University, Northridge is using sophisticated time-resolved laser spectroscopies
to study water at the liquid-solid interface. Studying this interface presents
significant challenges because it is only one or two molecular layers thick, and
for many experimental probes, the signal from the interfacial layer of water can
be drowned out by the many more molecules in the liquid. Dr. Boulesbaa and his
students will use the ability of the interface to combine colors of light into
new colors, which originate only from the thin layer of water molecules
neighboring the solid material, to watch the flow of energy between water
molecules on time scales shorter than one thousandth of one billionth of a
second. Their discoveries could lead to a better understanding of the
fundamental processes underpinning emerging energy generation and storage
technologies. The project will also contribute to the development of the
Nation's STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) workforce by
providing research opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students, as
well as students from community colleges in the greater Los Angeles area, who
will participate in the project through summer internships. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project will implement a synergistic program of research and
education directed at understanding the dynamics and mechanisms of vibrational
energy redistribution and charge transfer at the interface between liquid water
and metal-semiconductor hybrid (MSH) materials. Time-resolved vibrational sum-
frequency generation (tr-vSFG) will be used to observe vibrational energy
transfer dynamics following overtone excitation in water near the MSH interface
as a function of the ionic strength and pH of the liquid phase. The transfer of
charge carriers from the photoexcited MSH material into the liquid and their
subsequent relaxation and reactivity will also be studied. Students who
participate in this project will learn advanced laser spectroscopy techniques,
including non-linear optics, an excellent preparation for future careers in
academia or industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.