* 2238788
* CAREER: The genetic and developmental basis of body size evolution in nematodes
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2028
* Gavin Woodruff, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 02/29/2028
* USD 747,837.00

The diversity among animal body sizes (from at least ants to elephants) is
immense and demands explanation. Yet, the genetic and developmental changes that
cause body size evolution remain unknown. The proposed work aims to address this
problem by harnessing both long-established and cutting-edge genetic techniques
in closely-related roundworm species with drastically different body sizes to
identify the causes of body size variation. This work is important because we
know larger roundworm species have larger cells than those of smaller species,
and when the processes regulating cell size go awry, diseases such as cancer
emerge. This work then has the potential to discover novel genes that control
cell size and thus potential novel targets for cancer therapeutics. Beyond this,
the research work described above will be integrated with multiple, established
educational initiatives in the state of Oklahoma including: 1) The University of
Oklahoma’s four-year undergraduate research experience program; 2) A multi-year
summer research program for American Indian undergraduates; 3) A research
experience for high school students summer program; and 4) A graduate-student
led summer coding workshop. Additionally, an undergraduate developmental biology
laboratory course will be developed where students will participate in the
original research activities described above. The proposed work not only aims to
make significant advances in understanding the evolution of body size and the
genes underlying cell size variation, but this work also aims to connect
multiple educational efforts with these research efforts to simultaneously
advance both scientific knowledge and societal
good.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how developmental systems evolve to
promote phenotypic diversity is a fundamental goal of biology. These systems
include and regulate the morphogenetic fields, signaling factors, and
differentiation decisions essential for the construction and ultimate form of a
multicellular organism. Despite this, while gene regulatory networks have been
painstakingly described in a handful of model systems, network architecture
change is rarely connected to morphological divergence among species. How does
genetic variation change developmental processes to cause divergent phenotypes?
Over forty years of C. elegans genetics has revealed the developmental details
of a canonical TGF-β signaling network that regulates body size in this species.
C. inopinata is the sister species of C. elegans, and it is nearly twice as long
in size as its highly-studied close relative. Here, the vast background
knowledge of a long-standing model system will be integrated with a comparative
approach to understand how network modification causes phenotypic divergence.
This work will include: 1) The perturbation of TGF-β pathway activity in two
species to determine how ancestral body size genes evolve to promote cell size
divergence; 2) The generation and mapping of large-effect body size mutations in
C. inopinata to discover novel genes driving cell size regulation; and 3) The
characterization of tissue-specific cell size variation in mutants across
development in two species. Not only will this work map genotypes to organismal
phenotypes such as body size, but it will also show how genotypes influence
cellular phenotypes to cause the emergence of such organismal phenotypes. The
research work described above will be integrated with multiple, established
educational initiatives in the state of Oklahoma to broaden the participation of
students at all levels in scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is jointly funded by the BIO-IOS-Developmental Systems Program and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.