* 2238680
* CAREER: SaTC: Towards Machine-learnable Enhancing Framework for Local Differential Privacy
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2028
* Wenhai Sun, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* James Joshi
* 06/30/2028
* USD 121,853.00

The prevalence of data-centric applications demands collecting and analyzing the
information that may contain sensitive data of users. While local differential
privacy (LDP) can quantifiably control information leakage to protect user
privacy, it is challenging to tackle a dynamic threat landscape where the
attacker can manipulate the analytical results by exploiting the characteristics
of LDP design. The project’s novelties are to leverage machine intelligence
along with other enabling techniques to understand the complex interplay between
LDP privacy, security, and utility, and develop a machine-learnable LDP
enhancing framework to address their tension. The success of the project will
pave the way toward a future where ubiquitous machine intelligence can
understand and attend to user privacy, security, and utility demands in various
challenging scenarios. The project’s broader significance and importance are
broadening the participation of women and underrepresented students in STEM;
encouraging interdisciplinary, cross-sector partnership, and technology
transformation and incubation; and promoting diversity-and-equity-aware
technology development.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project aims to
develop a novel AI-assisted privacy-enhancing framework that can better address
the tension between LDP security, utility, and privacy. Generalizable theories
and principles will be produced to guide the developed machine agent to sense
the deployment environment and learn optimal responses to the observed
adversarial actions, expected utility, and privacy goals. The agent will also be
self-explainable for the actions it takes and can interact with both users and
developers, thereby improving algorithmic transparency and accountability. In
addition, human stakeholders will get involved in the growing cycle of the
system, allowing it to evolve over time. The project also aims to conduct
research-informed educational activities that will strengthen cybersecurity-
related education and mentoring programs in the home department while enhancing
cybersecurity workforce training at the university level and beyond. Meanwhile,
the project seeks to promote STEM careers by engaging in outreach activities
with K-12 students with diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.