* 2238792
* CAREER: Not all Collisions are Bad: Leveraging Physical Interactions towards User-Empowered Robotic Caregiving
* CSE,IIS
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Tapomayukh Bhattacharjee, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 02/29/2028
* USD 432,931.00

Building safe, efficient, and meaningful robotic individual assistance for long-
term caregiving is a grand challenge of robotics. More than a quarter of people
living in the United States in 2014 had a disability, and 24.2 million people
aged 18 or older required assistance with activities of daily living such as
feeding, bathing, transferring, dressing, toileting, and ambulating. Caregiving
robots have the potential to help increase or prolong user independence while
reducing caregiver burden. However, there are hardly any caregiving robots that
provide long-term care for performing activities of daily living, currently. One
of the primary reasons is the fundamental limitation to which robots can reason
about physical contact which is essential to perform these activities.
Therefore, our key insight is to leverage this physical contact instead of
avoiding them and to learn safe and efficient physical interactions while
empowering the users. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project
focuses on learning robot control policies that leverage physical contact during
the activities of robot-assisted feeding and bed-bathing while empowering the
users themselves with decision-making capabilities for assisting care recipients
with Spinal Cord Injury.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
develop fundamental capabilities towards reshaping the field of robotic physical
caregiving by designing control policies that leverage varied multimodal
physical interactions to perform activities of daily living (ADL) safely and
efficiently. This also entails addressing perception and action uncertainty in
unstructured environments by empowering the users to make critical decisions
without completely relying on full but fragile autonomy. The fields of assistive
robotics and physical human-robot interaction have primarily focused on
deliberate contact at the end-effector using carefully controlled actions that
are optimized for sensing. This does not capture the realistic scenarios of
physical caregiving that may require reasoning about incidental and/or
distributed contacts. This project aims to cover this gap and takes the first
steps towards translating laboratory research in robotic physical caregiving to
real-world deployment. The research plan is organized into three thrusts where
the first thrust focuses on designing autonomous control policies that use
multimodal sensory inputs for safe and efficient robotic physical caregiving.
The second thrust brings users in the loop to augment autonomous control
policies and empowers the users by including them in the critical decision-
making process. Finally, the third thrust focuses on designing control policies
for robotic caregiving that can adapt to a user's changing cognitive workload.
This project focuses on the activities of robot-assisted feeding and bed-bathing
and aims to evaluate these methods with individuals with C1-C4 Spinal Cord
Injury in their real homes towards long-term
assistance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.