* 2238888
* CAREER: Precise Synthesis of Polymers with Tunable Properties Through Stereocontrolled Olefin Metathesis
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Quentin Michaudel, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 05/31/2028
* USD 417,984.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry program
in the Division of Chemistry, Quentin Michaudel of Texas A&amp;M University is
developing catalytic methods that will provide access to polymers with specific
main-chain stereochemistry across several families of macromolecules.
Stereochemistry is a branch of chemistry that is concerned with the study of 3D
spatial arrangements of atoms in a molecule and the manipulation thereof. In
this research, systematic studies will first be conducted to design efficient
metal catalysts based on ruthenium and optimize reaction conditions. The
developed synthetic routes will then be utilized to prepare a variety of
stereoregular polymers, including industrially relevant polyesters and
polycarbonates. Finally, the stereoregularity of polymers is to be correlated
with their thermal and mechanical properties, as well as their degradability.
The education plan will complement and amplify research efforts by broadening
access to chemical education. Laboratory opportunities will be built for
students with autism spectrum disorder. The research team will also foster
awareness and inclusiveness through outreach with local support groups
supporting autistic children and their families. The activities will include
visits to the chemistry department at Texas A&amp;M University and
demonstrations focused on polymer science. Additional outreach will expose
students with disabilities to science through collaboration with the Aggie
ACHIEVE (academic courses in higher inclusive education and vocational
experiences) program developed at the university.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project will focus on the development of stereocontrolled polymerizations
utilizing ring-opening metathesis polymerization (ROMP) and acyclic diene
metathesis (ADMET). A variety of monomers will be investigated in processes
relying on a combination of stereoselective ruthenium catalysts and external
stimuli (light, temperature, and exogenous reagents) to yield macromolecules
with variable, yet predictable, cis:trans ratios of olefins in the main chain.
The stimuli will provide an external lever with which to modulate the overall
stereochemistry of the olefinic backbone through activation of either the
repeating units, the catalyst, or the chain end. The outlined processes have the
potential to provide a high level of control over the 3D architecture of many
families of polymers and should permit systematic studies of the influence of
alkene stereochemistry upon the thermal, mechanical, and optical/electronic
properties of the synthesized soft materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.