* 2238540
* CAREER: Priming CUREs to dissect how the DREAM complex protects cell identity
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Paul Goetsch, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 04/30/2028
* USD 240,592.00

Cellular identity is controlled by protein networks that establish which genes
are expressed in a cell. These protein networks react to internal and external
signals and define how the cell functions within the context of a multicellular
organism. A major obstacle in the field is that mechanisms that govern cell
identity are remarkably complex, such that identifying the contributing factors
remains a challenge. Identifying the missing components is critical for
generating an integrated view of how specialized cell types develop. This
project will fully integrate bioinformatic and experimental life science focused
Course-based Undergraduate Research Experiences (CUREs) within the research
activities to identity novel factors involved in establishing cell identity.
Overall, the CURE efforts will offer undergraduate students equitable access to
research and will help them develop the skills required to become competitive in
their future life science careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In Caenorhabditis
elegans, the DREAM (for Dp, Retinoblastoma(Rb)-like, E2F, and MuvB) complex
suppresses the differentiation programs in somatic (non-reproductive) cells,
preventing them from activating the germ (reproductive) cell program, and also
preserves the normal specification of vulval cell fate. DREAM represses genes
through direct binding to their promoter regions, but no evidence indicates that
the complex targets genes known to be associated with cell identity. These
observations lead to the hypothesis that loss of the DREAM complex likely
activates transcriptional components that drive breakdown of somatic cell
identity. By creating improved reporter strains using CRISPR/Cas9-mediated
genome editing in the laboratory with reverse genetic screens performed in the
classroom, this proposal aims to reveal key components that contribute to normal
germline and vulval development. In addition, the central role the DREAM complex
plays in the regulation of cell identity in C. elegans offers an opportunity to
explore how such developmental programs are conserved across multicellular
organisms. Using bioinformatic conservation analyses and molecular genomics,
this proposal will explore DREAM co-conservation with the intent of building a
manual gene curation pipeline for identifying and annotating genes-of-interest
in published but under-annotated genomes. Overall, this research will contribute
to understanding the mechanisms by which transcriptional regulatory networks
determine cellular and organismal
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was co-reviewed and
will be co-funded by the Genetic Mechanisms Cluster in the Division of Molecular
and Cellular Biosciences and by the Developmental Systems Program in the
Division of Integrative Organismal Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.