* 2238480
* CAREER: Manipulation of Novel Objects via Non-Smooth Implicit Learning
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Michael Posa, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 03/31/2028
* USD 600,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project will create physics-
inspired learning methods for data-efficient robotic manipulation of novel
objects – that is, previously unseen objects about which the robot has no prior
knowledge. The result will enable future generations of robots to provide
meaningful assistance throughout the daily lives of human users. To achieve
this, robots must be able to quickly learn about their surroundings through
physical interactions, particularly in chaotic settings beyond carefully
controlled laboratory conditions. This will require robots to gain new
capabilities beyond the current state of the art. This project will provide
robots with the ability to determine critical characteristics of surrounding
objects -- despite variations in shape, size, color, and material -- such as
whether they move when touched, whether they are soft or stiff, and whether they
bend or twist. A robot should be able to enter a room for the first time,
briefly investigate the objects in that room, and then safely accomplish an
assigned task. For example, an in-home robot might maneuver about a kitchen,
encountering new food items or culinary tools, and then interact with those
items to help prepare a meal. This project will advance a range of life-
improving robotic applications, including in-home assistive care, dangerous
search and rescue operations, or small-scale manufacturing. To train and inspire
the next generation of engineers, investigators, working with educators in the
Philadelphia Public School District, will develop an educational unit leveraging
a robotic simulator to demonstrate concepts from high-school
algebra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together concepts from non-
smooth dynamics, learning, and control, to enable robots that perform dexterous
manipulation of previously unseen objects, using data gathered in real time from
a cluttered environment. For example, a robot may interact with a set of novel
objects for at most a few seconds or minutes, then precisely perform, with
human-like dexterity, complex tasks such as tool use or in-hand manipulation.
The need for this project is driven first by the dependence of functional
robotics on interaction between the robot and its environment, which is
notoriously difficult to model, and second, by the reliance on predictive models
of both model-based and sim-to-real methods for control. This project addresses
the modeling of discontinuous contact-driven dynamics by gathering all sources
of non-smooth behavior into a set of contact forces. An implicit loss function,
which itself uses convex optimization to estimate non-smooth contact forces, can
be minimized using gradient-based methods to find a set of the smooth parameters
that describe the physics of robot-object interactions. To provide data-
efficient learning of robot-world interaction, this project explores the
following three primary research thrusts: (1) development of foundational
implicit-learning frameworks with physics-inspired structure for predicting
robot-world interactions, (2) dynamic manipulation of novel rigid and soft
objects by unifying tactile and visual sensing with motion prediction, and (3)
combining these two learning systems with control and reinforcement learning for
closed-loop performance. Together, these thrusts will provide new robotic
capabilities when dealing with novel objects, across a range of manipulation
tasks including in-hand manipulation and object reorientation, whole-body
manipulation (using limbs, torso, and other body parts) to maneuver, push, and
drag heavy objects, and multi-arm manipulation of large or unwieldy
objects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.