* 2238081
* CAREER: Establishing Ligand Platforms to Enable Selective, Catalytic Olefin Difunctionalization Reactions for Constructing Diverse Heterocyclic Scaffolds
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Shauna Paradine, University of Rochester
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 06/30/2028
* USD 473,487.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Shauna Paradine of the University of Rochester is studying new metal-catalyzed
chemical processes that may enable more efficient preparation of important
classes of so-called 'heterocyclic' molecules. The kinds of heterocycles being
targeted have potential applications as therapeutic agents, agrochemicals, and
advanced materials, and as such the outcome of the research could have a variety
of societal benefits. The potential advances being offered are made possible
with the design of new ligands for palladium that possess unconventional
properties. Through both hypothesis-driven and data-driven ligand design
strategies, the Paradine laboratory expects to discover selective and broadly
useful reactions that will allow for refined tuning of the properties of the
molecules of interest. In parallel with research activities, Dr. Paradine will
expand mentoring experiences for chemistry graduate students at the University
of Rochester and develop a formal course in scientific communication for
undergraduate and graduate students. These activities are designed to support
the personal and professional development of chemistry students, with a special
focus on addressing the needs of students from marginalized groups, and to equip
students of all backgrounds with the capacity to be effective scientific
communicators in a broad range of contexts and media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
ability of palladium to form broadly reactive organometallic species has led to
the introduction of a diverse array of practical methodologies for synthetic
organic chemistry. Indeed, Pd-catalyzed methods have become ubiquitous for the
construction of molecular scaffolds rich in sp2-hybridized carbon atoms. Ligand
development has been a key driver of this innovation, with electron-rich and
bulky ligands such as phosphines and N-heterocyclic carbenes being predominantly
used in efforts to uncover new Pd-catalyzed reactivity. However, the success of
these ligand families has led to other areas of ligand space for palladium being
left largely unexplored, leaving considerable opportunities for reaction
discovery, particularly in regard to methods for the construction of
sp3-hybridized carbon-rich domains. To address this imbalance, the funded
project involves study of unconventional ligand platforms derived from ureas and
phosphines to facilitate Pd-catalyzed selective olefin difunctionalization
reactions, with an emphasis on heteroannulation processes leading to non-planar
heterocyclic scaffolds. The investigation is divided across four aims: (1)
development of urea ligand-enabled heteroannulation reactions involving
ambiphiles (e.g., 2-bromoanilines) and 1,3-dienes; (2) exploration of the
reactivity of new pi-coupling partners with urea-enabled Pd catalysis; (3)
elucidation of the fundamental properties of urea ligands and their role in
catalysis; and, (4) realization of ligand-controlled site-selectivity in olefin
functionalization reactions. Pursuit of these aims will include the foundation
of data-driven, predictive models for ligand design that are anticipated to
facilitate general strategies for ligand development in the field of transition
metal catalysis with associated benefits for future reaction
discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.