* 2238035
* CAREER: Dissipation Mechanisms and Damping in Smart Elastomers with Intermolecular Organization
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Aurelie Azoug, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 07/31/2028
* USD 580,651.00

Energy harvesting is a promising technology for numerous industrial
applications. However, when converting energy into an easily stored form,
significant amount of energy is lost due to dissipations. This Faculty Early
Career Development (CAREER) award supports research on efficient dissipation of
mechanical energy at low volume using smart elastomers. This project
investigates internal movements in smart elastomers, such as liquid crystal
elastomers (LCE), as new dissipation mechanisms that could significantly improve
the performance of dampers. Understanding the deformation mechanisms of these
LCEs will allow tailoring of the material properties to the desired application,
such as energy harvesting, healthcare, and soft robotics. This research is
integrated with a sustained educational and outreach activity aimed at
developing a pipeline of girls and women in Mechanical Engineering, linking the
results of the research program to soft robotics and coding initiation.
Activities will focus on three objectives: introducing soft robotics, improving
coding skills, and mentoring through research. These activities will increase
women’s confidence, performance, and interest in pursuing an engineering career.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project’s goal is to understand the dissipation
deformation mechanisms in smart elastomers with intermolecular organization to
design highly efficient composite dampers. The fundamental understanding of the
dissipation mechanisms originating from the coupling between mesogens and
polymer chains will help a comprehensive macroscopic modeling approach for the
thermoviscoelastic behavior of LCEs, opening the door to robust device designs.
This investigation will be carried out using combined experimental and numerical
methods at multiple scales to determine and model the dissipative deformation
mechanisms, the curing kinetics, and the damping in a LCE composite. New
experimental methods will be developed to map the organization of the
microstructure in LCEs to the deformation using depolarized Raman spectroscopy
and nuclear magnetic resonance relaxometry. Smoothed particle hydrodynamics
(SPH) will be used to study the evolution of a self-organizing microstructure
during deformation. Additionally, the interactions between curing kinetics,
crosslink density, and microstructure ordering are primordial to accurately
predict properties of additively manufactured LCEs. Additionally, the potential
for LCE composites to exhibit extreme damping at low cost will be
explored.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by Mechanics of
Materials (MoMS) program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.