* 2238836
* CAREER: Complexity of quantum many-body systems: learnability, approximations, and entanglement
* CSE,CCF
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2028
* Anurag Anshu, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 01/31/2028
* USD 103,485.00

Interaction between particles gives rise to the matter seen in the physical
world and facilitates the study as well as the manipulation of matter. However
in the quantum realm, interaction between quantum particles can lead to daunting
challenges - it enforces complex collective behaviour of the particles that
appear very hard to study using current computational means. This project aims
to pin down the nature of this complexity by investigating a series of
fundamental questions. First, are the interactions themselves simple enough that
their precise knowledge can be gained by a practical algorithm? Such an
algorithm is also expected to benefit quantum technologies, facilitating
learning and testing of quantum devices. Second, how computationally difficult
is it to estimate physical properties of the quantum particles, even if the
knowledge of interactions is available? This question will help understand the
limits of near term quantum devices in probing quantum particles. Third, could
the collective behaviour of particles be simple rather than complex, under some
common assumptions on the interactions? This would allow efficient means to
computationally simulate systems that respect the assumptions. The educational
plan centers around computation and physics, encompassing a seminar series at
Harvard University with a diverse list of speakers, development of a quantum
computing curriculum at Harvard University for graduate and undergraduate
students, and teaching quantum theory to students from Boston high-schools with
limited access to Science, Technology, Engineering and Math
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study local Hamiltonians - the
quantum analogues of constraint satisfaction problems in theoretical computer
science - that model interactions in quantum many-body systems. In particular,
it will aim to make progress on three long-standing questions: Can a local
Hamiltonian be learned efficiently from the Gibbs quantum states? What are the
fundamental limits on the approximations to the ground energies of a local
Hamiltonian (the quantum Probabilistically-Checkable-Proofs conjecture)? Does
limited entanglement hold for the ground states of two-dimensional gapped local
Hamiltonians (the area law conjecture)? These questions address the complexity
of quantum many-body systems from the view of three well-studied measures:
learnability, approximability and entanglement. This is inspired by three
successful ways to measure complexity of a computation in theoretical computer
science - time complexity, space complexity and randomness. In fact, ideas from
theoretical computer science are expected to be crucial in making progress on
the above questions. Furthermore, research will add to the knowledge in quantum
technologies: Hamiltonian learning techniques will find use in the testing of
programmable quantum devices and progress on the quantum Probabilistically-
Checkable-Proofs conjecture will limit the efficiency of various near-term
quantum algorithms for quantum many-body problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.