* 2238473
* CAREER: Development of Constrained Multicomponent Density Functional Theory and Accurate and Efficient Incorporation of Nuclear Quantum Effects in ab initio Molecular Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2027
* Yang Yang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 11/30/2027
* USD 650,000.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods (CTMC)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Yang Yang of the University of
Wisconsin–Madison is developing methods that can accurately and efficiently
describe and simulate systems with significant nuclear quantum effects. Nuclear
quantum effects are ubiquitous in chemical and biological systems and can
strongly influence many of their static and dynamical properties. However, the
accurate and efficient incorporation of nuclear quantum effects remains a
challenge. Dr. Yang and his research group will tackle this challenge by
developing a new framework for molecular dynamics simulations with nuclear
quantum effects incorporated. They will develop the theory under periodic
boundary conditions, utilize the new theory to study a series of water related
systems, and elucidate the impacts of nuclear quantum effects on the structural
and vibrational properties of water. All methods developed will be freely
available to the public in open-source software packages. Additionally, as a
synergetic educational effort, to help undergraduate students better understand
nuclear quantum effects in chemistry, the Yang research group will transform
their research materials into educational materials by developing a
computational physical chemistry lab module for undergraduate students. In the
computational lab module, students will experiment with both classical molecular
dynamics and cNEO-MD in both model and real molecular systems, leading to a deep
understanding of the importance of nuclear quantum effects in
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the Yang research group will
continue their development of constrained nuclear-electronic orbital density
functional theory (cNEO-DFT) as well as its integration with molecular dynamics
(cNEO-MD). They will develop cNEO-DFT under periodic boundary conditions so that
cNEO-MD can be efficiently applied to condensed phase systems. For practical
applications, Dr. Yang and his research group will utilize cNEO-MD to study a
series of water related systems ranging from (protonated) water clusters to
water in the condensed phase in order to elucidate the impact of nuclear quantum
effects on their structural and vibrational properties as well as demonstrate
the efficacy of cNEO-MD. To broaden the scientific impact of these studies, the
codes for molecules and periodic systems will be made freely available to the
community through the open-source software packages PySCF and CP2K,
respectively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.