* 2238381
* CAREER: CAS- Climate: An altruistic game theoretic framework to characterize environmental responsiveness of residential electricity consumption
* ENG,CBET
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2028
* Jie Cai, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 01/31/2028
* USD 415,487.00

For most electricity markets in the U.S., the marginal cost and carbon emission
intensity of electricity generation exhibit opposite diurnal trends: during peak
demand hours, the electricity price is high while the carbon marginal emission
rate is low due to the operation of costly but less polluting natural gas
“peaker” plants. Energy consumers may respond to the conflicting price and
emission signals quite differently. Understanding the behavioral heterogeneity
in energy use and its impact on sustainability of the electrical infrastructure
is of critical importance to accelerating global energy system decarbonization.
This project will establish an altruistic game theoretic framework to understand
the interplay of an individual’s financial and environmental goals in shaping
their energy use behaviors and to evaluate the impact of behavioral
heterogeneity on system-level performances of the electric grid. The altruistic
game framework models each energy consumer as a partially altruistic entity
whose perceived cost is a weighted sum of his/her direct electricity cost and
the social cost of energy-related carbon emission. The weighting factor
characterizes an individual’s valuation of energy-related carbon emission, which
in turn influences their energy use behaviors. Customer behavioral models will
be developed from data collected through (1) online human subject tests with a
custom designed demand response game and (2) sociotechnical experiments in a
multi-family apartment complex within a historic African American community in
downtown Oklahoma City.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project goals include: (1)
generation of new knowledge on residential customers’ valuation of energy-
related carbon emission and its impact on energy use behaviors; (2) development
of a statistical behavioral model that characterizes how climate altruism
correlates with socio-demographic variables; (3) synthesis of learning-based
model predictive control strategies to enable automated demand response; (4)
establishment of an altruistic game theoretic framework to facilitate impact
analysis of behavioral heterogeneity on financial and environmental performances
of the electric grid; and (5) design of distributed and privacy-preserving Nash
equilibrium solution algorithms to accommodate distributed decision making for
flexible load control in electricity markets. The project aims to increase
public awareness of load flexibility and the associated environmental impact
through a series of interrelated research, educational and outreach activities.
The data-driven predictive control strategies are designed to unlock the
residential flexibility potential through technological development, while the
game theoretic framework supports design and assessment of demand-side carbon
reduction technologies, programs and policies with socio-economic insights. The
field experiment will directly engage 50 and indirectly affect more than 300
households in Oklahoma City providing technology solutions to and educating a
population that does not usually engage in the early stages of technology
adoption. Through collaboration with the community, developers and other
partners, the project will demonstrate social drivers that affect large
infrastructure systems, with the results potentially scalable and applicable on
a national level in the residential sector. Through the education program
development, this project will provide opportunities for K-12, underrepresented,
undergraduate, and graduate students to acquire cross-disciplinary skills that
are critical to addressing future engineering
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the CBET
Environmental Sustainability program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.