* 2238254
* CAREER: Electrical Control of Topological Phases in Layered Semimetals
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2028
* Jin Hu, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* Tomasz Durakiewicz
* 04/30/2028
* USD 289,763.00

This project is jointly funded by CMP Program and by the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The theory of topological phases and phase transitions,
which is the seminal work of the 2016 Nobel Prize in Physics, establishes the
foundation for a novel class of materials, referred as topological quantum
materials. Electrons in these materials behaves like particles, thus enabling
exploring high energy physics in tabletop experiments on solid state materials.
These materials have been leading to deeper knowledge of important topics in
physics, and display a kaleidoscope of novel electronic properties with great
promise for technology applications, such as very high mobility or even
dissipationless transport for energy-saving devices. The ability to manipulate
these properties, particularly using electrical approaches to switch on and off,
enhancing or suppression, is expected to enable a new generation of technology.
This project aims to develop such ability to provide insights to implement those
novel materials in technology applications. Integrated into the research
activities is a broad scope of educational and outreach efforts to prepare a
multi-talented and diverse quantum material workforce, including implementing a
scalable approach to train an inclusive group of students of various levels,
creating interdisciplinary courses to enhance material science education and
prepare students for career paths, and partnering with a historically black
college or university and a local underrepresented community to enhance research
and education opportunities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project pursues the electrical control of topological
electronic states by engineering lattice and time reversal symmetries in layered
topological semimetals. Topological phase control is performed by electrostatic
electron and hole doping and electrochemical intercalation in all-solid
electrical double layer devices, which is based on the hypothesis that electron
density acts as a tuning knob to modify these symmetries and drive topological
phase transitions. This research aims to topological phase transitions between
Dirac nodal-line semimetal, topological insulator, normal insulator, and Weyl
semimetal phases. The obtained knowledge and developed techniques further enable
the spatially selective control of topological phases to form lateral
heterostructures, leading to a versatile platform to explore exciting quantum
physics. Based on that, this project also targets to establish and demonstrate
concrete strategies for realizing completely confined topological fermions and
creating fundamentally new insights for novel confinement-induced phenomena in
topological quantum materials. Finally, the education plan is closely integrated
and leverages the research activities by training a diverse workforce with a
broad mix of quantum-related skills, and in the long term, continue to benefit
the condensed matter and materials science research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.