* 2238665
* CAREER: OS-Managed Remote Procedure Call for Datacenter Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Danyang Zhuo, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 05/31/2028
* USD 120,000.00

Remote procedure call (RPC) allows developers to build networked applications
using a simple and familiar programming model, and it has become a fundamental
building block for cloud applications today. Increasingly, application and
service operations teams need a high degree of visibility and control over the
flow of RPCs, including monitoring specific types of RPCs, and rate limiting to
meet application-specific performance goals. This project aims to explore a new
RPC system architecture that allows for efficient and flexible control of RPC
traffic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The key insight is to rearchitect RPC as a managed
service, decoupling RPC logic from individual applications. Applications specify
type information to the RPC service, and the RPC service executes RPC policies
and arbitrates resource use, and then marshals data customized to the underlying
network hardware capabilities. The project entails four thrusts: (1) a safe
cross-domain RPC memory management design, (2) a system design for efficient RPC
policy support, (3) a system design for RPC live upgradability, and (4)
techniques to use remote direct memory access hardware effectively in
RPC.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new RPC architecture will improve the performance
and manageability of cloud applications and reduce the cost of operating cloud
applications. This project will develop new educational tools, including
programming assignments and an RPC visualizer, to introduce a broader community
of students to the standard practices of using RPC to construct distributed
applications. This project will serve as a platform to engage undergraduate
students in networking research, especially women and students from historically
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Software artifacts, papers,
benchmarks, and tutorials developed as part of this project will be released on
the following website https://mrpc.cs.duke.edu. This website will be regularly
maintained for the next ten years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.