* 2238442
* CAREER: Distributed Differential Privacy via Secure Multiparty Computation
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2028
* Joseph Near, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Squicciarini
* 03/31/2028
* USD 212,575.00

The increasing rate of collection and analysis of personal data has led to new
privacy and security concerns. Differential privacy is a promising framework for
protecting individual privacy, but deploying it in practice remains a challenge.
Bugs in differential privacy systems are difficult to find, and can result in
unexpected privacy failures. In addition, such systems often require collecting
sensitive data on central servers; a compromise of these servers could result in
a catastrophic loss of privacy. This project aims to develop tools for
addressing both challenges. The project's novelties are: (a) new techniques for
verifying that programs correctly implement differential privacy, and (b) new
applications of cryptography to protect the security of data during processing.
The project's broader significance and importance lies in its potential to
enable the broader deployment of correct, secure implementations of formal
privacy guarantees for individuals in data processing
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central goal of this project is to enable the
construction of correct, scalable systems that satisfy differential privacy
without the need for a trusted data curator. To this end, the project aims to
design both new secure protocols and new techniques for ensuring the correctness
of systems built with those protocols. Specific research goals of the project
include (1) the design of new secure protocols that leverage properties of
differential privacy to increase performance and scale to millions of
participants; (2) new tools for evaluating these protocols at scale; (3) new
automated program analyses for verifying the correctness of secure protocols;
and (4) new program analyses and automated testing approaches for checking the
correctness of differentially private systems built on secure protocols. This
project includes the development of educational materials, including a
programming-oriented textbook suitable for an undergraduate course on secure
computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.