* 2238328
* CAREER: Electronic and Optical Properties in Generalized Moire Systems from First Principles
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2028
* Felipe Homrich da Jornada, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 02/29/2028
* USD 239,749.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical
and computational research, software development, and educational efforts on new
classes of materials that can be created by combining a few layers (typically
from two to four) of atomically thin materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This family
of layered materials has demonstrated great promise for use in electronic,
optical, and quantum information applications. Their properties depend
sensitively on the chemical composition of individual layers, the relative twist
angle between each layer, and even the presence of nearby supporting materials.
Hence, the vast combination of such layered systems that can be engineered with
unique properties offers an untapped scientific and engineering
opportunity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will use a combination of new
theoretical methods and large-scale atomistic simulation tools to chart this
large phase space of layered systems. The methods that will be developed in this
award will not only speed up simulations, but also give conceptual guidance on
how to realize systems with desired quantum properties. The PI will study a few
selected materials that can potentially host unconventional electronic and
optical properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award will also synergistically
involve community college students to broaden the participation of
underrepresented minorities in science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM)
fields. Finally, the research outcomes will also inform a proposed graduate-
level course that introduces concepts of 2D and quantum materials to materials
scientists and engineers. Such efforts will make the field of layered materials
more accessible to a broader community, increase the pace of fundamental and
applied materials discoveries, and translation of such discoveries to
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and computational
studies and educational efforts focused on vertically stacked, atomically thin
layered materials. The award focuses on systems that display moiré patterns with
a wavelength much larger than that of the crystal periodicity of the individual
layers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Such systems received considerable interest with
the discovery of superconductivity in twisted bilayer graphene in 2018. Indeed,
there has been a growing interest in stacking insulating, semiconducting,
ferroelectric, and magnetic monolayers, and engineering novel emergent
excitations by carefully controlling the energy landscape at these longer
wavelength scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Utilizing large-scale first-principles
computer calculations, the PI will develop methods to study such material
combinations. The research activities are structured in three complementary
objectives. First, the PI will develop methods to compute effective moiré
potentials in complex, multilayer van-der-Waals structures using DFT and first-
principles-parametrized force-field calculations. The outcome should allow the
community to understand the electronic properties in a vast set of layered
interfaces at low computational cost. Second, the award will support the
development of first-principles approaches to compute excitons in complex van-
der-Waals materials – which either include unusual materials combinations or a
large number of layer stacking. These will be carried out by ab initio many-body
perturbation theory calculations based on the GW and GW combined with Bethe-
Salpeter equation (GW-BSE) approaches, together with new methods to incorporate
the effect of the moiré potential without requiring large calculations on large
supercells. The PI will systematically study the coherence and coupling of
emergent excitonic states in such multilayer systems. Finally, this award will
support investigations on how twisted 2D materials can realize unusual 1D
physics, with applications in sensing and storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
parallel, this award includes a multi-pronged educational component to reach out
to students at different stages of their careers, with a particular emphasis on
the local Hispanic/Latinx community which is underrepresented in STEM fields.
These efforts involve, for instance, the mentoring of community college students
through mini-internship opportunities, and designing and offering a graduate-
level course on quantum and 2D materials, closing a common gap in the
traditional educational curriculum of materials science and physics
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.