* 2238691
* CAREER: vdW isotope heterostructuring showcased in phononic light-matter interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Siyuan Dai, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 04/30/2028
* USD 136,696.00

Nontechnical Description:&lt;br/&gt;Element isotopes are atoms with distinct
masses since they have the same number of protons but differ in the number of
neutrons in the nuclei. Isotopes exist in all forms of materials and devices and
therefore are an important governing factor for material properties. This CAREER
project aims to develop an innovative method to modify fundamental material
responses by making nanometer-scale multilayer structures with unique
arrangements of various isotopes. The principal investigator showcases this
method in controlling the vibrations of atoms and atomic planes as well as their
interactions with light. The new material responses demonstrated in this project
can be used for a broad range of applications, including microscopy, computer
memory, and biomedical treatment. In addition, this project offers excellent
training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, especially the
underrepresented minorities, on experiments and simulations of light and waves
at the nanoscale, and nanomaterial fabrication. The planned outreach and summer
research activities can provide K-12 students and high-school teachers with
hands-on research experience and teaching units for their
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;The primary
goal of this project is to explore unprecedented material properties by
engineering the constituent element isotopes in van der Waals heterostructures.
The principal investigator plans to build van der Waals heterostructures
comprised of various monoisotopic components by the state-of-the-art van der
Waals assembly technique, in order to establish advances over current isotope-
homogenous material systems. Scanning probe nano-imaging, nano-spectroscopy, and
Raman spectroscopy are used to investigate propagating phonon polaritons, phonon
dynamics, and interlayer phonons in these heterostructures. In addition, finite
element method electromagnetics simulation and density functional material
theory are planned for a thorough understanding of the experimental
observations. These efforts can reveal unique electromagnetic wave behaviors,
dynamic tunability, and memory effects for phononic light-matter interactions.
The prototype heterostructures demonstrated in this project can be further
engineered to delicately control nanoscale energy density, electromagnetic wave
propagation, and photonic density of states for practical applications in
biosensing, energy transfer, infrared light sources, and quantum information and
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.