* 2238432
* CAREER: Towards the Creation of a Dynamic Modeling Framework to Generate New Knowledge About Swimming Biological Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Kenneth Shorter, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 02/29/2028
* USD 724,026.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award supports research that will
enable new understanding of the swimming mechanics of bottlenose dolphins.
Researchers will gather information on the behavior of free-swimming bottlenose
dolphins using electronic tags that are attached to the animal and that measure
both movement and caloric expenditure. The collected information, combined with
mathematical modeling, will lead to new understanding of dolphin swimming. Such
an understanding is critical to policy and management practices that reduce the
impact of human activities on these animals. This research will be integrated
with education and outreach activities that are designed to inspire a new and
diverse generation of students and engineers and to raise awareness of the
social and environmental implications of bio-inspired engineered
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the current state of
knowledge of the swimming mechanics of bottlenose dolphins by creating a novel
diagnostic framework that will combine low-order mathematical models of swimming
with kinematic data from biologging tags. The framework will lead to a
fundamental scientific understanding of the impact of biomechanical parameters,
like fluke flexibility and swimming gait, on the cost of locomotion.
Importantly, this new bio-logging paradigm will enable us to obtain, using
single-point kinematic measurements taken from free-swimming animals, estimates
of the mechanical cost of swimming. This work will produce first-of-their-kind
estimates of the energetic cost during free swimming. The new knowledge
developed over the course of this project will impact the fields of biologging,
biomechanics, and the modeling of dynamical systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.