* 2238875
* CAREER: The State Dependency of Climate Sensitivity during Cenozoic Warm Intervals
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Ran Feng, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* David Verardo
* 05/31/2028
* USD 119,043.00

Despite decades of satellite observations and climate model development, the
fundamental question of “How much does Earth’s surface warm due to a doubling of
atmospheric CO2 concentration?” remains unanswered. Constraining this critical
climate metric, known as Equilibrium Climate Sensitivity (ECS), is important for
climate science and for robust decision making based on climate models. Past
climate data and simulations are instrumental to estimating ECS. Yet, ECS likely
changes with different climate background states. This state-dependency must be
accounted for when deriving future-climate relevant ECS from past climate data
and simulations. In addition to CO2 driver, climate is also altered by
perturbations of the earth energy balance from changes in geography, topography,
vegetation, and ice sheets, which modify climate background states, and
consequently, ECS. This project aims to identify the physical mechanisms driving
the state-dependency of ECS and quantify the role of non-CO2 drivers in altering
climate and ECS. This will be achieved by combining existing model simulation,
proxy data, new simulations, and statistical diagnostic tools for three past
warm intervals (3.3 – 3.0; ~16.9– 14.7 and ~50 million years) than can serve as
analogous to future climate states. Concurrently, a series of education and
outreach activities aimed at advancing climate education for students and the
public are proposed. These activities include developing new teaching materials
for a high school enrichment course on climate modeling, creating undergraduate
and graduate research opportunities, and facilitating the sharing of knowledge
within academia and between academia and the public through a workshop and a
virtual seminar series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By developing a non-linear
framework to analyze paleoclimate model simulations of three well-studied
Cenozoic warm intervals: the mid-Piacenzian (3.3 – 3.0 Ma), mid-Miocene (~16.9–
14.7 Ma), and early-Eocene (~50 Ma) -- to 1), this project will transform our
understanding of ECS by quantifying feedbacks that are responsible for the
climate-state dependency of ECS and the roles of non-CO2 forcings in modulating
ECS. The selected warm intervals bear many similarities to future climate, and
therefore, are particularly useful for studying feedbacks that are relevant to
climate projections. Furthermore, by combining multi-model simulations and proxy
data within a state-of-the-art Bayesian framework, this project will develop
proxy constraints for the state dependency of ECS and assess model skill. This
line of inquiry is particularly timely as researchers strive to narrow the
uncertainty of ECS of today’s climate. More generally, this research will
provide new insights into the feedbacks that maintain greenhouse and icehouse
climates. The proposed Bayesian method will also allow for the identification of
regions where proxy data are particularly influential for constraining the ECS,
which will help guide future data collection efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.