* 2238151
* Probing attentional allocation with a novel forced-response method
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* John Jonides, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 06/30/2026
* USD 659,877.00

Life is full of distractions. There are car noises from outside, pop-ups on our
computers, text messages that chime their appearance, and visual distractions
while we are trying to concentrate on a task at hand. Yet humans are remarkably
able to filter out distractions in the face of some goal that they are trying to
reach. How is this accomplished? The present research program is aimed at
studying how salient distractions in the visual world hurt ongoing performance
and how humans manage to mitigate these distractions in order to be productive.
Toward this end, the investigators have created a novel way of studying
distraction. Participants search for a particular item among other distracting
items while the moment-by-moment movement of their eyes is recorded. The task
forces them to respond at varying times after the presentation of each visual
array. The investigators can track where participants are looking and how
distractions affect them at different times into the processing of each display.
Data will also be analyzed using a computational model that helps uncover how
distractions impair performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research creates a
model situation for the study of distraction in the visual world. Participants
see a series of geometric objects; their task is to move their eyes to the oddly
shaped object in the display. To distract them, an oddly colored object that is
irrelevant to the task is sometimes presented. A critical feature of the task is
that it changes the time available to the participants to move their eyes with
each display so that sometimes a response is required very quickly after a
display is presented and sometimes participants have longer to process the
visual information. Performance is modeled theoretically as consisting of two
mental processes: 1) a reflexive response to the distractor that has to be
avoided and 2) a goal-oriented response to the oddly shaped object. Finally, the
investigators will study distraction in natural visual
scenes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.