* 2238424
* CAREER: Toward Real-Time, Constraint-Aware Control of Complex Dynamical Systems: from Theory and Algorithms to Software Tools
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Hamid Ossareh, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2028
* USD 535,817.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will fund research that
advances knowledge of real-time automatic control with application to complex,
safety-critical systems in power, transportation, and manufacturing
infrastructure, thereby promoting the progress of science, and advancing the
national prosperity. Complex systems are characterized by the coupling of many
subsystems, unmodeled components, significant variability, and environmental
uncertainty, which prevent effective use of traditional model-based techniques,
and render current data-driven approaches computationally intractable. This
project addresses these shortcomings by building a new theoretical framework for
creating data-based algorithms that are easy to tune by non-experts, real-time
feasible, and accompanied by guarantees of safety and performance. A
comprehensive plan for pedagogy and outreach aims to integrate the autonomous
technology ecosystem in Vermont, establish and strengthen relationships between
industry, academia, and government, disseminate research results through sharing
of open-source software and accessible video content, and engage with students
from underrepresented and underserved communities, including at rural high
schools in Vermont.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to develop the
foundations for a new data-driven control framework for complex systems, which
decouples the problems of tracking and constraint management through a marriage
of the Internal Model Control and Reference Governor model-based design
techniques with the Behavioral Systems Theory data-driven approach. By
inheriting many desirable properties of the model-based approaches, such as
robust stability, constraint enforcement, and finite-time convergence to
constraint-admissible setpoints, this framework overcomes the limitations of
data-driven approaches within a modular structure that simplifies analysis and
design, and allows for easily tunable, computationally tractable algorithms. To
this end, the project will investigate the system-theoretic underpinnings of the
new control framework, characterize its properties and fundamental limitations,
and develop generalizations to nonlinear, time-varying, and unstable systems.
Informed by collaboration with Beta Technologies and the Vermont Electric Power
Company, VELCO, the control framework will be validated on an electric motor
experiment, a quadrotor swarm transporting a complex payload, and a hardware-in-
the-loop simulation of a power system with significant penetration of
distributed energy resources. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by the Dynamics, Control and Systems Diagnostics program and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.