* 2238028
* CAREER: Synthesis and Applications of Multipurpose Halomucononitrile Linchpin Reagents
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Sidney Wilkerson-Hill, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 04/30/2028
* USD 308,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Sidney Wilkerson-Hill of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill is
studying the synthesis and reactivity of a class of hitherto little studied
molecules called halomucononitriles. These versatile materials are well-behaved
surrogates for highly reactive intermediates and the unique transformations to
be explored are anticipated to lead to improvements in chemical manufacturing
with positive impacts in disparate areas ranging from drug discovery to
materials science. The broader impacts of the funded project will extend to the
benefits accrued to society as the PI and other members of the Wilkerson-Hill
research group engage in a wide range of educational and outreach activities
involving partnerships between UNC Chapel Hill and organizations such as the
National Association for the Professional Advancement of Black Chemists and
Chemical Engineers (NOBCChE) and the Allies for Minorities and Women in Science
and Engineering (AMWISE). A significant portion of these efforts focus on
increasing participation in the scientific enterprise by individuals belonging
to groups traditionally underrepresented in STEM (Science, Technology,
Engineering and Mathematics) fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Halomucononitriles
[bis-3,3Â´-(2-haloacrylonitriles)] are valuable linchpin reagents containing a
1,4-dicyanobutadiene motif that permits the sequential formation of C-C and C-N
bonds through a variety of controllable multistep reaction sequences. The
synthetic utility of halomucononitriles and new routes for their formation will
be explored in the context of three aims: (1) synthesis of medicinally-relevant
7-alkylazaindoles from pyridinimines generated by addition of primary amines to
halomucononitriles, (2) use of halomuconitriles as a synthetic equivalent of
bisketene to access 1,4-diketones via double ([4+2], [3+2], or [2+2])
cycloadditions followed by alpha-halonitrile to ketone conversion, and (3)
generation of halomucononitriles from haloanilines by oxidative ring-opening
processes. The last aim paves the way for a new arene deconstruction strategy
enabling the net transmutation of benzene derivatives into pyridines and other
important azacycles. Beyond its immediate benefits to synthetic organic
chemistry, the new knowledge gained from these studies may enable researchers
from different fields to use halomucononitrile linchpin chemistry for diverse
applications such as lysine conjugation strategies, DNA-encoded library
synthesis, and polymer science. Finally, it is noted that the research supported
by the award will provide valuable training opportunities for graduate students
to enable their pursuit of future careers in the chemical sciences and allied
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.