* 2238916
* CAREER: WoU-MMA: PeVatrons and Beyond: Tackling the Century-old Problem with the New Messengers
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Ke Fang, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 08/31/2028
* USD 307,861.00

Cosmic rays are charged particles composed of protons, helium, and heavier
elements that travel at nearly the speed of light. They may carry energy above 1
Peta-electronvolt (PeV), well beyond the reach of man-made accelerators. A
cosmic-ray source capable of accelerating protons up to the PeV energy is called
a “PeVatron”. The nature of PeVatrons is among the most fundamental questions in
Particle Astrophysics. This program aims to advance our understanding of
PeVatrons through observational and theoretical studies. The research will be
connected to educational outreach through activities including: (1) hosting a
series of inter-disciplinary discussion events that serve as a bridge in
connecting research areas in the physics, astronomy, and statistics programs at
the PI’s institution; (2) engaging high school students in Madison, WI and
nearby regions in hands-on classes that show how scientists use modern
techniques to solve complicated physics problems; and (3) conducting outreach
and mentoring activities to involve students from groups that have been
traditionally underrepresented in science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will
analyze data from the IceCube Neutrino Observatory (IceCube) and the High-
Altitude Water Cherenkov Gamma-ray Observatory (HAWC) using an efficient joint-
analysis framework and new source-finding algorithms. They will also research
the theory of cosmic ray sources by numerically simulating particle transport
and interaction in cosmic environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is
aligned with the NSF Big Idea of Windows on the Universe: the Era of Multi-
messenger Astrophysics as it coordinates the use of multi-messengers
observations utilizing high energy gamma rays from HAWC with high energy
neutrinos from IceCube and will improve theoretical modeling to better interpret
the data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.