* 2238935
* CAREER: Mechano-Adaptive Polymers with Reversible Strain Stiffening and Softening via Active Control of Metal-Ligand Interactions
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Ying Yang, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 07/31/2028
* USD 120,651.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mechanical and elastic properties
of synthetic polymers are one reason why they have become ubiquitous in modern
life. However, comparatively, biomaterials exhibit unmatchable dynamics and
complex mechanical behaviors. This has motivated materials scientists and
engineers for years to push the limit of synthetic polymers to approach the
functionalities of biomaterials. This project is inspired by the mechanics of
biological cells. Actin, which plays an important role in supporting cell
mechanical integrity, shows stiffening followed by softening under mechanical
stress. The stiffening protects the cell from initial impact while the softening
prevents catastrophic fracture. These mechano-responses are fully reversible.
Imparting this mechanical reversibility of “stiffening-softening” to synthetic
polymers will enable unprecedented mechano-adaptation and allow the materials to
actively adjust their shape and stiffness in response to the mechanical
environment, becoming resistant to both low and high impacts. These properties
have not been realized in synthetic polymers. As such, this project aims to
develop polymeric materials with tailored structures and molecular interactions
to achieve similar mechanics. The results will advance the limited understanding
of controlling the nonlinear mechanics of complex molecular networks. It will
set the stage toward materials that emulate mechanobiology to have force-
regulated sensing, signaling, and morphing functionalities. The project will be
integrated with strategic education and outreach plans centered on virtual
reality (VR) demonstrations to engage a diverse group of students and promote
polymer science education in Northern Nevada.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biomaterials exhibit unmatchable dynamics and
complex mechanical behaviors compared to synthetic polymers. Supramolecular
polymers with tunable noncovalent bonds provide an opportunity to bridge this
gap. Intensive research has been conducted to elucidate the interdependencies of
material properties, polymer architectures, and the characteristics of the
associative groups. However, active control of the dynamics of the associative
bonds by mechanical force is still understudied. Thus, this project will
elucidate the use of this dynamic parameter by focusing on the change of sticker
kinetics during mechanical perturbation in a nonequilibrium state, in order to
access the complex nonlinear viscoelasticity for responsive networks. The
nonlinear mechanics of interest is the “stiffening-softening paradox” of living
cells. They stiffen under low strains to resist the initial impact, soften at
high strains to prevent catastrophic fracture, and recover their original forms
upon load removal, representing dynamic adjustments of their mechanical property
according to the surrounding environment. The project plans to develop a
solvent-free polymer that contains tailored noncovalent bonds, whose associative
interactions can be actively adjusted with force in a multi-component system
assembled from linear-bottlebrush-linear triblock copolymers. Each component
would provide complementary properties to realize complex nonlinear mechanics.
This study will address the fundamental question as to how different structural
components independently dominate the macroscopic viscoelasticity in certain
force ranges, and when their coupled effects become dominant. A combination of
synthetic approaches and mechanical &amp; spectroscopic characterization methods
will be used to probe their interactions. Understanding the interplay between
multi-component systems will serve as a springboard to emulate living materials,
which rely on multi-component hierarchical structures to optimize living
functions. &lt;br/&gt;.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.