* 2238905
* I-Corps: Immunomodulatory Patch for Periodontal Regeneration
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Mohammad Mahdi Hasani Sadrabadi, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a dissolvable microneedle patch that provides a sustained release
and local delivery of antibiotics. The first application of the proposed
technology will be the treatment of periodontitis, a wide-spread oral disease
that impacts up to 47.2% of all adults worldwide. Currently, antibiotic products
are only used for severe cases of periodontitis due to the high risk of
antibiotic-resistant bacterial strains developing from the leakage of product.
By utilizing the proposed technology to deliver antibiotics directly to the
local tissue, the proposed microneedle patch overcomes retention and leakage
issues. In addition, the proposed design requires minimal to no training for
application, and may be easily used as a point-of-care treatment. Patients may
eventually have direct access to using the patch with a prescription. This would
be the first locally delivered antibiotic for at home care to treat
periodontitis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of an engineered, dissolvable, microarray delivery platform that
provides a sustained release and local delivery of antibiotics aimed at treating
periodontal disease. The proposed technology is a dissolvable patch with
biodegradable microneedles, offering a point-of-care option for patients to
administer antibiotic treatment at their convenience. The proposed patch may
prevent regrowth of the bacterial colonies that initially cause periodontitis
and encourage gingival tissue regrowth. The patch is applied to gingival tissue
where the membrane support is designed to dissolve quickly for a burst release
of antibiotics to immediately reduce bacterial content in the microenvironment.
The biocompatible and bioresorbable microneedles penetrate and stay in gingival
tissue for the sustained release of biomolecules. The goal of the proposed
technology is to overcomes the problems of insufficient penetration and local
retention as well as antibacterial and immune
modulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.