* 2238400
* CAREER: Chemical Tools for Bio-Orthogonal Neuromodulation
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Rachel Steinhardt, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 06/30/2028
* USD 639,404.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Division of
Chemistry, Rachel Steinhardt of Syracuse University will develop chemical tools
to understand how individual cells communicate to create brain activity.
Decoding this communication promises to enable new insights into phenomena such
as learning, mood, and sleep. The research focuses on the chemical synthesis of
probes and optimization of their chemical and biochemical properties. They will
then be tested in assays that determine the ability of the probe to interact
with a target in a spatially- or temporally defined manner, which can then be
correlated to a biochemical or neuronal event. The interdisciplinary nature of
this program will allow graduate students and undergraduates to gain expertise
in modern research techniques. The project also integrates an outreach program
to teach chemistry in an after school program at middle schools Syracuse City
School District.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most perplexing challenges in
neuroscience is how to explain the brainâ€™s ability to learn and change itself,
creating seemingly infinite behaviors and states (sleeping, wakefulness,
attention) while using a fixed anatomical connectivity. To answer these
questions, it is necessary to define the link between membrane-bound receptor
binding events and the ensemble activity of neurons. Unfortunately, there is a
paucity of chemical tools to adequately probe neural activity via stimulation of
the native receptors. The Steinhardt lab will address this need by synthesizing
probes for spatially defined native receptor control and temporally defined
neurochemical signaling,that will then be used in biochemical and primary cell-
based assays. These probes are small molecule methods for researchers to control
native chemical synapses with light. Such probes are expected to facilitate
bottom-up experiments (i.e., cell to neural network) to determine the
mechanistic relationship between learning and neural state flexibility and
modulation of native dopamine and serotonin receptor
subtypes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.