* 2238706
* CAREER: Developing a Computational Workflow to Quantify Atomic-level Allosteric Mechanisms
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Martin McCullagh, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 04/30/2028
* USD 569,832.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
in the Division of Chemistry, and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), Martin McCullagh and his research group at
Oklahoma State University will develop computational methods and workflows to
quantify allosteric response in proteins. Allostery in proteins can switch on
and off the primary function through the binding of a molecule at a secondary
site on the protein. This behavior serves as important handle for the
development of therapeutics as well as the design of novel proteins. The
computational workflows developed in the McCullagh group will be used to
quantify allosteric response as well as identify new allosteric sites for
further regulation of the protein. The McCullagh group will also develop jupyter
notebook-based chemistry lessons to both introduce chemistry concepts in a novel
way and introduce aspects of coding to undergraduate chemistry
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The McCullagh group will develop and verify a
computational workflow to quantify allosteric response and describe the atomic-
level details that underlie this behavior. Allostery is the altering of enzyme
function at one site due to a perturbation of the enzyme at a distal site.
Despite over a century of work on this topic, two key questions remain
unanswered: (1) What are the atomic-level changes that contribute to allostery
in a complete four-state thermodynamic cycle? (2) Can we harness the atomic-
level allosteric mechanisms to identify new targets to impact the observed
allostery? This project will address these questions using two pyruvate kinase
isozymes as model systems. The K-type allosteric response of these enzymes is a
pivotal control valve for the last step in glycolysis. This project will also
develop and freely distribute online jupyter notebook-based chemistry
lessons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.