* 2238693
* CAREER: Statistically-Sound Knowledge Discovery from Data
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Matteo Riondato, Amherst College
* Continuing Grant
* Sorin Draghici
* 09/30/2028
* USD 205,324.00

Methods for knowledge discovery from data (e.g., for extracting patterns or
finding anomalies) have found their way to research labs in life and biological
sciences, and in industries such as cybersecurity. In these fields, the
statistical validity of the results produced by these methods is paramount:
false discoveries cannot be tolerated. Current methods do not offer such
stringent statistical guarantees. This project develops algorithms for
statistically-sound Knowledge Discovery from Data. It transforms the field by
shifting the goal of the Knowledge Discovery process from extracting information
about the available data to gaining new understanding of the noisy, random
process that generates the data. The proposed methods contribute towards a
faster and higher-throughput scientific pipeline, by allowing scientists and
practitioners to efficiently analyze rich large datasets and to trust the
results of the analysis. Researchers can then focus on their discipline-specific
research tasks without worrying about computational or statistical
considerations. The project includes collaborations with a local museum and a
local public library, to analyze data about their collections of historic
materials, and with a cybersecurity company to develop methods for fast
detection of network attacks with few false positives. A diverse cohort of
undergraduate students will be involved in the research and educational
components of the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research in knowledge discovery
has mostly focused on understanding the available data, rather than the process
that generated it. In the few cases where hypothesis testing was used to assess
the results (mostly for simple patterns), only simplistic null models were
considered, and the testing employed low-statistical-power approaches (e.g., the
Bonferroni correction) to control only for one measure of false discovery, the
Family-Wise Error Rate. This project is transformative because it will develop
efficient methods for evaluating a wide variety of results (e.g., patterns,
anomalies, graph/vertex/edge properties, and more) obtained from large rich
datasets (e.g., transactional datasets, graphs, and time series), using
realistic null models which are more appropriate for these tasks, and better
encode available knowledge of the data generating process. We will create novel
efficient procedures to sample from such models, both approximate (e.g., Markov-
Chain Monte Carlo) and exact, and combine them with modern resampling- based
multiple testing methods, in a multiple-hypothesis first approach that also
controls the (marginal) False Discovery Rate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.