* 2238080
* CAREER: Statistics through the Sum of Squares Lens
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Samuel Hopkins, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Brass
* 01/31/2028
* USD 117,410.00

Statistics with large data sets of high-dimensional observations (e.g., images,
videos, genomes) forms the basis for modern machine learning and data science.
Despite extraordinary successes in practice and the potential for tremendous
further impact, theoretical understanding of the basic algorithmic building
blocks for high-dimensional statistics remains limited. Unlike in traditional
(low-dimensional) statistics, the key bottleneck is not how much data is
available but how much computational power is available to process it. The
central aim of this proposal is to advance a theory of algorithmic statistics
which can address the core questions: which problems in high-dimensional
statistics have computationally efficient algorithms? And, what are the best --
most accurate, most robust, fastest, etc. -- algorithms for such problems?
Pursuing answers to these questions is likely to lead both to foundational
algorithmic innovations as well as to a deeper understanding of the fundamental
limitations of efficient computation in statistical settings, which is a
prerequisite for understanding when a given algorithm is the best possible at
the task it performs. Furthermore, the curriculum development and mentoring
components of this project will disseminate state-of-the-art algorithm design
techniques to the broader scientific community via courses, lectures, and videos
and train the next generation of algorithm designers for science and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop the Sum of Squares
method (SoS) as a powerful tool for algorithm design in statistical settings and
as a lens on fundamental limitations. SoS is a problem-independent approach to
designing algorithms with strong provable guarantees, generalizing tools such as
linear programming, and eigenvalue/eigenvector methods. SoS has already broadly
impacted algorithms in numerous areas: combinatorial optimization, quantum
information, cryptography, control theory, high-dimensional statistics, and
more. Even within high-dimensional statistics, SoS already has many applications
in clustering, robust estimation, and tensor decomposition (the inverse problem
underlying the method of moments), to name only a few. However, knowledge of SoS
remains incomplete: there is tremendous potential to push the frontier of
efficient algorithms by studying SoS, including in high-dimensional statistics.
The core technical thrust of this project will be developing novel algorithms
based on SoS as well as the mathematical tools to understand the guarantees and
fundamental limitations of those algorithms. The project will focus on algorithm
design in two specific domains, privacy-preserving data analysis and Bayesian
inference, where the investigator believes that there are opportunities for new
algorithms with strong provable guarantees to offer new insights on algorithm
design broadly, as well as to have a near-term impact on
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.