* 2238128
* CAREER: Advances in Randomization Inference for Causal Effects: Heterogeneity, Sensitivity, and Complexity
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Xinran Li, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Yulia Gel
* 06/30/2028
* USD 84,609.00

Understanding causal effects holds significant importance in various social,
biomedical, and industrial studies, as it plays a vital role in decision making
and policy formulation. This project aims to create innovative statistical
methodologies that provide a more comprehensive understanding of causal effect
heterogeneity, a more reliable assessment of the sensitivity of causal
conclusions to unmeasured confounding in observational studies, and robust
inference for modern complex experiments. The research has the potential to
answer questions in such a diverse set of disciplines, as political science,
education, and sociology. For instance, the project can help address inquiries
regarding the proportion of individuals who benefit from a specific policy to
any extent, in addition to the usual average treatment effects. The PI intends
to disseminate the research outputs through publications, presentations, and the
distribution of open-source software. Additionally, the educational and outreach
activities will be systematically integrated to the research agenda, aiming to
enhance undergraduate education, spread causality knowledge to the broader
audiences, and equip graduate students with the critical skills allowing them to
become in-depth researchers and human-centered
educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigator plans to develop new
tools that provide a more comprehensive and robust understanding of causal
effects in both randomized experiments and observational studies. These tools
will be built upon or inspired by the randomization inference, which uses the
randomization of treatment assignments as the reasoned basis. The project has
three primary objectives. First, the PI will develop inference techniques for
the distribution of individual causal effects, which is an important concern in
practice, yet difficult to infer due to its unidentifiability from the observed
data. Second, the project will deliver new sensitivity analyses that can
accommodate extreme hidden confounding in observational studies, which can
strengthen the causal conclusions. Third, the PI will develop robust inference
methods for complex randomized experiments that go beyond simple randomization
or involve peer influence. Finally, the project will provide new computationally
efficient algorithms and will create publicly available R software packages that
will facilitate the use of these new tools in
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.