* 2238047
* CAREER: A Holistic Developer-Centered Approach to Enhance Privacy for Data-Driven Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Sepideh Ghanavati, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2028
* USD 130,648.00

The number of privacy violations in the U.S. has increased dramatically, with
many companies experiencing harmful and costly breaches. Such breaches
negatively impact users and lead to financial and reputational costs for
developers. Their adverse effects underscore the need for holistic privacy
engineering solutions throughout the software development lifecycle. Recent
privacy research has made progress in this regard, yet significant gaps remain,
including insufficient implementation guidelines and ex-ante detection of
privacy violations. This project addresses these gaps by investigating how
novice and expert developers currently implement privacy rules, supporting the
developers in detecting privacy behaviors, designing privacy-preserving
solutions, and automating the implementation of privacy rules in code. This
project will result in models and tools to enhance privacy for all types of
software applications. Hence, the project will benefit society by (i) helping to
protect the privacy of vulnerable groups, including Maine youth, migrants, and
asylum seekers, (ii) supporting the software industry and the U.S. economy, and
(iii) broadening access to STEM and computer science education and careers for
girls, women, minorities, first-generation students, and other underrepresented
groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary project fundamentally
advances knowledge in privacy and software engineering by investigating new
theories, methods, and tools to describe software privacy behaviors prior to
development and then ensure their effective implementation in code. Through
three thrusts, the project will: (i) generate new scientific knowledge about the
privacy awareness and expertise of developers and the challenges they face; (ii)
reduce the effort of manually implementing privacy requirements in code via the
development of novel privacy-related code generation models; (iii) minimize
privacy violations through examining the current practices for writing privacy-
related code and creating novel solutions to improve such practices; and (iv)
strengthen communications between legal and technical experts by developing a
shared infrastructure for defining and reasoning about privacy solutions from
both technical and policy perspectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the Software and Hardware Foundations (SHF) program, the
Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC), and the the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.