* 2238363
* CAREER: Closing the Loop of Human-Machine Interactions via Skin-Like Multimodal Haptic Interfaces
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Shanshan Yao, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 02/29/2028
* USD 398,537.00

Haptic perception is essential for all human actions, which helps humans
explore, understand, and interact with the surrounding environment. When
interacting with smart machines, such as robots, prosthetics, computers, or even
virtual environments, such haptic feedback is crucial for efficient human-
machine interactions. Remarkable progress has been made in developing skin-like
sensors for users to control machines and for machines to learn about their
surrounding environment. However, skin-compatible haptic feedback from machines
to users is largely unexplored. This project seeks to develop haptic interfaces
that can produce haptic cues compatible with the sensing capabilities and
mechanical properties of the skin. The proposed skin-like multimodal haptic
interface represents a significant opportunity to enable bilateral machine
control. The resulting closed-loop human-machine interface is the enabling
technology that can impact a wide range of applications, including robotics,
prosthetics, teleoperation, smart manufacturing, entertainment, medical/military
training, and virtual reality (VR)/augmented reality (AR). The haptic interface
can also benefit individuals with hearing and visual impairments by encoding and
representing information using haptic feedback. The integrated research and
educational activities will inspire and educate a diverse group of students in
the fields of haptic devices and nanotechnology. Through team-based research
activities, workshops, open house activities, and research mentoring, the
project will strengthen students’ skillset development and advance their pursuit
of STEM careers. The educational and outreach activities will engage
underrepresented groups and students of all ages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research objective of this CAREER proposal is to explore the interplay between
functional materials, structural design, as well as integration strategies to
realize haptic devices that can match the functional and mechanical
characteristics of the skin for enhanced haptic sensations. Three research
thrusts are proposed: (1) High-performance soft actuators to generate mechano-
haptic sensations. (2) Robust heating/cooling devices to generate thermo-haptic
sensations. (3) Integration of both modalities for skin-like multimodal haptic
interfaces. The educational objective of this CAREER proposal is to disseminate
research discoveries in wearable haptics and nanomaterials to promote diversity
in STEM fields, and to equip the next generation workforce with skillsets to
advance these emerging fields. The PI will conduct the following educational
activities: (1) Mentor a multidisciplinary Vertically Integrated Project (VIP)
team to strengthen students’ soft skills in addition to technical skills. (2)
Develop a workshop for Mater Teachers to enhance teachers’ STEM knowledge. These
emerging technologies will then be communicated more broadly to students when
teachers integrate them into the curriculum. (3) Host research open houses and
provide research opportunities for a diverse group of students to stimulate
interest and increase diversity. The proposed work will yield new knowledge
about the rational design of haptic interfaces to realize efficient feedback
sensations through the skin. Completion of the proposed research will lay the
ground for closed-loop human-machine interfaces and pave the way for
applications involving interactions between users and
machines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.