* 2238880
* CAREER: Personalizing sensory-driven computerized interfaces to optimize motor rehabilitation
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Raviraj Nataraj, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 01/31/2028
* USD 498,072.00

Persons with an injury to the brain or spinal cord often undergo physical
training to recover movement abilities needed for daily activities. To motivate
participation in this “motor therapy,” virtual reality (VR) technologies are
increasingly used. VR can be programmed to be highly realistic or look like a
game to encourage participants. Still, persons who use VR motor therapy do not
always achieve better outcomes than traditional methods, partially because they
are not personalized to each user. Improving VR therapy requires a greater
understanding of how persons respond to programmable features. Two features that
can improve VR motor therapy are the difficulty of the training task and the
guidance (feedback) provided during training. VR interfaces that stimulate
senses for greater immersion can readily provide training guidance using
augmented sensory feedback (ASF). The method of ASF involves providing sensory
(e.g., visual, haptic) cues about the direction and magnitude in which a person
should move during training. This project will examine how impairment in
function affects personal performance, physiologic responses, and perceptions
during VR training that adapts the task difficulty and ASF. This project will
advance education through supervised training of high-school students to custom-
develop VR rehabilitation applications. These students will further engage the
community by presenting their work at laboratory demonstrations to K-12 students
from under-resourced districts. In addition, they will receive constructive
feedback about their applications from caregivers, clinicians, and, most
importantly, persons with a spinal cord injury (SCI) serving as end-user
mentors. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will test the hypothesis that motor
performance improves when adapting VR training features (i.e., task complexity,
ASF for guidance) based on measures indicating well-being and physical readiness
for training. This project’s technical objectives are: (1) creating regression-
type models relating performance to perceptional and physiologic measures during
VR motor training and as a function of varying disability, and (2) leveraging
these models in an adaptive control system using positive reinforcement to
personalize VR training features. Experiments will include persons with SCI
performing VR motor rehabilitation tasks with a robot-arm avatar. This project
focuses on the SCI population, under-served by VR motor rehabilitation yet ideal
for fundamental scientific study since SCI can present as a physical disability
with or without cognitive impairment. Participants will generate muscle-
activation signals, measured at the skin surface, serving as inputs to a
machine-learning algorithm that detects command intention in controlling the
avatar. Data from the VR environment, body-mounted sensors, and surveys will be
used to assess changes in performance, physiologic responses, and perceptions
during training. As such, this project promotes human-centered training that
considers both body and mind in providing clinicians with new and diverse
dimensions of patient-specific data to personalize healthcare for better
function. This project has the potential to generate critical insights into how
user-device interfaces are best adapted for function, including how to deliver
sensory-driven training for more intuitive control of devices (e.g.,
smartphones, vehicles, remote-controlled robots).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.