* 2238072
* CAREER: Guiding and Confining Nonlinear Elastic Waves in Moiré Metastructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Raj Kumar Pal, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 06/30/2028
* USD 504,341.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will fund research that
enables the application of new architected metamaterials to vibration protection
of large-capacity wind turbine blades, as well as the design of surface acoustic
wave devices capable of high-precision sensing and signal processing, thereby
promoting the progress of science and advancing the national prosperity. A major
impediment to scaling up the output from wind energy generation is structural
failure due to vibrations of turbine blades induced by unsteady wind loads and
extreme weather conditions. Without effective means to guide or isolate
vibrational energy in such structures, concerns about damage and safety enforce
suboptimal designs and operation. To address this challenge, this project
investigates a hitherto unexplored class of engineered materials, called moiré
metastructures, that can guide and confine elastic wave energy in ways that are
unattainable in conventional materials. An integrated set of education and
outreach activities aims to positively impact engineering education and
contribute to a diverse and globally competitive STEM workforce. These include
metastructure design challenges in an undergraduate course, hands-on activities
at workshops for K-12 students, international student exchange with a research
group in France, and participation of individuals from underrepresented groups
in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to develop the foundations
for the design of a class of bilayered architected plate metastructures, coupled
by nonlinear between-layer springs, that allow independent engineering of
dispersion and nonlinearity and, as a result, the possibility of uniquely
nonlinear wave phenomena, such as solitons, frequency combs, wave bending, and
unidirectional propagation. It achieves this aim by investigating how nontrivial
topological properties of moiré metastructures, obtained by stacking two layers
of hexagonal, square, and Kagome lattice-based plates, result in almost flat
dispersion bands that can be exploited and combined with space-time modulation
of stiffness to guide or confine wave energy. The approach relies on theoretical
analysis of discrete spring-mass models, finite-element analysis using
discontinuous Galerkin basis functions based on Bloch modes, design optimization
and fabrication of coupling springs with the desired nonlinear stiffness, and
experimental validation using laser-Doppler vibrometry and high-speed
imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.