* 2238801
* CAREER: Museomic approach for exploring the evolution of past, persistent, and emerging orthopoxvirus outbreaks
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2028
* Molly McDonough, Chicago State University
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 04/30/2028
* USD 95,771.00

Determining which animals a virus can infect remains a major obstacle for
understanding how pathogens are maintained in natural populations and their
potential spillover threat to humans. This is especially true for the group of
viruses that includes smallpox, one of the deadliest pathogens in human history.
A major unanswered question tied to this deadly pandemic is why some species of
pox viruses are able to infect multiple animals while others only infect one. In
light of the recent outbreak of monkeypox, a pox virus capable of infecting
multiple species, the need to better understand host-pox virus diversity and
evolution is of particular importance. This project will use novel technologies
combined with historic and modern samples of animals housed in natural history
museums to expand our understanding of pox virus infection across the tree of
life. Additionally, this project advances the goals of the NSF by increasing
diversity in STEM and creating a diverse workforce by placing underrepresented
minorities at the center of cutting-edge research. Specifically, this work
involves linking a primarily undergraduate, minority-serving institution with
partnerships at several premier research institutions in Chicago and beyond,
creating a network of opportunities for students engaged in the project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will leverage a large series of historical
museum specimens from regions and time periods when pox outbreaks were known to
occur, and advance genomic techniques to expand our knowledge of pox-virus
evolution and host diversity. The proposed work will focus on three museum
collections, targeting: a past outbreak (smallpox); a current outbreak
(monkeypox); and finally, an emerging threat (Alaskapox). Viral genomes will be
generated from pox-positive samples using a combination of high throughput
sequencing and targeted enrichment approaches, allowing researchers to elucidate
the evolutionary history of these complex but little-studied pathogens. Such
data will be used to answer a suite of questions related to the evolution of
Orthopoxvirus including: 1) How does genome architecture influence host range
for different species of pox viruses? 2) Do intermediate hosts or distantly
related hosts play a role in Orthopoxvirus diversification or transmission? and
3) Does increasing the known diversity of Orthopoxvirus in mammals help resolve
the phylogenetic position and origin of human
smallpox?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.