* 2238213
* CAREER: Mechanistic Understanding and Strategies to Improve the Regeneration of Supported Nickel Catalysts for Methane Conversion
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Yuanyuan Zhu, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 05/31/2028
* USD 479,290.00

The acceleration of global warming has produced a pressing need to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions despite the ever-increasing demand for energy. In the
United States, natural gas combustion has become the No. 1 source of electricity
generation. However, the carbon dioxide (CO2) associated with natural gas
combustion, combined with methane emissions during its extraction and transport,
still contributes to greenhouse gas emissions beyond levels required for energy
sustainability. Two technologies - gas-to-liquids (GTL) and catalytic methane
pyrolysis (CMP) – hold promise for producing hydrogen for both fuel and
chemicals manufacturing while decreasing greenhouse gas emissions. However,
catalyst deactivation due to carbon deposition and metal sintering are still
major challenges in methane valorization reactions. Previous research studies
have not explored process-based catalyst deactivation and regeneration
mechanisms in sufficient depth to devise energy-efficient, effective
regeneration strategies. To that end, the project will directly address
fundamental knowledge gaps in the regeneration of prototypical supported nickel
(Ni) catalysts to enable new options for extending methane catalyst lifetime,
thus contributing to better carbon management and further reduction of
greenhouse gas emissions during the transition to sustainable fuels and
chemicals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the regeneration of spent methane
conversion metal catalysts has been described phenomenologically, a
comprehensive fundamental understanding of carbon gasification and metal
redispersion has been lacking. This is partly due to conventional investigation
methodologies in heterogeneous catalysis that focus mainly on the catalytic
reaction kinetics and dynamics of molecules adsorbed on catalyst surfaces, not
on the structural dynamics of solid catalysts. The project will combine state-
of-the-art, in-situ environmental transmission electron microscopy (ETEM) with a
branch of machine learning known as computer vision to directly monitor both
carbon deposits and Ni catalyst structural changes under regeneration
conditions. Advancement of fundamental understanding of spent metal catalyst
regeneration will be achieved through three aims: 1) establish an operando
methodology for high-throughput correlation of regeneration performance and
structural evolution, 2) determine carbon gasification mechanisms and kinetics
for optimized gasification conditions, and 3) determine metal redispersion
mechanisms and support effects enabling a cyclic reaction-regeneration process.
Successful integration of the three aims will establish direct correlations
between the gasification kinetics and state of the catalyst during the carbon
removal, gasification-induced sintering, and Ni redispersion sequence. The
correlations will enable rational tuning of regeneration condition parameters to
achieve complete carbon removal and effective Ni catalyst redispersion. These
fundamental insights into rejuvenating spent Ni catalysts can lead to new
practical regeneration strategies for other supported metal catalyst systems.
Beyond the technical aspects of the project, the investigator will establish an
interdisciplinary, practical, and inspiring program “The Amazing Life Cycle of
Nanocatalysts.” The program will train a new generation of students in catalysis
through activities integrating research into education, interactive workshops
that excite and inspire students and K–12 teachers about STEM fields, and
outreach efforts attracting and recruiting underrepresented students to
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.