* 2238723
* CAREER: Magnetic Stimulation and Myelination
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* In Hong Yang, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 04/30/2028
* USD 450,710.00

Demyelination is the degradation of the protective covering (myelin sheath) of
nerve fibers, a common side effect associated with neurological disorders, e.g.,
multiple sclerosis, Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’ disease. Current methods
to treat demyelinated axons require re-immersion and support of
oligodendrocytes, special cells that promote myelin development. The scientific
community has found that neurons can be activated when an external stimulation
is applied such as Electrical, Optogenetic and Magnetic stimulation. Of these,
Magnetic stimulation is the only non-invasive method for regenerating injured
neurons in the body. This project seeks to discover a new, fundamental
understanding of the effects of Magnetic stimulation on the myelination process
that may eventually lead to the creation of new techniques and tools for the
development of the next generation of neurological medical devices.
Subsequently, these devices may spawn innovative treatments of neurological
diseases by the medical community in the future. Additionally, this project will
engage K-12, undergraduate, and graduate students to inspire them to pursue
careers in Regenerative Neural Engineering. In particular, this project will
employ outreach activities and hands-on activities to actively recruit female,
first generation, underrepresented, and veterans’ students into the project and
prepare them to contribute to this exciting field. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PI’s overarching career goal is to establish a highly successful neural
engineering research and training program within the Center for Biomedical
Engineering and Science in the Department of Mechanical Engineering at the
University of North Carolina, Charlotte. Towards this goal, the goal of this
project is to investigate magnetic stimulation (MSTIM) induced myelination of
axons by oligodendrocytes (OLs) and the signaling mechanisms of MSTIM in
myelination. Demyelination of myelinated axons in the nervous system is a
deleterious feature of neurological diseases and spinal cord injuries. However,
damaged axons can be repaired (i.e., remyelinated) when endogenous
oligodendrocyte progenitor cells (OPCs) differentiate into new myelinating
oligodendrocytes (OLs). Remyelination of axons by endogenous OLs, however, is
limited due to OPCs’ failure to differentiate OLs. Electrical activity of
neurons plays a necessary role in OPC differentiation and myelination of axons
by OLs. Neuromodulation, an emerging neurotechnology, excites or inhibits
dysfunctional neuronal circuits to alter them into a more physiological state
and can be an effective tool for inducing myelination. In vitro electrical
stimulation (ESTIM) and optogenetic stimulation (OSTIM) of neurons have been
found to increase neural activity and enhance myelination of axons, but are
invasive methods. A similar technique, magnetic stimulation (MSTIM), is a non-
invasive form of neuromodulation that also modulates neural activity. The
Research plan is organized under three objectives: (1) establish an in vitro
model of neural activity-dependent myelination by MSTIM, (2) investigate MSTIM
induced differentiation of OPCs and myelination of axons, and (3) investigate
the neurotrophic factors, and signaling molecules released from neurons and OPCs
with MSTIM-induced myelination. Outcomes are expected to enable an understanding
of the fundamental mechanisms of interactions between MSTIM and the nervous
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.