* 2238058
* CAREER: Quantum silicon phononics: Harnessing long-lived phonons for memories and interconnects
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2028
* Mohammad Mirhosseini, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew McCune
* 01/31/2028
* USD 434,031.00

Over the last two decades, quantum technologies have progressed steadily,
promising solutions to a wide range of applications in computation,
communication, and sensing. The bulk of efforts in developing physical platforms
for quantum technologies has so far focused on photons as carriers of quantum
information and atomic and solid-state qubits for storing and processing quantum
information. Phonons, the quanta of energy in vibrations in solid-state
materials, have recently emerged as a viable resource for quantum technologies.
Due to their ability to interact with a wide range of systems, phonons can serve
as interconnects to pass quantum signals from the electrical domain, where
quantum computers are likely to operate, to the optical domain, where optical
fibers enable long-distance quantum communication. Additionally, phonons can be
well isolated from their environments in nano-engineered devices, potentially
providing memory elements for storing quantum states. Developing these physical
properties into experimental capabilities and, subsequently, a technological
advantage requires methods of interfacing mechanical devices with other quantum
hardware platforms. This project aims to create scalable, chip-scale optical and
electrical quantum interfaces to long-lived mechanical resonators. Furthermore,
the project aims to assess the practical benefits of the developed interfaces by
using them in experimental demonstrations that create quantum entanglement
between electrical, optical, and mechanical quantum
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;GHz-frequency acoustic resonators made from
single-crystal silicon offer the unique properties of exceptionally low loss
(reaching 50-billion quality factors at low temperatures) and the ease of
interfacing with telecom-band optical photons. However, while quantum
manipulations of phonons have been previously demonstrated with piezoelectric
coupling to superconducting qubits, the absence of piezoelectricity in silicon
forbids direct integration with qubits. This project aims to overcome this
challenge by developing new mechanisms for electromechanical coupling of GHz-
frequency mechanical resonators with superconducting qubits and cavity
optomechanical systems in a monolithic silicon-on-insulator platform. To achieve
this goal, the project will develop electrostatic transducers based on phononic
crystals and high-impedance microwave cavities based on kinetic inductance in
disordered superconductors. Integrating these components, the PI aims to realize
full quantum control of electromechanical resonators with transmon qubits and
demonstrate electro-optomechanical conversion of microwave photons to optical
photons. The absence of lossy piezoelectric materials and the reliance on light-
resistant superconductors in this approach is expected to translate to
exceptionally long mechanical lifetimes and orders-of-magnitude improvement in
the efficiency of microwave-to-optical frequency conversion. The project aims to
take benefit of these improvements for demonstrating quantum entangling
operations in a lab-scale hybrid network made from transmon qubits (acting as
processors), phononic crystal resonators (memory elements), and
telecommunication band photons (interconnects). Demonstrating such a hybrid
quantum network would be essential for future real-world applications in
providing secure remote access to quantum computing clouds, distributed quantum
computing, and quantum-enabled sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.