* 2238379
* CAREER: CAS: Understanding the Chemistry of Palladium and Silyl Compounds to Design Catalyst Active Sites
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Amanda Cook-Sneathen, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 05/31/2028
* USD 333,947.00

In this CAREER project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp;
Mechanisms B Program of the Chemistry Division, Amanda Cook-Sneathen of the
Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the University of Oregon is
developing new catalysts by understanding the interactions of molecules at a
liquid-solid interface. The ultimate goal of this research program is to develop
solid catalysts that have an active site – the location of chemical reactions on
a catalyst – that is structurally understood. Solid catalysts are used
ubiquitously in the chemical industry but understanding how they function is
significantly challenging. Only with knowledge of the active site structure on a
molecular level can one develop hypotheses on how to improve reactions. In this
project, active sites made of palladium will be installed on the surface of
silica (the primary component of sand and glass) to synthesize solid catalysts,
and their activities and mechanisms of action will be investigated. This
research program sits at the interface of organic and inorganic chemistry and
homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysis and has the potential to contribute to a
more sustainable future. Students working on this project will benefit
intellectually and practically because of the interdisciplinary nature of the
research. Mentorship, immersion of high-school students in chemistry labs, and
increasing diversity, equity, and inclusion through outreach are also parts of
the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heterogeneous catalysis is vital in the
chemical industry, where it is used in &gt;90% of chemical processes. These
catalysts are integral to sustainable practices, since they are robust and
recyclable. Improvement of heterogeneous catalysts is often empirical and is
hindered by a lack of structural understanding of the active site, precluding
informative mechanistic studies. This project utilizes surface organometallic
chemistry to control the structure and reactivity of metal sites on surfaces,
specifically palladium sites supported on silica. There are three Aims: 1)
Surface-supported (silyl)Pd(H) species will be formed and their reactivity as
catalysts for alkene isomerization will be tested; 2) Oxidative addition of
silyl halides to palladium complexes will be investigated; 3) Cationic, surface-
supported palladium sites will be synthesized, and their catalytic activity in
the Diels-Alder reaction will be demonstrated. In addition to the research
goals, there are several complementary educational goals: 1) educate through
effective mentorship, 2) increase representation in STEM, and 3) increase
awareness of contributions of chemists from underrepresented and marginalized
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.