* 2238257
* CAREER: Towards Self-Sustainable Wearable Systems Design for Mobile Health Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Ganapati Bhat, Washington State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 06/30/2028
* USD 207,762.00

Wearable technology has the potential to transform the quality of human life by
enabling cost-effective, reliable, continuous, and data-driven monitoring of
users in non-clinical settings. Continuous monitoring of user activities and
vital signs is exciting, as it can expose health issues otherwise difficult to
perceive in an office visit. Indeed, wearable devices have been identified as a
key technology to support the aging United States population by the White House
National Science and Technology Council. Despite the impressive potential of
wearable technology, its widespread adoption in clinical and everyday settings
has been limited due to user comfort, usability, and energy sustainability
challenges. This CAREER project proposes to resolve these challenges through
three closely integrated research aims: 1) A wearable design kit to
automatically design comfortable and usable wearable systems as a function of
the user, clinician, and application requirements; 2) self-sustainable wearable
devices through energy harvesting and management from ambient sources such as
light, body motion, and heat; 3) algorithms and methods to enable reliable
health applications for continuous health monitoring. The successful outcome of
these objectives will help wearable devices achieve their full potential in
transforming the quality of human life and healthcare. The project will also
generate new knowledge and insights into the design of wearable systems and,
more broadly, Internet of Things devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The widespread
adoption of wearable devices enabled by this CAREER project will have two
significant impacts on public health: (i) High-precision monitoring and
management of diseases in free-living environments; and (ii) reduction in
healthcare costs due to a reduced need for clinical visits. The integrated
educational component of this CAREER project will train a strong and diverse
multidisciplinary workforce to handle future challenges in computing system
design and automation. One of the key educational goals of the project is to
improve science and mathematics learning for children with disabilities to
increase their participation in the science and technology workforce. The
project also includes an ambassador program to involve students from community
colleges in Washington to recruit underrepresented students into Washington
State University (WSU) programs. Results from this CAREER project will be widely
disseminated through publications in conferences, journals, and open-source
packages for use by the community. The project will also engage with the public
through outreach programs that explain research outcomes and showcase the
benefits of wearable systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.