* 2238190
* CAREER: Establishing the mechanistic role of differential phosphorylation in regulating viral life-cycle processes
* BIO,MCB
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Jodi Hadden-Perilla, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Ishita Mukerji
* 01/31/2028
* USD 340,220.00

Over the course of their life cycles, viruses must execute a number of processes
to successfully hijack a host cell. This project investigates the regulation of
these processes in two different viruses. Understanding of this regulation
process in greater detail will allow researchers to use it to exert control over
viruses, both to inhibit viral infection and to re-purpose viral structures for
biotechnology. To ensure that viruses have the tools necessary for these
processes while still maintaining a small genome, some viruses encode protein
domains that have multiple functions. Intrinsically disordered protein (IDP)
domains, for example, change shape to perform different functions. This project
investigates a key mechanism enabling IDP domains to switch between functional
shapes, which is modification of the protein with phosphate, a process called
phosphorylation. The project will also engage multiple under-served populations
and motivate them to learn more about viruses and how computers are used to
study them through different types of outreach activities. Researchers will
develop software to enable students who are blind to participate in
computational biophysical chemistry, update undergraduate courses with hands-on
computational biophysics modules to improve interdisciplinary training of
biochemists, and leverage crochet to engage students, adults, and non-scientists
alike in learning about virus structure and
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phosphorylation has been implicated as a key
regulator of capsid function in viruses, but the molecular determinants of this
phenomena have not been elucidated. For example, hepatitis B virus (HBV, a human
virus that infects liver tissue) and Brome mosaic virus (BMV, a plant virus that
infects cereal crops) capsids both contain multi-functional IDPs that undergo
differential, reversible phosphorylation. It is hypothesized that variable
phosphorylation patterns control the conformational ensembles of the IDPs.
However, owing to intrinsic disorder, atomistic structures of the IDPs have not
been resolved, impeding characterization of structure-function relationships.
This project will use atomistic modeling and molecular dynamics simulations to
establish the role of phosphorylation patterns in regulating specific RNA
recognition for genome packaging, the mechanism and timing of intracellular
trafficking signal display, and interactions required for the infiltration of
host organelles, namely the nucleus for HBV and the endoplasmic reticulum for
BMV. By cataloging the effects of phosphates on viral IDPs in terms of
conformation, dynamics, and binding interactions, we can begin to establish the
rules of phospho-regulation as utilized by viruses for genome encapsidation and
host cell manipulation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by
the Molecular Biophysics Program of the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences
Division in the Biological Sciences Directorate and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.