* 2238209
* CAREER: The interaction of deficits in cellular regulation and divergent parental environments to postzygotic isolation in hybridizing milkweeds (Asclepias)
* BIO,IOS
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2028
* Carrie Olson-Manning, Augustana University Association
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 05/31/2028
* USD 768,732.00

This project will study how cellular regulation affects the reproductive
barriers between two milkweed species in different environments. Understanding
this is important because it sheds light on the ways in which species adapt to
their environments and how they interact with each other. The project will use
field experiments, genomics, and metabolomics analyses to explore the effects of
hybridization and genetic and environmental perturbation on gene networks and
cellular metabolism. This project will contribute to our understanding of
cellular mechanisms, genetic incompatibilities, and the ways in which species
interact with each other in different environments. This knowledge will be
valuable in predicting how climate change and human activities might affect the
relationships between different species. The broader impacts include engaging
K12 students in South Dakota in research experiences and providing educational
opportunities for underrepresented students. Finally, the project will develop
an undergraduate Bioinformatics curriculum that focuses on quantitative
reasoning and programming skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate how intrinsic and extrinsic reproductive barriers contribute to
species isolation by examining the cellular regulatory dysfunction in hybrids of
two milkweeds, Asclepias syriaca and A. speciosa. The study will focus on
identifying the cellular regulatory networks and stress-response metabolism of
each species in parental environments and characterizing the diversity of hybrid
cellular expression and its impact on fitness. The research will be conducted
through RNA-sequencing and quantification of stress metabolites in root and leaf
tissue. The broader impacts are integrated into the research with experiments in
common gardens at K12 schools across South Dakota to quantify the relative
contributions of pre- and postzygotic barriers to reproductive isolation.
Further integration of the scientific and educational aims will include the
development of an undergraduate Bioinformatics curriculum that focuses on
quantitative reasoning, modeling, and simulation, and applying the process of
science via programming in R. This research will contribute to understanding
gene interactions and the types of incompatibilities that arise during species
isolation, which will become increasingly important as climate change and human
disturbances shift species ranges and bring previously isolated species into
contact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Integrative
Ecological Physiology program (IEP) in Integrative Organismal Systems, the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the
Evolutionary Processes (EP) program in the Division of Environmental
Biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.