* 2238672
* CAREER: Electronic Transport in Sulfide-Based Lithium Solid Electrolytes
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Fudong Han, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 02/29/2028
* USD 244,275.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Lithium-ion batteries have succeeded in powering
portable electronics, but they face the challenges of safety and energy density
for applications in electrification transportation and grid storage. Solid-state
batteries that utilize nonflammable solid electrolytes (SEs) are being
considered as a promising approach for safe and high-energy storage systems. As
an electrochemical energy storage system, a lithium-ion battery works in a way
that only ions shuttle between cathode and anode through an electrolyte inside
the battery while electrons flow through the external circuit during charge and
discharge. The electrolyte should have a high ionic conductivity but low
electronic conductivity to ensure that the electrons cannot travel directly
inside the battery to cause self-discharge. Significant efforts have been
devoted to improving the ionic conductivity of battery SEs. However, the
electronic conductivity, which has important implications in the life-time,
energy density, and cycling stability of solid-state batteries has rarely been
studied. This CAREER proposal aims to study the mechanisms of electronic
transport in sulfide-based Li solid electrolytes. The ultimate goal is to gain
critical scientific insights for designing electronically insulating SEs for
high-performance solid-state batteries. The multi-disciplinary research provides
multiple opportunities for training graduate and undergraduate researchers. The
project involves curriculum development and pedagogical innovations for teaching
charge transport in solids, and includes multiple outreach activities to K-12
students, particularly those from historically and traditionally
underrepresented groups. The proposed research is expected to be impactful with
respect to the maintenance and advancement of the US battery technology
leadership and achievement of the Nation’s strategic goal of full
decarbonization by 2050. The education efforts are also expected to be helpful
for STEM education and workforce development in the field of energy storage.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This hypothesis-driven
proposal aims to understand the mechanisms of electronic transport in sulfide-
based lithium solid electrolyte (SEs), including binary Li2S-P2S5, Li10GeP2S12,
and Li6PS5Cl. The research goals of the project are to determine the intrinsic
electronic conductivity of Li SEs, reveal their voltage dependence, and identify
the dominant causes and charge carriers for the electronic conduction in Li SEs.
These goals are achieved through a combination of experimental and theoretical
approaches, including synthesis of ceramic SEs with controlled composition,
crystallinity, and microstructure, advanced and in-situ electrochemical
measurements based on the Hebb-Wagner approach, and theory of defect equilibria
and transport for minority carriers in mixed ionic and electronic conductors.
The proposed research is expected to provide critical insights to understand
defect chemistry and transport of electronic carriers in sulfide-based Li SEs
and establish design principles of electronically insulating SEs for high-
energy-density, long-calendar-life solid-state batteries. This proposal aims
also to implement an innovative approach for the introduction of “solid state
ionics (SSI)” – i.e., transport and reactions of ionic and electronic defects in
solids – to students in the field of electrochemical energy storage. SSI play a
critical role in the discovery and domination of lithium-ion batteries, but the
instruction of SSI-related topics has been primarily focused on oxide-based
materials in the context of fuel cells for energy conversion applications.
Another educational goal for the proposal is to develop a learning module with
the aid of virtual reality technology for teaching three-dimensional, tortuous,
and anisotropic charge transport in solids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.