* 2238571
* CAREER: Landscape genomics of co-evolution: a test in carpenter ants (Genus Camponotus) and their microbial symbionts
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2028
* Joseph Manthey, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Hughes
* 04/30/2028
* USD 862,082.00

Interactions with positive impacts for both organisms—mutualisms—shape the
ecology and evolution of many taxa. Across a landscape, evolution of mutualists
may be shaped by environmental characteristics; however, little research has
quantified how co-distributed mutualist pairs exhibit similar or different
coevolutionary dynamics across the landscape. Using co-distributed North
American carpenter ants and their mutualist microbial symbionts, the researchers
will quantify whether mutualist pairs with overlapping geographic ranges are
codiversifying and coevolving in similar manners, as measured by convergent or
divergent genetic patterns. Consequently, this project will provide insight
about how environmental pressures shape evolutionary patterns and processes in
mutualists. The specimens, genomic data, and results generated by this project
will be used to improve STEM education; educational components include (1)
formal undergraduate and graduate training in genomics research, (2) development
and expansion of research-focused genomics and molecular ecology courses at
Texas Tech University, and (3) museum-based educational materials at the Museum
of Texas Tech University, including both an exhibit and educational traveling
trunks. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will test hypotheses about
comparative patterns of codiversification and coevolution and their
predictability in ant hosts and their endosymbionts. Using whole-genome sequence
data from carpenter ant hosts (genus Camponotus) and their endosymbionts (genus
Blochmannia) across the landscape of North America, the researchers will measure
genetic variation in both mutualist partners to (1) characterize associations
between ant / symbiont genotypes and the environment using landscape genomics
techniques and (2) test hypotheses about coevolution of ant and endosymbiont
genomes and whether coevolutionary local adaptation is predictable. The
project’s final products will include deposition of thousands of specimens in
natural history collections, open genomic resources for several species of
carpenter ants and their bacterial endosymbionts, science communication of
results via presentations and manuscripts, and student training in all aspects
of the research including field studies, genomic sequence generation,
bioinformatics, and dissemination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.