* 2238563
* CAREER: Diazaborine-Based Tools and Platforms for Mapping Intra- and Extracellular Peroxynitrite
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Dylan Domaille, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 03/31/2028
* USD 334,434.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes program in the Division of
Chemistry, Dylan Domaille from the Colorado School of Mines is studying the
development of new fluorescent compounds and materials to track peroxynitrite in
cellular systems. Peroxynitrite is a potent oxidant produced by live cells that
can damage biomolecules like DNA and proteins. However, peroxynitrite is
challenging to track in complex biological systems without interference from
other compounds because of its high reactivity and short lifetime. Dr. Domaille
will develop a new chemical ‘switch’ that reacts selectively with peroxynitrite.
This chemical switch will activate the fluorescence of another compound,
yielding a new class of fluorescent probes that illuminate where and when
peroxynitrite is produced by cells. In pursuit of these goals, undergraduate and
graduate students will learn synthetic chemistry, fluorescence spectroscopy, and
live-cell fluorescence microscopy. In a complementary, two-pronged, educational
program focused on scientific communication, undergraduate students will learn
how to present information and ideas varying from scientific data to
biotechnological pitches to a broad range of audiences, including professional
scientists, student peers, and high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project will pursue the synthesis and evaluation of diazaborine-based
intracellular fluorescent probes for tracking peroxynitrite with resolution that
makes possible measurement in different cell compartments. New imaging platforms
will also be developed to track extracellular peroxynitrite with spatial
fidelity in pursuit of single-cell extracellular metabolite imaging. These tools
will be used to understand how peroxynitrite profiles change in response to
mechanical cues (e.g., stiffness, viscoelasticity, etc.) that are present in
living tissue but are not captured in traditional cell culture. The proposed
work aims to a) establish diazaborines as peroxynitrite-specific motifs; b)
invent new technologies for imaging intra- and extracellular peroxynitrite; and
c) understand how mechanical cues impact intra- and extracellular oxidative
metabolite profiles. Results from this program are expected to provide a
foundation for the development of peroxynitrite-specific diazaborine-based
chemical tools for imaging and, in the longer term, drug
delivery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.