* 2238770
* CAREER: Automated physics-based distillation of coherent structures and mechanisms in unsteady and turbulent flows
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2027
* Scott Dawson, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 11/30/2027
* USD 409,735.00

Identifying and understanding the fundamental mechanisms that sustain unsteady
and turbulent flows is important for ensuring accurate prediction and effective
optimization and control across a broad range of applications, such as for
reducing drag on aerodynamic vehicles, improving efficiency in wind energy
harvesting devices, and improving patient outcomes via cardiovascular flows.
While we have a good understanding of such mechanisms for simple flows, new
tools will be required to obtain similar levels of understanding for a broader
range of applications of real-world relevance. This project will develop methods
that enable such mechanisms to be identified in an automated and unambiguous
manner, with minimal data and computational requirements. These technical
developments will be coupled with educational and outreach initiatives involving
the research community, university students in coursework and research, K-12
students, and members of local community groups on Chicago's South
Side.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will develop two central ideas
to address the challenge identified above, with an overall goal of developing a
methodology to isolate dominant coherent structures and mechanisms in an
unambiguous, automated, and computationally efficient manner. The first idea
involves applying sparsity-promoting methods to physics-based modeling tools to
uncover minimal-physics models without needing the human insight and/or trial-
and-error that would otherwise be required. The second idea considers methods to
approximate the behavior of these mechanisms using analytic rather than
numerical methods, leveraging ideas from wave-packet pseudo-spectral theory.
This formulation in turn enables additional analysis methods conducive to
studying a broader class of mechanisms, in particular allowing for highly
nonlinear behavior to be modeled. To demonstrate their utility, these methods
will be applied on a range of fluid flows, including incompressible and
compressible parallel shear flows, flows with secondary mean flow components
induced by sidewalls, and cardiovascular flows with more complex geometries. An
improved ability to identify and manipulate the coherent structures that exist
within turbulent flows can benefit a broad range of applications, with the
potential to decrease friction drag on air, sea, and ground transport vehicles,
increase the efficiency of wind turbines, and enhance understanding and
treatment of cardiovascular diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.