* 2238564
* CAREER: van der Waals Semiconductor Integration via Surface and Interface Tailoring
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Sidong Lei, Georgia State University Research Foundation, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 04/30/2028
* USD 412,868.00

As the post-10 nm era approaches, further shrinking of silicon microelectronics
turns out to be more difficult and less beneficial. Instead, van der Waals
semiconductors (vdW-S) with atomic thickness become the leading candidates to
further boost the trajectory of Moore’s law. After the successful synthesis of
wafer-scale raw materials, the next milestone on this roadmap is the
implementation of vdW-S integrated circuits with smaller sizes, higher density,
faster speed, and lower energy consumption. However, established methods for
bulk material integration, such as silicon, lead to performance degradation,
high heat generation, and many other issues in vdW-S. Therefore, new fundamental
principles and practical methods are in urgent need, and this project is
designed to fill this gap. Considering the ultra-thinness of these emerging
materials, their electronic properties are typically decided by the surface and
interfacial conditions. With this entry point, the project makes efforts to
explore surface/interface tailoring methods and study the corresponding
electronic effects for the purpose of vdW-S integration in both planar and
three-dimensional (3D) configurations. As a case study, a novel 3D active pixel
image sensor (3D-APS) built upon the as-developed principles can provide better
color-sensing accuracy, miniature device size, and higher sensitivity than
conventional counterparts. As such, it showcases the transformative impacts of
this project on a broader scope of applications, such as medical imaging,
machine vision, and environmental survey. Along with the research, this project
emphasizes the educational responsibility, especially for the underrepresented
minority groups in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics, leveraging
the advanced status of Georgia State University (GSU) as a minority-serving
institute. Graduate and undergraduate students, particularly minority students,
receive systematic training in modern material science, electrical engineering,
semiconductor process and characterization technologies, instrumentation design
and manufacturing, and many more skills. In this process, they build their
capabilities and career trajectories as next-generation workforces. The team
shares the research experience and achievements via seminars, conferences, and
publications, to bring nationwide impacts of this project. Regular open houses,
K-12 school visits, and popular science activities are arranged to broadcast the
latest research progress to our community, raising public awareness of modern
science and technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The very large-scale integration
(VLSI) of vdW-S devices is the next essential topic for their practical
applications in computing, communication, medication, and other fields. But the
long-standing challenges in selected area doping, contact resistance management,
material stability, and characterization methods block the pathway toward these
goals. In this regard, this project is arranged to systematically and profoundly
investigate the solutions to these problems, and substantially promote the
planar and 3D integration of these emerging semiconductor materials. The primary
research activities include the following aspects. (i) The project insightfully
comprehends the charge doping effects and stability of a surface modification
reaction introduced by the PI, in order to facilitate a gentle, precisely
controllable, and non-destructive selected area doping approach for planar vdW-S
integration. (ii) Conventional metal-to-vdW-S inter-tier contacts are replaced
by newly developed direct vdW-S-to-vdW-S (v-v) contacts with conditioned
interfaces, which provide a scalable and low-resistance solution for inter-tier
connections in 3D integrations. (iii) The research activities leverage the home-
built in-situ and non-invasive electrical and optical characterization systems
to examine the devices’ stability and performance with convinced accuracy and
precision. Beyond that, the 3D-APS delivered by this project can exhibit rich
system-level physical and electronic behaviors that otherwise are intangible
from single device-level studies, and in turn, deepen the understanding of the
synergistic cooperation mechanism in complex vdW-S frameworks. The prototype
devices also inspire succeeding innovations of high-performance
microelectronics, as core functional units in future VLSI with smaller sizes,
higher integration density, faster speed, and lower energy
consumption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.