* 2238096
* CAREER: Generation and detection of large-scale quantum entanglement on an integrated photonic chip
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2028
* Xu Yi, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew McCune
* 01/31/2028
* USD 450,315.00

Quantum information and quantum computing have long established revolutionary
promises, such as exponential speedup of difficult to near-impossible
computations. They can be directly applied to attack some of society’s biggest
challenges through modeling atoms and molecules, such as nitrogen fixation for
fertilizer production, room-temperature superconductivity, and pharmaceuticals.
It has been recognized that millions to billions of raw qubits are required to
realize practical, universal, and fault-tolerant quantum computing. Yet there
exists no established paradigm for building such highly scalable quantum
systems. Therefore, achieving scalability and maintaining high coherence at a
large scale are two of the central challenges to quantum information processing.
Many existing quantum systems, like superconducting qubits and trapped ion
qubits, are scaled up qubit by qubit due to the lack of multiplexing: one has to
fabricate N more physical structures to add N more qubits. Thus, to further
increase the number of qubits is exponentially challenging because of the power
of the compound yield rate. Quantum optics provides a promising alternative
thanks to its capability of photonic multiplexing in spectral, temporal, and
spatial domains, meaning that a large number of quantum modes in frequency,
time, or spatial domain can be generated with just a few devices. In order to
reach the next step, quantum-integrated technology must become a reality, where
a massive number of photonic elements are integrated to process the large number
of quantum modes. This proposal aims to develop methods for large-scale
multipartite entanglement generation, where all critical elements, including
entanglement generation and detection, will be integrated on the same chip. The
proposed work can open up new avenues in the fields of quantum computing,
networking, and sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed effort aims to
develop methods to generate large-scale multipartite entanglement states with
integrated photonic circuits. The approach is based on high-Q optical
microresonators, where hundreds of longitude optical modes with their
frequencies separated by free-spectral-range will serve as frequency multiplexed
quantum modes to encode quantum information through the continuous-variable
approach. Unconditional entanglement among the quantum modes will be created by
the Kerr parametric process in microresonators and quantum interference among
different microresonators. To pursue “quantum experiment on a chip,” balanced
photodiodes with high quantum efficiency will be heterogeneously integrated with
the entanglement generation chip, which will minimize excess loss and phase
fluctuation between quantum state generation and detection to preserve the
quality of entanglement. This project will not only create a quantum leap in the
scale and quality of multipartite entanglement generated with integrated
photonic circuits, but more importantly, it will be a significant step forward
in the miniaturization and applicability of continuous-variable quantum optics
and push the state-of-art for applications in quantum computing, communication,
and sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.