* 2238423
* CAREER: Probability and Mathematical Statistical Mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2028
* Philippe Sosoe, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Wilmer
* 06/30/2028
* USD 17,764.00

Probability theory is the mathematical study of random processes. Mathematical
statistical mechanics uses probability methods to understand physical phenomena
such as transitions from solid to liquid and gaseous phases of matter, or the
flow of fluid through a porous medium. This project will focus on two central
problems in mathematical statistical mechanics relating to (a) distances in
random landscapes and (b) the large scale behavior of a simplified model of a
phase transition on high-dimensional lattices. Educational activities will
include training of graduate students, organization of a summer school, and the
development of probability and statistics learning materials suitable for
teaching adults in correctional environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first
direction of research will be investigation of universal fluctuations in
stationary Kardar-Parisi-Zhang models using robust coupling techniques, focusing
especially on interacting diffusions and polymer models. The goal is to
investigate the extent to which coupling methods apply to general models
expected to lie in the KPZ class. A first step will be the study, via analytic
methods, of triangular systems relating to multi-path extensions of the
O'Connell-Yor semi-discrete polymer, and their scaling at the edge of the limit
shape. A second objective is the construction of scaling limits in high
dimensional percolation, including joint scaling limits of distances in high
dimensional percolation. One goal is to obtain the joint scaling limit of
distances to the origin for collections of points at macroscopic distance. This
is expected to match the corresponding limit for branching random walk. Another
scaling limit of interest is that of the cluster measure. These investigations
will be enabled by cluster extension and decoupling techniques akin to those
existing for 2-dimensional percolation, but which nonetheless rest on completely
different mechanisms in high dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.