* 2238235
* CAREER: Atmospheric-Pressure Manufacturing of Nanocrystalline Diamonds by Plasma-Assisted Flat Flame Vapor Deposition
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Lili Cai, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 01/31/2028
* USD 500,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will support research that
will establish new knowledge of an atmospheric-pressure manufacturing process
for nanocrystalline diamonds with well-controlled thermal, electrical and
optical functionalities. Nanocrystalline diamonds are a class of carbon
nanomaterials possessing prominent properties for a wide range of energy,
semiconductor, biomedical and quantum applications. However, the current state-
of-the-art approaches to fabricating nanoscale diamonds rely on either very
high-pressure or low-pressure processes and lack scalability and
controllability. These deficiencies stem from a lack of fundamental knowledge in
atmospheric-pressure process required for high throughput, scalable
manufacturing. The new approach will provide an economically viable platform for
continuous, large-scale manufacturing of high-quality nanocrystalline diamonds.
The success of this research project can advance a variety of technologies that
have strategic importance to the U.S. national welfare and defense, including
thermal management, energy conversion and storage, nanoscale sensing, biomedical
imaging, quantum computing. The education and outreach activities will
contribute to broadening the participation in STEM education and strengthening
the next-generation workforce for solving societal challenges, particularly in
the field of advanced manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The flame vapor
deposition methods have the capability to synthesize nanocrystalline diamonds at
atmospheric pressure. In contrast to the low-pressure or high-pressure processes
that are operated in a batch-by-batch manner with long downtime for loading and
unloading samples, the atmospheric-pressure flame synthesis approach shows great
promise for continuous production that is more efficient and cost-effective for
up-scaling to large quantities and large areas. To advance the atmospheric-
pressure manufacturing of nanocrystalline diamonds, the research work will
investigate the coupling of flame vapor deposition and plasma, with the
hypothesis of two synergistic effects that can be made by flame-plasma coupling:
1) improving the growth rate, uniformity and stability for scaling up, and 2)
increasing the in-situ doping efficiency for controlling the functionality of
nanocrystalline diamond. The project will take a combined experimental and
modeling approach to advance the understanding of the controllability and
scalability of plasma assisted flame vapor deposition process, study the in-situ
doping capability, and develop a continuous, atmospheric prototype with in-line
quality diagnosis for manufacturing functional nanocrystalline diamond materials
and devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.