* 2238701
* CAREER: Safeguarding Smart Homes: A Foundation for Building User Privacy-Enhancing IoT Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Dong Chen, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 07/31/2028
* USD 229,784.00

People are increasingly deploying Internet of Things (IoT) devices to enable
smart home automation. Unfortunately, network traffic data generated by these
devices can contain sensitive information that may be exposed through malicious
artificial intelligence (AI)-based privacy attacks. Current defense approaches
do not adequately consider these emerging “smart” attacks. This project aims to
address challenges in understanding and defending against these new AI-based
attacks through a data-driven, privacy-friendly IoT management framework that
enables people to understand and manage the leakage of in-home information. This
project will investigate new techniques for enhancing smart home user privacy.
Specifically, this project will (1) develop new AI-based privacy attack models
to better understand privacy vulnerabilities; (2) build novel, low-cost, and
distributed traffic reshaping approaches to safeguard user privacy; and (3)
design new AI-based optimization methods for adapting the reshaping profiles to
mirror real-world user behavior, further safeguarding privacy. The outcomes of
this project will serve as a foundation for building IoT systems that enable
people to have greater control over data collection and sharing. The three
technical innovations being pursued will be prototyped and validated through
real-world experiments in mock smart homes, as well as within industry
collaborators’ laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific outcomes of the
research will include a family of algorithms, mechanisms, and prototypes that
will advance the state-of-the-art in strengthening IoT security and privacy for
smart homes, an area that has received relatively little attention, despite the
rapidly growing smart home market. This project will also develop IoT
cybersecurity summer workshops for Colorado public middle/high school teachers,
with a recruitment emphasis on districts with significant populations of Black,
Brown, and Indigenous People of Color. Hands-on course modules developed on IoT
systems, cybersecurity, and AI will be used to train K-12, undergraduate, and
graduate students. This project will also conduct computer science outreach
events at local elementary, middle, and high schools to guide the next
generation of IoT cybersecurity and AI researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.