* 2238030
* CAREER: DeepCertify: Data-driven Formal Approach to Safe Autonomy
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Chuchu Fan, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 01/31/2028
* USD 99,417.00

Providing safety and reliability assurances for data-driven methods is urgently
needed as Machine Learning (ML) and Neural Networks (NN) perform more tasks in
real-world autonomous systems. However, ML-based approaches for decision-making
largely lack appropriate methods for certification. In the meantime, rigorous
model-based approaches based on Formal Methods, control, and programming
languages have made fundamental contributions to developing many reliable
hardware and software systems and can provide rigorous guarantees.
Unfortunately, these rigorous approaches cannot scale to today's complex
critical systems. The projects’ novelties are to combine the effectiveness of
data-driven methods and the rigor of formal approaches. The project is
developing a novel set of certifiable data-driven technologies for the control,
design, and risk analysis of highly challenging autonomous systems. The project
is investigating theoretical and algorithmic foundations of the methods,
integrating them into a unified design automation framework, and evaluating
their capability thoroughly in advanced simulation environments and on practical
hardware platforms. The project’s impacts are 1) addressing the insufficiency
and poor scalability of existing methods and enabling the design and analysis of
new systems that existing methods cannot support; and 2) allowing the deployment
of NNs in various real-world systems in a safe, reliable, and resilient way.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's intellectual merit is redefining how to
provide rigorous certificates at different levels of computation for highly
complex autonomous and cyber-physical systems. Specifically, the project is
focusing on 1) Developing novel data-driven control methods that can handle
highly complex systems beyond the capability of traditional model-based
approaches. The methods will provide the resulting closed-loop systems with
mathematical certificates for safety, robustness, and resiliency, which are
often missing in pure data-driven approaches. 2) Developing novel data-driven
design methods that enable end-to-end optimization of the full autonomy stack
and provide certificates of robustness by performing program-level symbolic
sensitivity analysis. 3) Exploring stochastic verification methods based on
Hamiltonian mechanics to develop novel strategic sampling methods to increase
rare case appearances in training samples. The methods can reduce unforeseen
behaviors in executions and improve the sampling efficiency of the data-driven
methods. The investigator is working closely with industry partners to transfer
research results and use their real-world problems/data to generate challenging
research problems. The investigator is disseminating the project's results
through multiple channels, establishing the permanent identity of safe autonomy
in top AI/ML and Formal Methods conferences, and promoting diversity in top
engineering programs. The investigator is creating a new course, incorporating
all results and resources in this project into the course and making them
publicly available. The investigator has a concrete roadmap to integrate women
and underrepresented minority undergraduate students into research activities
through the MIT undergraduate research opportunities program, MIT summer
research program and the long-term collaboration of the MIT Office of Minority
Education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.