* 2238372
* CAREER: Dynamics of Searching for Equilibria
* CSE,CCF
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Simina Branzei, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 03/31/2028
* USD 254,553.00

Competitive and Nash equilibria are key economic concepts that describe systems
with multiple interacting players, each with its own incentives. These concepts
have diverse applications, from informing peace agreements and the design of
labor markets to giving insights into biological processes. The competitive and
Nash equilibrium notions are static, while dynamics may better reflect scenarios
where players are continually adapting to the current state of the world. The
goal of this research is to study new fundamental questions in the space of
dynamics, games, and learning. The research is inspired by applications such as
designing efficient and equitable markets on online platforms and devising
mechanisms for allocating waste. The project is interdisciplinary, bringing
together tools from game theory, algorithms, complexity, dynamical systems,
economics, optimization, machine learning, probability, and statistics. The
project includes course development and training for graduate and undergraduate
students, organizing a series of workshops, and forming a computer science and
math club to help bring together the student
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Concrete research directions include: (i) Market
dynamics, where computationally bounded players with local information only
interact over time. Are globally efficient allocations likely to be reached,
despite each player optimizing locally? Will the market grow/shrink? (ii)
Incentives in learning, focusing on games where even a few players are learning
together but have different incentives that can influence their actions. What
algorithms should the players use? (iii) Local search, which models processes
such as best response dynamics in congestion games. A high-level question is:
How is the geometry of the graph related to the complexity of local search? By
answering questions in this space, the research will contribute to the
theoretical foundations of games, learning, and dynamics while also providing
insight into motivating applications. The project will also include organizing
workshops on Games and Learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.