* 2238831
* CAREER:  Molecular mechanisms, algorithms and software for design and analysis of genome perturbation experiments
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Yury Pritykin, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Gao
* 05/31/2028
* USD 164,495.00

Genome editing technology using CRISPR (which stands for Clustered Regularly
Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats) has transformed life sciences and is
among the most influential inventions in modern biology. CRISPR can be used for
guided edits of selected genomic targets. Multiple variants and extensions of
CRISPR are actively being used by researchers for editing, knockout, activation
and inhibition of genes and genomic elements for studying cell function and
identification of important cellular regulators. Computational algorithms and
software for experimental design are essential for continued successful use of
the CRISPR technologies. However, fundamental molecular mechanisms and optimal
parameters of efficient and targeted use of CRISPR technologies across entire
genomes are not fully characterized. Limitations in current computational
methods for design and analysis of CRISPR experiments include lack of complete
unbiased genome-wide information about CRISPR off-targets across biological and
experimental contexts, across cell types and across CRISPR variants; lack of
specificity to genomes and genomic variants across individuals, cohorts and
populations; and incomplete understanding of biases in results of CRISPR
experiments caused by off-targets. These limitations present barriers for wider
adoption of CRISPR technologies in life sciences and biomedicine. This project
is devoted to overcoming these limitations and developing new computational
methodology for design and analysis of CRISPR experiments. Fully integrated with
this research plan, an educational and outreach program will be developed in
order to involve undergraduate and high school students into open collaborative
computational biology research. This work will substantially lower the bar for
using CRISPR technologies across a wide range of applications and will inform
the development of the next generation of such technologies. Implementation of
this educational and outreach plan will make entering research careers in
bioinformatics and computational biology substantially more accessible for the
next generation of students, and will encourage wet lab biologists to obtain
computational biology training and to productively collaborate with
computational scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
address major challenges in CRISPR low- and high-throughput experimental design
and analysis via a combination of computational and experimental approaches. New
high-throughput cell type-specific data on genome-wide CRISPR guide RNA on-
target and off-target efficiency will be generated and then aggregated into new
models of CRISPR efficiency and specificity. New algorithms and software will be
developed for generalizable and customizable design, analysis and interpretation
of CRISPR genome perturbation experiments across contexts, by incorporating
results of the analysis of the newly generated experimental data. Integrated
with this research, an educational and outreach program and a specially designed
online platform will involve undergraduate and high school students into open
collaborative computational biology research, with specific introductory set of
research problems about design and analysis of CRISPR experiments. All the
results from this project will be available at
https://pritykinlab.github.io/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.