* 2238653
* CAREER:  InteractiveRF:  Fully-Adaptive, Physics-Aware RF-Enabled Cyber-Physical Human Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Sevgi Gurbuz, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Continuing Grant
* John Taylor
* 04/30/2028
* USD 110,875.00

As technology advances and an increasing number of devices enter our homes and
workplace, humans have become an integral component of cyber-physical systems
(CPS). One of the grand challenges of cyber-physical human systems (CPHS) is how
to design autonomous systems where human-system collaboration is optimized
through improved understanding of human behavior. A new frontier within this
landscape is afforded by the advent of low-cost, low-power millimeter-wave radio
frequency (RF) transceivers, which can be exploited almost anywhere as part of
the Internet-of-Things, smart environments, and personal devices. RF sensors
provide a unique, information rich dataset of high-resolution measurements of
distance, direction-of-arrival, and micro-Doppler signature in a non-contact,
non-intrusive fashion in most weather conditions and in the dark. This CAREER
project aims to pave the way for new and innovative RF-enabled CPHS applications
in service of society and a better quality-of-life by transforming current
fixed-transmission RF sensors into intelligent devices that can autonomously
respond to human and environmental dynamics to optimize CPHS performance. Due to
the burgeoning commercial sector utilizing radar across a variety of fields,
such as transportation, health and human-computer interaction, this project
features integrated academic preparation for multi-disciplinary, convergence
research at both undergraduate and graduate levels to educate a new generation
of engineers with experience in RF sensing, machine learning, signal processing
and CPHS applications. Through K-12 outreach activities and recruiting at local
historically black colleges and universities (HBCUs), this project will enrich
and motivate students to study STEM fields, laying the foundations for a diverse
and globally competitive STEM workforce for the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project simultaneously addresses
critical challenges currently limiting effective exploitation of RF sensors in
CPHS, such as the problem of RF data scarcity for training deep models, the wide
range and continuity of possible human movements, the presence of other people
and obstacles, and the dynamic nature of real-world scenes. Specific
contributions include the development of 1) physics-aware ML techniques that
leverage the domain knowledge embodied in models with data-driven deep learning;
2) spatio-temporal parsing techniques to extract and recognize human signal
components from RF data streams to improve robustness of RF-CPHS under real-
world conditions; and 3) a new task-cognizant, fully-adaptive RF sensing
framework to improve performance and robustness of RF-CPHS for varying tasks in
dynamic real-world environments. The proposed fully-adaptive RF framework also
paves the way for collaborative, multi-modal RF-CPHS by exploiting information
learned from RF and other sensor modalities in its decision
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.