* 2238486
* CAREER: Learning Kernels in Operators from Data: Learning Theory, Scalable Algorithms and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Fei Lu, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Jodi Mead
* 06/30/2028
* USD 81,452.00

Learning kernels/functions in operators from data is a new frontier that bridges
computational mathematics, inverse problems, statistical inference, and machine
learning. Such operator learning problems arise in various applications in
disciplines such as physics, biology, engineering, economics, and hydrography.
These kernels/functions represent the intrinsic physical laws of interactions
between particles or the inherent structures of the operators. Thus, they are as
fundamental as the physical laws of gravity in physics, shredding insight into
models in their applications. Therefore, it is paramount to construct robust
convergent estimators when the data size increases to reveal the intrinsic laws
that are not sensitive to the data. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop a unified computational approach for the nonparametric learning of
kernels/functions in operators from high- or infinite dimensional data, and the
products are scalable algorithms with performance guarantees in a unifying
variational framework. It will study four groups of applications where the goal
is to recover the kernels/functions in PDE operators, non-Markovian processes,
state-space models, and weighted convolution operators. Notably, a systematic
learning theory, covering identifiability and regularization, will address the
challenges from nonlocal dependence and high-dimensional data. Furthermore, this
theory builds the mathematical foundations for a general framework, making the
algorithms and theory applicable to inverse problems far beyond those studied in
this proposal. Finally, the research will be integrated into undergraduate and
graduate teaching in multiple disciplines, promote the fundamental role of
computational math in statistical/machine learning, and provide many research
opportunities for graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.