* 2238629
* CAREER: Water-Soluble Metallofullerene Derivatives with Defined Structures and Tailorable Functions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Jianyuan Zhang, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* George Janini
* 06/30/2028
* USD 430,000.00

WIth support from the Macromolecular, Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN)
Program of the Division of Chemistry, Jianyuan Zhang of Rutgers, The State
University of New Jersey and his team will synthesize and structurally
characterize water soluble endohedral metallofullerenes (EMFs) and explore their
potential utility. EMFs are nanometer-sized soccer ball-shaped carbon molecules
that encapsulate metal ions within their cages. Electronic, energy, quantum
materials, catalysis, electronics, and biotechnologies are potential
applications where EMFs show promise. However, realizing their full potential
will require a better understanding of their behavior in aqueous solution.
Typical approaches to making water-soluble EMF derivatives do not yield
structurally defined molecules; they invariably disrupt the structure of the EMF
cage and downgrade its electronic properties. This project will use a modular
synthetic approach to create a family of water-soluble EMFs with precisely
defined structures and study the correlation between their structural parameters
and electro-optic properties. In the course of conducting this project, students
will be trained in a multidisciplinary research environment. Active learning
techniques with real world experiments that are integrated with the research
results will be developed. Outreach activities targeting a diverse population in
local community colleges will be carried out to introduce economically
disadvantaged and underrepresented students future career paths in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will utilize a modular
“metallobuckytrio” (MBT) platform that was recently developed in the laboratory
of the principal investigator. The MBT platform, which consists of two
metallofullerenes covalently bonded to one C60 fullerene, allows the synthesis
of a family of structurally defined water-soluble EMF derivatives with desirable
properties via judicious selection of ligands. Three research aims will be
pursued. In Aim 1, saccharide-functionalized ligands will be introduced to
enhance the T1 relaxivity of gadolinium (Gd) MBTs for the next-generation MRI
contrast agents. In Aim 2, porphyrin-functionalized ligands will be introduced
and photo-induced charge separation and recombination processes of the resulting
porphyrin-fullerene tridecads will be investigated. In Aim 3, dye-functionalized
ligands will be introduced to form synergistic photosensitizers with potential
long term scientific impact in photodynamic therapy
(PDT).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.