* 2238812
* CAREER:  Developing albumin-binding responsive polypeptides for nucleic acid delivery
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Fuwu Zhang, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 12/31/2027
* USD 137,488.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Nucleic acid-based drugs have been
identified as an effective treatment for various diseases including cancer,
viral infections, and genetic disorders. This was highlighted by the use of
messenger RNA (mRNA) vaccines during the Covid-19 pandemic. Due to the intrinsic
physicochemical properties of nucleic acids, including negative charges, high
hydrophilicity, and susceptibility to enzymatic degradation positively charged
delivery carriers are typically required to successfully exert their functions.
However, most of the current carriers suffer from unsatisfactory toxicities and
low delivery efficiencies. This limits the widespread use of nucleic acid
therapeutics in a clinical setting. This CAREER project proposes innovative
approaches to developing biologically friendly, safe, and effective nucleic acid
delivery carriers. These polypeptide-based carriers are less toxic and can
effectively deliver nucleic acids to diseased sites. The structure of the
polypeptide will be systematically investigated for optimized efficacy. Protein-
binding molecules will also be used to further reduce the carrier’s toxicity
along with an increase in delivery efficiency. This project provides critical
insights into the development of biomaterials for nucleic acid delivery and many
other biomedical applications in disease treatment. Integrated with the research
effort, the principal investigator proposes a series of educational projects to
help K-12 students understand chemistry and science. This program aims to train
graduate and undergraduate students, particularly women and underrepresented
minorities, in the field of biomaterials, and ultimately contribute to the
development of the next-generation STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2:
TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project aims to develop safe and
effective polymeric delivery carriers for nucleic acid therapeutics, including
small interfering RNA (siRNA) and messenger RNA (mRNA). siRNA and mRNA are a
class of “information drugs” with far-reaching therapeutic potential and have
been investigated for the treatment of various diseases, including cancers,
viral infections, and genetic and metabolic disorders. However, broad clinical
adoption of nucleic acid therapeutics has been challenged by the fact that
nucleic acids are unstable and cannot efficiently cross cell membranes besides
being immunogenic. To tackle the challenges of nucleic acid therapeutics for
clinical adoption, this project is dedicated to the development of albumin-
binding responsive polypeptides that have minimal toxicity. Therefore, these
polypeptides can carry, protect, deliver, and release nucleic acid into target
tissues and cells, with an emphasis on the delivery process. This will be
accomplished through two innovative approaches to reduce toxicity and improve
the effectiveness of nucleic acid therapeutics: 1) development of redox-
responsive polypeptides, wherein pendant cationic amines are connected via
disulfide bonds to polypeptide backbones; 2) conjugation of the albumin-binding
molecule Evans Blue to polypeptides (EBylation) to hitchhike endogenous albumin
for shielding and camouflaging the positive charge for minimal cytotoxicity and
immunotoxicity. This project seeks to systematically investigate the structure-
property relationship between responsive amine moieties and nucleic acid
delivery efficiency. Additionally, the effect of EBylation on nucleic acid
binding, cellular uptake, and transfection will be studied. The concept of
reversible protein binding will also be introduced to camouflage the self-
assembled materials for enhancement of biocompatibility and reduction of
undesirable interactions. This proposal will help prepare a diverse group of
undergraduate and graduate students to tackle social challenges and complex
scientific problems. It will be complemented with outreach activities and
efforts for students in K-12, ultimately contributing to the development of the
next-generation STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.