* 2238908
* CAREER: Mechanistic understanding of the nanoscale interactions of structurally tunable 3D assemblies of MXenes-polyelectrolytes
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Nader Taheri Qazvini, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 05/31/2028
* USD 623,243.00

Functional materials that predominantly absorb electromagnetic waves are desired
for several applications relevant to the security and prosperity of the United
States. These materials have a wide range of applications, including but not
limited to preventing the interference of aircraft digital instruments,
mitigating signal jamming, enhancing the performance of wireless devices, and
safeguarding control of electronics for power grid systems. Most of the
electromagnetic shields that are widely used at present rely mainly on
reflecting the incident waves, which can result in secondary pollution. This
Faculty Early Career Development project will combine experimental and
computational studies to investigate how the molecular interactions between
charge-containing polymers and two-dimensional carbides MXenes can be utilized
to create functional materials with tunable electromagnetic wave absorption.
This project will develop a science-based connection between the chemistry of
charged macromolecules and MXenes and the mechanisms by which they interact, and
form intricate, hierarchical nanoscale structures. In addition, this project
will provide opportunities for high school, undergraduate, and graduate
students, as well as STEM teachers, to engage in hands-on experiments and
workshops. The project also involves curriculum development related to the
synthesis, characterization, and application of hybrid functional materials
based on nanoscale interactions. Regional research symposia on two-dimensional
materials will also be organized to facilitate knowledge-sharing among the
broader scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integration of MXenes and
charged polymers within three-dimensional hybrid structures presents an enticing
prospect for developing hybrid materials with adjustable mechanical and
electrochemical properties. Nevertheless, creating such three-dimensional
assemblies can prove difficult due to the complex surface chemistry of MXenes,
which can result in uncontrolled interactions and, ultimately, aggregation. A
key challenge in the field of MXene nanomaterials is gaining a fundamental
understanding of these interactions and discovering methods to manipulate them
effectively. This CAREER project addresses this challenge by integrating
experimental and computational modeling through three interconnected research
thrusts. The first thrust focuses on comprehending the nanoscale interactions
between MXenes and polyelectrolytes, while the second thrust aims to exploit
these interactions to direct the 3D bottom-up assembly. The third thrust
involves the bottom-up structural modulation of electromagnetic wave absorption.
The dynamics of assembly and the development of morphology and composition will
be studied at multiple length scales. The regulation of morphology is
accomplished by managing the conformation of the adsorbed polymer chains on
MXene nanosheets, which controls the nanostructure of the MXene-polyelectrolyte
heterointerface. The impact of various molecular characteristics of
polyelectrolytes and MXenes, as well as hydrodynamic forces, on their
interactions at heterointerfaces and the assembly of MXenes-polyelectrolyte into
hybrid structures will be explored. This project will also demonstrate how
controlling the interface nanostructure can lead to the creation of hybrid
materials with improved microwave absorption, which arises from tunable
electrical conductivity and interfacial polarization. The fundamental knowledge
obtained from this research has the potential to inform the development of other
MXene-based hybrids for applications in antimicrobial materials and water
treatment. This project will integrate research, teaching, and outreach
initiatives to advance scientific innovation while educating and inspiring a
diverse, inclusive group of future STEM students and
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the CBET
Nanoscale Interactions Program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.