* 2238193
* CAREER: Sparse Sampling and Reconstruction for Rendering Through Per-Scene Optimization
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Nima Khademi Kalantari, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 06/30/2028
* USD 330,293.00

Computer graphics rendering is increasingly becoming an integral part of our
daily lives, in applications from product and architectural design to self-
driving cars, to cite just a few examples. In the context of rendering,
typically an image is generated through random sampling using what are known as
Monte Carlo (MC) algorithms, simulating how the photons emitted from the light
sources interact with the objects in the virtual environment and arrive at the
camera. Accurate reconstruction of an image, however, requires simulating a
large number of photons, making this approach costly in terms of computational
power and energy consumption. This project will dramatically reduce the number
of photons required to obtain a high-quality image, thereby significantly
reducing the cost. This objective is achieved by novel ways of finding high-
likelihood photon paths and by enhancing the quality of the image after
rendering. Project outcomes will have broad impact on applications such as those
mentioned above, as well as in areas beyond graphics that also rely on MC
integration. Educational and outreach activities will use compelling real-world
problems and concepts in computer graphics, particularly rendering, as
motivational tools to get people of diverse ages and demographic backgrounds
excited about STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will focus on
accelerating the convergence of MC rendering by developing novel methods that
operate during or after rendering. The two most common categories of methods
used in this setting are importance sampling (during) and
reconstruction/denoising (after). Unfortunately, the majority of existing
importance sampling techniques provide path guidance locally and thereby ignore
the model error on future points along the path. Moreover, current state-of-the-
art reconstruction/denoising methods use a neural network trained on a set of
noisy images and their corresponding ground truth, and the performance of these
methods on test images that lie outside the distribution of the training data
can be suboptimal. This project addresses these challenges by introducing novel
frameworks that view these problems in a fundamentally different way. The
specific research objectives are twofold: (1) To guide the paths according to
distributions that are estimated in an error-aware manner, which requires
introducing a global objective function that takes the entire path into
consideration. (2) To design denoising systems that can be adapted to the test
example at hand, by posing the denoising problem as an optimization problem and
developing novel objectives that work effectively without the need for ground
truth images.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.