* 2238552
* CAREER: Governance of Computer Models in Sustainable Water Quality Management
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Theodore Lim, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 04/30/2028
* USD 58,810.00

Computer models are used to understand and manage nearly every aspect of modern
life and are increasingly embedded in organizations and institutions. However,
despite scientific data inputs, modeling is heavily influenced by social and
political factors. This is especially true in the management of our most
pressing environmental problems, in which there are many diverse actors and
conflicting values and interests. Through in-depth analysis of international
water quality management organizations, this project addresses the process of
how models are made and how this process can be improved through better “model
governance” – the rules and processes adopted within an organization to shape
individual and group actions around how models are developed and used. Better
understanding of model governance will improve how science is used in
environmental policies. The project is developing workshop materials for
practitioners, as well as novel undergraduate and K12 experiences to link the
fields of environmental science and policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project’s
overall objective is to build a quantitative meta-model that can predict future
states of a scientific model. The project is identifying the parameters,
conditions, and processes that how actors and governance structures shape model
development. The overall objective is supported by three interconnected
activities: (1) systems dynamics modeling, (2) comparative case study, and (3)
education, outreach, and engagement that will inform future iterations of the
meta-model. The project is solidifying an integrative theory of model
governance, comprising both a qualitative framework and quantitative
operationalization. Improved computer model governance will transform
understanding of science-based environmental policy, including building public
trust in computer models and reducing uncertainty that is created by social and
political factors embedded in models. The quantitative meta-model will create a
key link for modular social-ecological systems modeling: that of how the
knowledge embedded in the computer models that organizations use for decision-
making is updated in an iterative and adaptive way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.