* 2238946
* CAREER: Stereochemical Biomimicry for Sustainability
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Konrad Krakowiak, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 05/31/2028
* USD 698,187.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award addresses a pressing issue
in construction materials technology, namely the design of durable cementitious
materials with low defect sensitivity and high long-term structural integrity.
The functionality and resiliency of our built environment heavily depend on the
performance of concrete, a widely adopted material in practical applications.
However, the high population of microstructural defects in concrete and the
environment's catalytic factors diminish the effectiveness of existing
technologies against crack nucleation and growth. Thus, concrete structures'
durability and longevity are continuously challenged. This project will enable
stereochemical biomimicry pathways through which robust organic-inorganic nano
additives and cementitious composites are created. Inspired by nature, this
research will couple short-chain organic molecules with an inorganic calcium-
silicate-hydrate (C-S-H) to reduce the disparity between concrete's tensile and
compressive strength, achieve superior toughness, and decrease inherent porosity
and material permeability. In partnership with chemical, biomolecular and
computational materials scientists, this research resorts to state-of-the-art
experimental methods to discover new synthesis processes of hybrid materials
with enhanced or novel physical and chemical properties and to promote progress
in engineering science. Inclusive science communication and evidence-based
outreach activities will engage an audience of all ages, from K-12 students and
undergraduates to U.S. Veterans, especially belonging to historically
disadvantaged groups, to prepare them to participate in a future STEM workforce
capable of meeting emerging technological challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is
established that living organisms use organic molecules and stereochemical
recognition to fabricate complex materials characterized by robust
physicochemical and mechanical properties. Inspired by this process, the
overreaching goal of this research is to unravel the stereochemical biomimicry
principles that govern interactions between short-chain functionalized organic
molecules and C-S-H. The combined computational and experimental approach will
test the following central hypothesis: the interfacial stereochemical effects
dictate the nanoparticle nucleation, growth, and self-assembly path in reactive
colloidal cement systems. Thus, this award addresses knowledge gaps in three
areas: (a) the resolution of stereostructural and energetic binding motifs
between the C-S-H and organic molecules; (b) understanding the molecular-scale
mechanism, thermodynamic, and kinetic control variables regulating C-S-H
nucleation, growth, and texture stabilization in relation to the molecular
architecture of the organic modifier; and (c) discovery of stereochemical
pathways of C-S-H self-assembly in confined cement environment. Resolving these
knowledge gaps will allow the rational design of modifiers for targeted
interaction with C-S-H, and engineering biomimetics concrete with reduced defect
sensitivity, thus enhancing toughness and long-term structural integrity. This
project will enable the PI to advance the knowledge base in materials science,
colloids physics and chemistry and to establish his long-term career in
engineering biomimetic of infrastructure materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.