* 2238682
* CAREER: Fine-Grained Complexity and Algorithms for Structured Linear Equations and Linear Programs
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Peng Zhang, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Brass
* 01/31/2028
* USD 109,463.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;Linear equations and linear programs are ubiquitous in
computational mathematics, engineering, machine learning, and data science, and
they are powerful primitives for developing various algorithmic paradigms.
Unfortunately, the currently best-known algorithms for solving general linear
equations and linear programs run in super-quadratic time, which can be
prohibitively slow for modern large-scale datasets. In practice, however, many
linear equations and programs exhibit additional structures that enable
significantly faster solvers. This project aims (1) to identify and classify
structures that can accelerate solving linear equations and linear programs and
those that can not and (2) to understand how fast we can solve general linear
equations and linear programs. Another major part of this project is to provide
multi-disciplinary education and research training for graduate, undergraduate,
and high school students and to broaden the participation of women and
underrepresented students in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
aims to study fine-grained complexity and algorithms for structured linear
equations and structured linear programs and focuses on three major goals. The
first goal is to establish ``equivalent`` classes for structured linear
equations and linear programs so that if we can solve one problem fast, we can
immediately solve all the problems in the same equivalence class equally fast.
The second goal is to develop efficient solvers for structured linear equations
and linear programs that arise commonly from practice. Examples include
generalized Laplacians with additional geometric structures, dense instances
such as kernel matrices, and random instances. Finally, the third goal is to
better understand the time complexity of general linear equations and linear
programs. For example, can we solve general linear equations and linear programs
faster than matrix multiplication? What are the runtime lower bounds under the
Strong Exponential Time Hypothesis?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.