* 2238135
* CAREER: Quantum spin liquids meet spintronics: Theory of probing quantum spin liquids with spin Hall effects
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* So Takei, CUNY Queens College
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 07/31/2028
* USD 230,000.00

NONTEHCNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research at the intersection of quantum magnetism and spin-electronics (also
known as spintronics) with a general aim to find spin-sensitive probes of a
class of materials known as quantum spin liquids, in which the atomic spins
perpetually fluctuate rather than order in a fixed configuration. This strongly
disordered spin configuration of quantum spin liquids endows them with a range
of unusual and potentially beneficial properties including the possibility of
offering a platform that may realize quantum computation. One of the challenges
in the field is that experimental results on candidate quantum spin liquid
materials often show conflicting results or lend themselves to multiple
theoretical interpretations. It is, therefore, important to develop novel
methods that examine and characterize candidate quantum spin liquid materials.
With the support of this CAREER award, the research team will address this issue
by integrating concepts and experimental techniques from spintronics with those
of quantum magnetism and propose novel probes of these materials. By
contributing to the discovery and characterization of quantum spin liquids,
outcomes of this project may, in the long run, enable new technologies in
quantum communication and computation, and help create opportunities in numerous
aspects of modern life, including drug design, weather forecasting, and
logistics optimization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports
educational and outreach activities that are aimed at contributing to the growth
of the US STEM workforce and broadening participation within it. The PI will (i)
mentor doctoral and undergraduate students in their research, (ii) deliver
annual webinars on spintronics at the New York Academy of Sciences Afterschool
STEM Mentoring Program and provide research mentoring for New York City middle
and high school students from underrepresented demographic groups, and (iii)
develop a computational spintronics course for Queens College undergraduates and
create a doctoral course on nonequilibrium quantum many-body systems for the
City University of New York graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TEHCNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research at the
intersection of quantum magnetism and spintronics with an aim to offer new
pathways to realize spin-sensitive probes of quantum spin liquids. The PI and
his team will theoretically analyze spintronics-inspired devices to (i) develop
a dynamical probe of quantum spin liquids based on spin Hall effects, (ii)
quantify spin transport through the Kitaev quantum spin liquid using spin Hall-
based spin injection and detection, and (iii) analyze the nonequilibrium
behavior of an open Kitaev quantum spin liquid in the presence of spin Hall-
based spin current injection. The concepts underlying the proposed probes are
universal: such probes can be applied to all quantum spin liquids. Activities
supported by this CAREER award will thus fuel the birth of a new line of
research that investigates how spin-sensitive probes based on spintronics
phenomena can facilitate the experimental identification and characterization of
quantum spin liquids. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports educational
and outreach activities that are aimed at contributing to the growth of the US
STEM workforce and broadening participation within it. The PI will (i) mentor
doctoral and undergraduate students in their research, (ii) deliver annual
webinars on spintronics at the New York Academy of Sciences Afterschool STEM
Mentoring Program and provide research mentoring for New York City middle and
high school students from underrepresented demographic groups, and (iii) develop
a computational spintronics course for Queens College undergraduates and create
a doctoral course on nonequilibrium quantum many-body systems for the City
University of New York graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.