* 2238198
* CAREER: Groups Acting on Combinatorial Objects
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Katarzyna Jankiewicz, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2028
* USD 79,239.00

This award supports research in geometry and topology, and more specifically in
the area of geometric group theory, which studies the connection between the
geometry of an object, and the properties of the group of its symmetries. The PI
will study certain groups of symmetries of combinatorial objects. Examples of
such objects include trees, i.e. collections of nodes and edges, each connecting
a pair of nodes, which contain no closed loops. Other examples are finite
dimensional polyhedral complexes, which can be thought of as shapes built out of
polyhedral blocks of arbitrary dimension, such as cubes or tetrahedra. The PI
will explore the connection between the geometry and topology of those objects,
the dynamics of the action of their symmetry groups, and the algebraic structure
of the symmetries. The project also has educational components. The PI will be
involved in the initiative “Women in Groups, Geometry, and Dynamics” and will
organize workshops facilitating collaborative learning and research experience
for early career female researchers in those areas. Secondly, the PI will
organize an invited speaker series at her institution, focusing on various
careers of mathematicians in business, industry, and government. Finally, she
will continue her engagement in other professional activities, through
organization of conferences, workshops, seminars, development of a new graduate
course, and mentorship of a diverse group of students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
first research goal of the project is devoted to the study of actions of Artin
groups on CAT(0) spaces with the goal of establishing a rigidity of such
actions. In particular, the PI will focus on the braid group on four strands,
and classify its proper actions on CAT(0) cube complexes, as well as classify
its proper and cocompact actions on general CAT(0) complexes. In the second part
of the project, she will investigate the profinite aspects of complexes of
groups, and in particular of Artin groups. In the final part of the project, the
PI will study the subgroup structure of groups acting geometrically on a product
of trees, with the goal of constructing finitely generated infinitely presented
subgroups in such groups, establishing their
incoherence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.