* 2238360
* CAREER: Theoretical and Numerical Investigation of Symmetric Mass Generation
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2027
* Yi-Zhuang You, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 12/31/2027
* USD 230,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports research
and educational activities to explore novel quantum mechanisms that transform
metals into insulators by increasing the interaction strength between electrons
in such materials. In solid-state physics, the electronic structure theory
provides the standard description for metals and insulators, such that the
highest-energy electrons lie within an energy band for metals or in the band
gap, a forbidden zone, as is the case for insulators. In this theory,
transforming material from metal to insulator corresponds to a band gap opening
in the electron energy spectrum, which always requires a change in the symmetry
properties of the material to modify its band structure. This research aims to
study a different mechanism for the metal-to-insulator transformation that is
beyond the standard electronic structure theory in which the interaction and
subsequent correlated motion of the electrons play the central role. The novel
mechanism is called symmetric mass generation, which opens an excitation gap in
the electron many-body energy spectrum without any change of symmetry properties
â€” a phenomenon that is not explained by standard electronic structure theory.
Understanding this novel mechanism may have implications in classifying quantum
phases of matter in condensed matter physics and understanding the origin of
mass for fundamental matter particles in high-energy physics. This project will
investigate symmetric mass generation with an aim to address: (1) how
appropriate interactions can be designed to realize this phenomenon, (2) what
happens precisely as the metal becomes an insulator, (3) what are the unique
experimental signatures of the novel insulator that distinguish it from
conventional band insulators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational activity
focuses on retaining LGBT+ (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and other
gender and sexual minorities) students in physics by providing them with
research opportunities and increasing LGBT+ visibility on campus. The effort
will build a more diverse and inclusive academic environment that attracts
talented under served students to physics and contribute to developing a diverse
and globally competitive workforce in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports research and educational
activities to study a novel mechanism for the gap opening (mass generation) of
fermions in interacting quantum many-body systems, called the symmetric mass
generation. The mechanism is a non-perturbative interaction-driven gap-opening
effect that cannot be interpreted as a change in the single-particle band
structure. Symmetric mass generation provides a new mechanism for metal-
insulator transition beyond current band theory in condensed matter physics and
a new origin for fermion mass beyond the standard Higgs mechanism. This research
can advance the understanding of interacting topological insulators and
transform the frontier knowledge about mass generation. The research will
explore three related aspects: (1) the principle of designing appropriate
interaction to realize the symmetric mass generation insulating phase, (2) the
universal properties of the gap-opening transition under the symmetric mass
generation interaction, and (3) the effect of doping symmetric mass generation
insulators and the possibility to realize symmetric mass generation on the Fermi
surface in a Fermi liquid. The research will combine field theory, for example,
categorical symmetry, duality, monopole scaling, and dimension reduction, and
numerical simulation, for example machine-learning-assisted variational Monte
Carlo methods, to tackle scientific problems about symmetric mass generation.
The research outcome will advance the knowledge frontier of interacting
topological phases, strongly correlated materials, and lattice regularization
for chiral fermions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The educational activities will focus
on supporting and retaining LGBT+ (lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and
other gender and sexual minorities) undergraduates in physics and building a
welcoming local community for LGBT+ students/researchers at all levels. These
objectives will be attained by (1) providing mentored research opportunities to
the targeted group and (2) initiating and organizing a weekly tea-time social
event for LGBT+ students/researchers in Physics Department at
UCSD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.