* 2238990
* CAREER: Multitrack Read Channel Designs for Modern Two-Dimensional Magnetic Recording
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Elnaz Banan Sadeghian, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2028
* USD 269,025.00

This project develops efficient noise prediction, synchronization, and symbol
detection algorithms that support modern and future generations of ultra-high
density two-dimensional magnetic recording. Two-dimensional magnetic recording
is a novel technology in hard disk drives that allows a drastic increase in the
data density to up to 10 Terabits per square inch, on already-existing head and
media designs. This is achieved through shingled writing, where the adjacent
data tracks are written with partial overlap on top of each other, like roof
shingles, in order to squeeze many more tracks on the disk. Powerful signal
processing algorithms enable efficient data recovery from highly interference-
laden and noisy readback signals. This project investigates powerful signal
processing algorithms, from purely communication-theoretic to machine learning
models, and their combinations, for data recovery in such channels. The results
of this project are expected to increase the data density of two-dimensional
magnetic recording well beyond the current state-of-the-art. The project
integrates an educational component in signal processing and communication
theory in the form of 1) graduate student training, 2) research-oriented
undergraduate student education, and 3) collaborative participation with
industrial research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The novel elements of this project are
that: 1) it adopts a multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) model in accordance
with the industry expectation for low-latency implementation; 2) it develops
multitrack detection strategies as opposed to the current industry standard of
single-track detection, in order to reach higher areal densities as well as
throughput; and 3) in addition to considering all the channel impediments that
are often considered separately in earlier works, this project also addresses
the problem of timing asynchrony between the adjacent tracks and the analog-to-
digital converter sampling rate. To achieve the above goals, four research
thrusts will be pursued. In the first thrust, reduced-state redesigns of the
trellis-based multitrack symbol detectors will be investigated. The second
thrust develops media noise mitigation techniques for asynchronous multitrack
detection. Here, both the MIMO extension of the pattern-dependent noise
prediction algorithm and neural network noise predictor models will be studied.
In the third thrust, deep neural network symbol detectors will be developed,
both as a stand-alone joint symbol detector and synchronizer, as well as a joint
symbol detector and synchronizer coupled with a low-density parity check decoder
following the turbo detection mechanism. The fourth thrust develops novel read
channels built entirely of neural networks, both as a separate network equalizer
followed by a network symbol detector, and as a holistic deep neural network
read channel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.