* 2238568
* CAREER: Stable transformation of STEM identity by integrating cell cycle regulation with persistent infection in Agrobacterium
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Jason Heindl, Rowan University
* Continuing Grant
* Courtney Jahn
* 08/31/2028
* USD 50,000.00

This project will identify and detail relationships between how pathogenic
plant-associated bacteria grow and develop throughout their life cycle, how they
switch from associating with a host plant and being free-living in the soil, and
pathogenesis. In particular, this project uses “nature’s genetic engineer,”
Agrobacterium tumefaciens, as the model bacterium for study. Results from this
project will be applied to increasing the efficiency of using this organism to
genetically engineer and breed crops in a predictable, directed manner. Results
from this project may also be applied to basic research questions involving
genetic manipulation of a variety of plant species, providing a new set of tools
for understanding the genomics and evolution of multiple plant species. Finally,
results from this project may be applied to close relatives of Agrobacterium,
some of which are involved in beneficial relationships with their hosts and some
of which are potentially pathogenic to plants, livestock, and humans. This
project provides education and outreach activities that emphasize solidifying
the identity of first-generation and economically or racially minoritized
students as scientists. These activities include incorporating research
experiences into undergraduate coursework and supporting students and faculty
from nearby community colleges as summer research scientists in an active
research lab. Both of these sets of activities will have participants performing
hypothesis-driven experimental work in support of the research objectives of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to detail the
genetic framework governing cell cycle control in Agrobacterium tumefaciens and
how cell cycle control is modulated in ecologically relevant contexts,
contributing to persistent colonization. The central hypothesis tested in this
work is that in Agrobacterium the PdhS-DivK-CtrA regulatory pathway is a central
point of environmentally-responsive cell cycle regulation enabling efficient
host colonization, niche construction, and pathogenesis. The first research
objective will determine the molecular mechanism by which the PdhS sensor
kinases coordinately regulate CtrA activity, specifically exploring the in vivo
and in vitro interactions of protein components of this pathway. The second
research objective will catalogue the full suite of genetic loci under CtrA
transcriptional control using transcriptomics approaches. The third research
objective will quantify the contribution of PdhS-DivK-CtrA pathway activity to
niche construction and pathogenesis through competition assays during plant
infection. The rationale for this project is that it will establish the validity
of targeting cell cycle regulation to control plant colonization. This project
will contribute to our understanding of the ecological significance of observed
cell cycle changes during plant interactions in Agrobacterium and how such
changes are effected. This work will expand our mechanistic understanding of
cell cycle regulation in Agrobacterium, as well as how cell cycle control
integrates with other phenotypes. This work will enable follow-on work in
translational phytopathology, including development of new tools and targets for
manipulation of interactions at the host plant-microbe
interface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.