* 2238132
* CAREER: Taming the Terahertz for 6G Wireless Backhaul
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* John O'Hara, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 05/31/2028
* USD 500,002.00

An essential element of next-generation 6G wireless communications will be
wireless backhaul. Backhaul is the network link that moves massive data streams
at high speed between two points, supporting large subnetworks of mobile and
fixed-location users. Normally optical fibers carry backhaul data, but fiber
deployment is not always viable; wireless backhaul provides the high-speed
alternative and solution. 6G will be the first generation of widely deployed
wireless communication that has data rates comparable to fiber optics, heralding
important benefits to our nation and society. Rural and remote populations may
especially benefit from wireless backhaul, since it supports broadband
connectivity (helping to close the digital divide) where fiber deployment is
cost prohibitive. Wireless backhaul would also enable temporary high-speed
networks critical to operations in mobile military units, natural disaster
recoveries, or seasonal endeavors, such as smart and connected farming. Even the
fiber-dominated networks in urban centers may economically and logistically
benefit from the high flexibility and relatively low installation cost of
wireless backhaul segments. Further, 6G wireless backhaul will strategically
leverage the long-underutilized terahertz spectrum between 0.1-10 THz. Realizing
ubiquitous 6G networks will require much new research, but terahertz backhaul is
an important first step. The proposed work will utilize a combination of unique
experimental measurements, theoretical models, and new device designs to fill
knowledge gaps in the understanding of terahertz backhaul performance under
real-world conditions. The knowledge gained will establish the critical
foundations upon which future 6G systems can be intelligently engineered and
optimized. Moreover, this work will train a new generation of students, from
high school to graduate levels, inspired to work in electrical engineering and
capable of advancing the highly complex wireless communications and sensing
technologies in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To date, experimental
demonstrations of terahertz communication are still very rare, leaving numerous
scientific gaps in the holistic understanding of the impact of the atmosphere,
antenna pointing, weather, and turbulence, especially when employing the
backhaul requirements of ultrawide bandwidth and long distance. This dearth of
measurements further leads to an inability to properly validate comprehensive
theoretical models used in system engineering. The project goals and scope
involve three thrusts: 1. to measure real terahertz backhaul links and enable
gap issues to be studied and properly understood; 2. to use experimental
measurements as the validation standard upon which theoretical channel models
can be corrected and made more comprehensive; 3. to develop multi-functional
reflectarrays, which are devices that can actively correct – in situ – terahertz
communication problems such as antenna pointing, turbulence, and beam
distortion. The measurement method will rely on a unique NSF-funded suite of
terahertz systems that are purposely built to enable sensitive, long-distance,
ultrawide bandwidth operations, both indoors and outdoors. The theoretical
modeling will be extended to account for backhaul-unique properties, such as
ultrawide bandwidth, and to unify the various physical mechanisms into a single
comprehensive tool by which backhaul system behavior can be predicted in any
practical circumstance. Reflectarrays will be designed by advancing artificial
electromagnetic material concepts for backhaul specific purposes. These efforts
will enhance terahertz wireless communication knowledge, improve theoretical
models, and invent multi-functional devices that improve the power efficiency,
speed, versatility, and reliability of future 6G wireless
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Communications, Circuits and Sensing Systems (CCSS) Program and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.