* 2238712
* CAREER: CritComp Pop-Ups: A Research-Practice Partnership for Co-Designing and Implementing Critical Computing Elementary Education Curricula
* EDU,DRL
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2028
* Golnaz Arastoopour Irgens, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Toya frank
* 03/31/2028
* USD 606,135.00

Elementary school-aged children use and have interest in technologies with
integrated AI applications, yet they rarely critically investigate the
sociopolitical contexts in which people consume and produce AI technology.
Without engaging in this form of critical computing, elementary school students
will not be prepared to participate ethically in a digitally reliant society and
tackle the increasingly discriminatory affects of algorithmic decision-making as
they continue their schooling and careers. Moreover, there is still a limited
understanding on how elementary students apply critical lenses to computing and
few computing education programs are available that focus on sociocultural
issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project proposal will address these
research gaps by co-designing, implementing, and analyzing an innovative
critical computing education curriculum, referred to as CritComp Pop-Ups. The
research goals will be to (1) characterize co-design processes that involve
teachers, researchers, and students; (2) measure elementary school students’
critical computing knowledge and practices using quantitative ethnography; and
(3) evaluate the effectiveness of an AI critical computing curriculum on
students’ interest and confidence in computer science. The education goals will
be to 1) broaden participation in computing by engaging underserved students in
rural areas; (2) foster children’s interest in computer science through
culturally relevant instructional methods focused on AI; (3) provide elementary
school teachers with strategies for integrating critical computing; (4) host
critical computing community events; and (5) train undergraduate/graduate
students in research competencies and critical computing. The potential
contributions will be to (1) extend understanding of how elementary students
construct knowledge through a critical sociopolitical lens; (2) provide
researchers a framing for studies on critical computing education; and (3)
inform the development of critical computer science educational standards and
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project is funded through the
Racial Equity in STEM Education program (EDU Racial Equity). The program
supports research and practice projects that investigate how considerations of
racial equity factor into the improvement of science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) education and workforce. Awarded projects seek to center
the voices, knowledge, and experiences of the individuals, communities, and
institutions most impacted by systemic inequities within the STEM enterprise.
This program aligns with NSF’s core value of supporting outstanding researchers
and innovative thinkers from across the Nation's diversity of demographic
groups, regions, and types of organizations. Programs across EDU contribute
funds to the Racial Equity program in recognition of the alignment of its
projects with the collective research and development thrusts of the four
divisions of the directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.