* 2238768
* CAREER: Rethinking Replication in Highly Available and Reliable Data Stores
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Shuai Mu, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 04/30/2028
* USD 194,984.00

This project targets long-lasting and increasingly pervasive challenges in
building highly reliable and available distributed storage systems, which are
the key components in large-scale Internet services. The proposal aims to study
and address insufficiencies in current distributed storage system designs from
several important aspects including their abstraction, performance,
communication, and failure models. These insufficiencies typically arise from
the conventional designs in distributed systems that were not prepared for
today’s Internet scale. This research may produce a major impact on industry and
society because distributed systems are the cornerstones of modern computing
infrastructures such as cloud computing, serverless computing, and high-
performance computing. In particular, this work will be done in collaboration
with widely used distributed storage systems built in Microsoft, Google,
MongoDB, and Cockroach. The PI is working with their department to broaden the
course offerings with multidisciplinary courses in the general area of cloud
computing, distributed systems, reliable systems, and software engineering. The
PI will incorporate the topics in this proposal into the courses he is
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditionally, systems often use a method called
state machine replication (SMR) to achieve reliability. SMR is often treated as
an independent module, with a clear boundary such as a key-value interface
isolating it from the rest of the system. However, this creates problems in
today’s systems. For example, using SMR as a blackbox in geo-replicated systems
could incur a great performance penalty because each application request could
translate into multiple SMR operations and each operation takes at least a wide-
area round-trip to finish. This proposal summarizes four impediments of existing
systems from different aspects in practice (abstraction, performance,
communication model, and failure model), and proposes four research thrusts
targeting these impediments: 1) use transactional data structures to enrich the
abstraction layer between applications and the data store, 2) investigate
leveraging multicore resources to improve performance for geo-replication, 3)
study advanced SMR techniques under a more generalized communication model than
the status quo, 4) study tolerating a new failure model, silent data corruption.
The proposed work will develop a set of novel, transformative technologies,
including a new replicated transactional data structure library that supports
building general types of applications, other new system designs and
implementations for providing fast and consistent replication that will be
encapsulated in state-of-the-art research products and will dramatically improve
the performance and fault-tolerance of modern distributed
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.