* 2238860
* CAREER: Connecting Remote Atomic Quantum Registers via Entanglement
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Hannes Bernien, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 06/30/2028
* USD 205,331.00

The internet has revolutionized society, and a quantum internet would enable
further revolutionary advances based on information processing with profoundly
new capabilities. For example, a quantum internet could facilitate scaling up
quantum computers by linking modules together; it may enable new, more sensitive
measurement devices; and it would provide a platform for secure communication
based on quantum protocols. A key difference between classical and quantum
networks is that quantum networks will utilize quantum states with stronger-
than-classical correlations, called entangled states, that can be shared between
network nodes. To enable some of the most compelling applications, entanglement
will need to be distributed, stored, and manipulated at multiple network nodes.
This is a daunting challenge, as entanglement is quite fragile and the quantum
information encoded in entangled states is easily lost. This project will
develop new tools for quantum networking based on arrays of individually trapped
neutral atoms. The atoms will form a quantum register that can store
entanglement and process quantum information. Furthermore, two or more registers
will be linked by using a light-matter interface to distribute entanglement via
single photons. Demonstrating these capabilities will constitute an important
step towards building a quantum internet and will elucidate the physics and
engineering of entanglement distribution. This research program is integrated
with educational and outreach efforts to increase participation and awareness in
quantum science. The educational and outreach activities will highlight
demonstrations of quantum experiments in several
venues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arrays of individually trapped atoms have recently
become a promising platform for quantum information processing and quantum
simulation. This project will expand the range of applications for trapped atoms
by exploring new quantum networking methods. This project will combine arrays of
atoms with nanophotonic cavities that operate at telecom wavelengths to
facilitate long-distance entanglement distribution. Processing quantum
information within an array while generating entanglement between distant arrays
will enable several possible applications for quantum networks such as
distributed quantum computing, enhanced quantum sensing, and intercontinental
quantum communication. This team aims to make progress towards these
applications by demonstrating high-speed multiplexed entanglement generation
with rates that are much faster than the decoherence rate of the nodes, and
creating multiple entangled Bell pairs between registers that are separated by
50 kilometers. Techniques developed in this project can also expand the toolkit
for quantum simulation, for example, by using this approach to study condensed
matter physics models with quantum simulation architectures in which
interactions are mediated by photons in a photonic crystal
waveguide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.