* 2238639
* CAREER: Harnessing Heterogeneous Sources of Data and Artificial Intelligence for Informed Flood Management
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Erfan Goharian, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 09/30/2028
* USD 520,799.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project supports the nation's
research priority in climate adaptation through advancing scientific
understanding of urban and coastal floodings and establishing a new generation
of intelligent flood early warning systems and smart flood control
infrastructure. The project will address gaps in flood data availability and in
present-day flood modeling by harnessing heterogeneous data sources, such as
ground-based images and videos taken by traffic cameras, smartphones and drones,
to provide faster and more distributed flood timeseries data and visual
information. The use of multi-source, heterogeneous data, along with accelerated
flood modeling and data analytics, will support the transformation of existing
flood infrastructure into Active Flood Control Infrastructure through real-time
model updating, active measurements, and active flood management. The project
integrates research activities with educational and outreach plans to (i) train
the next generation of AI-enabled engineers and scientists, (ii) foster flood-
aware communities, and (iii) inform decision-makers by developing an integrated
looped learning framework consisting of four phases of flood modeling, planning
and response, behavioral analysis, and virtual reality gameplay and outreach.
The project will study two coastal watersheds in South Carolina, one dominantly
urbanized and the other natural, with potential transferability to other urban
and coastal systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Novel Artificial Intelligence and
image processing tools will be deployed to process different types of inputs at
different stages of flood management: data acquisition, flood detection,
monitoring, simulation, and forecasting. The research core of this project
revolves around the detailed design and development of an integrated modeling
platform consisting of Multi-Deep Learning Models (MDLM) for flood data
analysis, modeling, and management. In the data analysis phase, deep learning
models, alone or in combination with the reconstruction of a 3-Dimensional of
the study area, will be used to provide numerical data, such as water levels,
and inundation area, from ground-based images, and videos. Moreover, a multi-
source data fusion module will be developed to feed data from different
satellites and bands to a multi-branch deep learning network for flood detection
and feature extraction. In the modeling phase, this CAREER project will enhance
the understanding of compound flooding by developing a fully coupled model for
simulating coastal compound floods through the integration of distributed
hydrologic and surface hydraulics mathematical models into a single modeling
framework. Then, a set of machine learning-based surrogate models will be
developed to mimic the knowledge of fine-scale physics-based flood models and
provide timely flood predictions. Finally, this project will provide adaptive
design guidelines to turn existing infrastructure into active flood control
infrastructure through real-time model updating, active measurements, and active
flood management. New technologies and tools created in this project will allow
stakeholders, decision-makers, and the public to make choices regarding their
direct and indirect involvement pre-, peri-, and post-flooding and evaluate
their impacts using integrated numerical simulations and virtual reality
gameplay.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project is jointly funded by the
Civil Infrastructure Systems (CIS) and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR) programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.