* 2238940
* CAREER: Towards Open World Event Knowledge Extraction with Weak Supervision
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2028
* Lifu Huang, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 07/31/2028
* USD 222,802.00

Understanding events, such as who did what to whom, when and where, is one of
the fundamental human activities to learn about the changing world. The answers
to these questions underpin the key information conveyed in the overwhelming
majority, if not all, of language-based communication. However, current research
paradigm suffers from several shortcomings in extracting event knowledge from
the open world scenarios. In these scenarios, knowledge extraction from data is
limited to a few large domains (e.g., news or biomedical) or common languages
(e.g., English, Spanish and Chinese), because of the heavy reliance on the human
effort to contextualize data. This includes creating large-scale manual
annotations or defining the schematic templates for a few target event types.
This project aims to lay the foundation and establish new paradigms for open
world event knowledge extraction by developing new and more efficient algorithms
to extend the extraction capability to the wide range of scenario, while
requiring minimal human effort. This foundation should provide extensive
coverage of different event types and be easily adapted to emerging scenarios.
The success of this project will directly benefit users of the intelligent
information access systems. For applications that analyze emerging and trending
topics and events, such as natural disasters, national elections, protest and
disease outbreak, success of the proposed research will not only provide an
accurate and abstractive summary and easy access of each topic for humans, but
also allow analysts to better discover the participants of the events, the
cause, effects and temporal orders among them, and help discover more insights.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical aims of the project are divided into three
thrusts. Thrust 1 develops schema-guided event extraction approaches. This is
done by leveraging the knowledge from the complex target event schema, such as
the event type structures (i.e., type name and argument roles), hierarchy and
temporal/causal/part-whole relations among the event types, which provide
valuable guidance, especially when there is few to no annotations available.
While event annotations for most of the domains and scenarios are not existing
and extremely expensive and time-consuming to obtain, the large-scale unlabeled
in-domain data are usually accessible. Thus, Thrust 2 will further develops a
suite of more efficient and novel self-training strategies to make use of the
large-scale unlabeled data through self-supervision. In practice, there is even
no event type schema available to most of the domains and scenarios, such as
natural disaster or disease outbreak. Manually defining an event schema with
high coverage is extremely challenging and time consuming as it requires
background knowledge in both linguistics and the target domain, and humans need
to manually examine a large amount of in-domain data to determine the salient
event types. Considering these challenges, Thrust 3 further explores novel
solutions to automatically deduce the target event schema, including event
types, the roles of their participants, as well as their relations from the raw
text and extract their event mentions accordingly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.