* 2238175
* CAREER: Resolving Uncertainty Visualization Reasoning Errors with Mental Model Design and Training
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2028
* Lace Padilla, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 05/31/2028
* USD 86,508.00

People worldwide use data visualizations that show forecasts of future events to
decide how to respond to impending hazards. For example, television news
meteorologists often use visualizations of a hurricane's forecasted path to
inform the public about an approaching storm. Unfortunately, a large body of
research demonstrates that people misinterpret the most common methods for
visualizing uncertainty in forecasts such as these. This projectâ€™s goal is to
learn more about why people have difficulty using forecast visualizations and
how to create more effective ones. One key outcome of the project will be a
theory of uncertainty visualization literacy that will identify the skills
needed to effectively use visualized uncertainty and provide cognitively
informed rules for new visualization designs. This work will develop more
effective methods to convey forecast uncertainty, along with uncertainty
literacy training that will support the public in making informed decisions in
response to natural disasters and public health crises.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research plan includes a series of empirical studies to test competing
hypotheses, including a novel theory centered around integrating users' mental
models into visualization design and training. The new hypothesis predicts that
uncertainty visualization reasoning errors result from discrepancies between how
people conceptualize a forecast (a priori schemas) and how the visualization
presents the data (visualization-driven schemas). The first phase of this work
will create tools to reveal a priori schemas and visualization-driven schemas
using previously established cognitive methods for evaluating schemas. These
methods include analysis of participants' drawings, eye tracking, and memory
tests. In the second phase, the team will develop a measurement tool to
determine the relative distance between the two schemas, using a mapping
agreement unit based on methods developed in human factors, then use that tool
to empirically test the schema-based theory compared to alternative explanations
for reasoning errors when using uncertainty visualizations. In the third phase,
the team will use the winning approaches to develop visualization training and
new visualization designs of hurricane path forecasts and COVID-19 morbidity
projections as testbeds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.