* 2238953
* CAREER: Elucidating hydrodynamic drivers of microbial water quality in drinking water distribution systems
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2028
* Emily Garner, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 05/31/2028
* USD 414,627.00

Drinking water distribution systems (DWDS) are critical infrastructure that
protect public health by ensuring the safety of drinking water as it travels
from treatment plants to points of consumption. However, the quality of drinking
water can degrade as it flows through the extensive pipe networks of DWDS.
Growth of biofilms on the surfaces of water distribution pipes is a particular
concern as it is detrimental to water quality in various ways, including by
creating a protective environment capable of harboring pathogenic
microorganisms, accelerating the decay of disinfectant residual, facilitating
the formation of disinfection byproducts, and the release of compounds that
cause problems with taste, odor, and water discoloration. However, a fundamental
understanding of the relationships between pipe hydrodynamics, biofilm
properties, and water quality in DWDS has remained elusive. The overarching goal
of this CAREER project is to advance the fundamental understanding of the impact
of hydrodynamics conditions on the composition, structure, and stability of
biofilms that form on the surfaces of drinking water pipes. The successful
completion of this project will benefit society though the development of
fundamental knowledge to guide the management of DWDS with the goal of improving
both the quality and safety of drinking water at the points of consumption.
Additional benefits to society will be achieved through student education and
training including mentoring of one graduate and two undergraduate students at
West Virginia University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The formation and growth of
biofilms on the surfaces of drinking water pipes have a major impact on water
quality and safety in drinking water distribution systems (DWDS). The structure
and composition of the biofilms of water distribution pipes play a key role in
modulating the quality of drinking water at the points of consumption. There are
critical knowledge gaps in the fundamental understanding of these biofilms
including the impact of diurnal fluctuations in hydrodynamic conditions on their
structure, composition, stability, propensity for pathogen attachment/release,
and potential to induce/catalyze the formation of disinfection by-products
during water disinfection by chlorination or ozonation. This CAREER project will
address these knowledge gaps. The specific objectives of the proposed research
are to: 1) evaluate biofilm physical characteristics and associated attachment
and detachment of pathogens in DWDS in response to repeated variations in shear
stress during water flow; 2) assess the impact of variations in hydrodynamic
forces on the amount/composition of extracellular polymeric substances in
biofilms and associated impacts to water quality; and 3) investigate the effect
of variable hydraulic conditions on the formation of biofilms on sediment
surfaces in DWDS. The successful completion of this research has the potential
for transformative impact by combining controlled bench-scale experiments to
develop a mechanistic understanding of biofilms in drinking water pipes with the
analysis of samples collected from a full-scale drinking water distribution
system, and modeling to benchmark and validate the research findings. To
implement the educational and training goals of this CAREER project, the
Principal Investigator (PI) proposes to develop a new undergraduate course at
West Virginia University that will focus on decentralized wastewater treatment
technologies. In addition, the PI plans to develop and deliver an education
module entitled “Why Water Matters in Rural Communities” to K-12 students from
rural communities in West Virginia with the goals of increasing awareness of
water careers, promoting the recruitment of young professionals into local water
and wastewater apprenticeship programs, and advancing the recognition of the
essential role that water plays in supporting healthy and prosperous
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the CBET
Environmental Engineering program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.