* 2238897
* CAREER: Globalization, Social Stability, and Inclusion in Authoritarian Citizenship
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Samantha Vortherms, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* James I. Walsh
* 06/30/2028
* USD 103,639.00

CAREER: Globalization, Social Stability, and Inclusion in Authoritarian
Citizenship &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Economic globalization creates many
conflicting interests for governments that host multi-national corporations. In
democracies, governments often provide greater welfare and redistribution to
compensate groups harmed by globalizationâ€™s impact. In non-democracies without
well established interest group representation, however, much less is known
about how globalization affects both government provision of welfare and
protests driven by globalization-induced inequalities. This project seeks to
understand when foreign investment in authoritarian countries increases
government redistribution and how both international production chains and local
government policies drive or deter protests. The findings of the project will
help to better understand how authoritarian governments adapt to globalization
and the international business environment faced by multinational corporations
operating abroad. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has two specific goals. The
first goal is to identify the conditions under which economic globalization
increases access to authoritarian redistribution. Using text-as-data techniques
on government firm registration records and a representative survey of foreign-
invested firms in a matching model for time-series cross-sectional data, the
project disaggregates foreign direct investment to investigate the hypotheses
that market orientation of foreign-funded firms drives the generosity of welfare
redistribution through higher government spending, but skill-dependence of
foreign firms determines who gains access to redistribution. The second goal is
to identify the relationship between increased access to welfare redistribution
and incidents of social unrest. Using time-series cross-sectional models on
social media and non-governmental organization reports on social protests
including labor and social justice protests, the project identifies not only how
relative access to welfare redistribution relates to street protests, but also
if expanded access to welfare decreases social unrest. The findings of the
project will advance basic research on central questions relating to government
policy responses to globalization, the relationship of globalization to social
unrest, and the political economy of multi-national firms operating in
authoritarian countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.