* 2238310
* CAREER: Harnessing herbarium specimens to investigate effects of phenological shifts on plant-insect interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Emily Meineke, University of California-Davis
* Continuing Grant
* Kari Segraves
* 08/31/2028
* USD 680,134.00

The project will examine how climate change alters interactions between plants
and plant-feeding insects. In contrast to 100 years ago, plants today are
flowering and producing leaves earlier due to climate warming. Consequently,
many organisms that rely on plants are at risk if they cannot keep pace with
these changes in plant growth and flowering. The project uses new data sources
to examine the effects of climate warming for plants and their insect herbivores
which is one of the most diverse groups of organisms on earth. Insect herbivores
leave characteristic bite marks when they feed, and these marks can reveal the
species of insect that fed on a plant and how much plant tissue was eaten. These
bite marks can be seen on preserved plant samples. The project will use plant
collections from the past few hundred years to test how changes in the timing of
growth and flowering in plants have affected the insects that feed on them.
Specifically, the project will test whether earlier timing of plant growth and
flowering has led to new interactions of plant and insect herbivore species.
Understanding how insects respond to climate change is important for better
management of threatened species, agriculture, forestry, and conservation of
natural ecosystems. Data will be collected by undergraduate and graduate
students, and students will learn about insect herbivores by creating public art
that will be displayed at the experimental garden. Together, these efforts will
support student learning and scholarship through the lenses of art-science
fusion, climate change, and the importance of plant-insect herbivore
relationships in nature. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global environmental change is
reshuffling biotic communities with uncertain impacts on biodiversity. However,
long-term data describing the effects of global change on biotic communities are
rare and focus on a narrow set of clades, resulting in severely limited
datasets. The overall objective of this project is to determine recent effects
of climate change on understudied herbivore communities using data from two key
sources: herbarium specimens collected over hundreds of years and an
experimental garden mimicking past, current, and future climatic conditions. The
project will create a 'damage type guide' that will provide identification of
the insect causing the damage, thus facilitating collection of long-term
datasets. Through these data sources, this project will assess the potential for
novel species interactions resulting from changes in leaf emergence timing over
the past 100+ years of climate change. The experimental garden will be located
at the UC Davis Arboretum to provide an access point to the public into climate
change research. The project will also involve redesigning three courses at UC
Davis to focus on learning through art-science fusion and course-based
undergraduate research experiences. Students will share their knowledge via
creative engagement in K-12 classrooms and in the UC Davis
Arboretum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.