* 2238051
* CAREER: Transportation Network Maintenance under Climate Change, Resource Uncertainties, and Connectivity
* ENG,CMMI
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Kakan Dey, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 09/30/2028
* USD 540,000.00

This Early Faculty Career Development (CAREER) project aims to improve
transportation network maintenance with a focus on the growing severity and
frequency of natural disasters due to climate change, resource uncertainties,
and emerging data sources and implement an education program for next-generation
transportation engineers, high school students, and the existing workforce with
a focus on holistic thinking from a multidisciplinary perspective. Natural
disasters substantially compromise regional transportation network’s mobility
performance, reduce economic productivity, and create significant safety hazards
to travelers. Transportation agencies in the United States spend more than $2.3
billion annually for winter roadway maintenance alone. Systematic considerations
of the uncertainty of long-term regional weather patterns due to climate change,
maintenance resources, and new data sources can significantly improve the
resilience of a resource-intensive transportation network maintenance. This
project will lay the groundwork for transforming traditional static
transportation network maintenance operations into the next-generation data-
driven and dynamic program that will reduce transportation infrastructure
maintenance time and costs and minimize adverse societal impacts. The education
program will train next-generation transportation professionals and the existing
workforce and foster school students’ interest in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is
to advance the scientific discovery in transportation network maintenance
operations under growing climate change-induced adverse weather risks and
uncertainties for the formulation of a robust, efficient, flexible, and reliable
maintenance program. Advanced data-driven and machine learning-based emerging
network modeling and analysis techniques will be developed to advance the
understanding of the interrelationship between transportation networks and
maintenance demand uncertainties in a regional roadway network. This project
will formulate and solve scientific problems critical for (i) understanding the
dependency of different uncertainties in optimal maintenance activity center
configuration at a regional scale, (ii) modeling the roadway condition
observation location to improve the forecast of the transportation network
condition and traffic pattern for timely and effective roadway maintenance,
(iii) formulating the maintenance operations considering weather and resource
uncertainties in a data-intensive environment, and (iv) characterizing the all-
electric maintenance operations and charging infrastructure. The education plan
will apply the multidisciplinary principles of engineering problem-solving in
traditional civil/transportation engineering courses; prepare next-generation
engineers through multidisciplinary research and education activities; develop
and execute educational activities for K-12 to increase awareness about science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics disciplines and careers; and execute
outreach activities for dissemination of research
findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Civil
Infrastructure Systems (CIS) program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.