* 2238754
* CAREER: Manufacturing Soft Functional Composites through Mechanically Induced Assembly of Liquid Microstructures in Elastic Films
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Michael Bartlett, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 12/31/2027
* USD 590,600.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant supports research to
understand the fundamental processing-structure-property relationships that
govern continuous manufacturing and microstructural assembly of liquid metal-
based composites for a new class of soft, deformable, and robust functional
materials. Soft functional composites consisting of liquid metal droplets
dispersed in elastic solids have shown promising capabilities for self-healing
and stretchable electronics, soft robots, and thermal-interface materials for
portable devices. However, these composites are often created in a single batch
which limits scalability, and the processing dependence and underlying
mechanisms of how liquid metal inclusions deform and assemble during
manufacturing is not well known. This research will determine the fundamental
inclusion deformation mechanisms and quantify how liquid metal microstructures
in soft composites evolve during processing. This research has the potential to
guide the realization of new continuous manufacturing strategies for precise and
highly controlled mechanical, electrical, and thermal properties in functional
soft materials by tuning liquid metal inclusion morphology during processing.
The knowledge gained through this research will enable future innovations in
electronics and robotics, which benefits national economy and society.
Additionally, the research is paired with a broader outreach program and day
camp, with an emphasis on first-generation students in Southwest Virginia. The
outreach program is designed to engage, excite, and develop student interest and
skills in manufacturing, soft electronics, and robotics while highlighting STEM
career options.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of the research is to
determine the processing dependence, underlying mechanisms, and quantitative
microstructural origins of how liquid metal inclusions deform and assemble in
soft solids. This is achieved through a combination of controlled processing
strategies such as film embossing, tentering or stretching, and roll-to-roll
assembly with in-situ electrical characterization and synchronized micro- and
nano-computed tomography. This approach provides the processing-structure-
property relationships needed for the advanced manufacturing of soft composites
through mechanically induced assembly of liquid microstructures in elastic
films. The project aims to determine the fundamental liquid metal inclusion
deformation mechanisms and ensuing microstructures as a function of inclusion
size, shape, and volume loading. Soft functional composites with programmable
properties will be created through reconfigurable microstructures by controlling
droplet inclusion shape and connectivity during processing. This project will
provide insights on manufacturing and assembly of liquid structures within soft
elastic films, introduce new directions to control material properties through
reconfigurable liquid microstructures, and enable the design and manufacturing
of materials for soft electronics and robots.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.