* 2238064
* EAGER: Exploring intelligent services for managing uncertainty under constraints across the Computing Continuum: A case study using the SAGE platform
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Daniel Balouek-Thomert, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Thompson
* 09/30/2024
* USD 300,000.00

Advanced cyberinfrastructures seek to make streaming data a modality for the
scientific community by offering rich sensing capabilities across the edge-to-
Cloud Computing Continuum. For societal applications based on multiple geo-
distributed data sources and sophisticated data analytics, such as wildfire
detection or personal safety, these platforms can be incredibly transformative.
However, it is challenging to match user constraints (response time, quality,
energy) with what is feasible in a heterogeneous and dynamic computation
environment coupled with uncertainty in the availability of data. Identifying
events and accelerating responses critically depends on the capacity to select
resources and configure services under uncertain operating conditions. This
project develops software abstractions that react at runtime to unforeseen
events, and adaptation of the resources and computing paths between the edge and
the cloud. This research is driven by the unique capabilities of the SAGE
cyberinfrastructure as a case study to explore data-driven reactive behaviors at
the network's edge on a national scale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
proposes intelligent services to drive computing optimization from urgent
scenarios on large cyberinfrastructures. The project focuses on resource
management and programming support around three interrelated tasks: (1)
developing models for capturing the dynamics of edge resources; (2) researching
software abstractions for reactive analytics; and (3) addressing cost/benefit
tradeoffs to drive the autonomous reconfiguration of applications and resources
under constraints. The outcomes are intended to directly extend the SAGE
platform and provide artifacts for creating urgent analytics, which will benefit
SAGE users and the scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.