* 2238127
* CAREER: Pattern formation in singularly perturbed partial differential equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Paul Carter, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 05/31/2028
* USD 219,896.00

Spatiotemporal pattern formation appears throughout the natural world; examples
include the dynamics of vegetation patterns in dryland ecosystems, phase
separation in mixtures, and patterns in chemical reactions. Fundamental
theoretical questions concern identifying universal pattern-forming mechanisms
and predicting the nature and dynamics of the patterns which appear. This
project aims to address these questions through the study of pattern-forming
instabilities in the setting of partial differential equations (PDEs) arising in
models from biology, ecology, and chemical reactions. In particular, the project
focuses on the development of techniques to tackle pattern formation in PDEs
which are singularly perturbed; such equations arise naturally in the study of
systems where components operate on widely differing length or time scales.
Application areas include desertification fronts in dryland ecosystems, as well
as wave phenomena in mathematical biology and neuroscience. Included in the
project are activities which integrate research and education through the
supervision of graduate students as well as outreach programs and summer
research opportunities for undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project focuses on three primary research areas, with the goal of providing
insight into complex spatiotemporal pattern formation phenomena in singularly
perturbed reaction diffusion PDEs. Motivated by the phenomenon of
desertification fronts in dryland ecosystems, the first research area concerns
pattern-forming instabilities of bistable planar interfaces in multi-component
reaction diffusion systems. The second area aims to build a rigorous theory of
temporal pulse replication, by which a single traveling pulse (or localized
wave) self-replicates, sequentially nucleating additional pulses in a manner
resembling a spatiotemporal canard explosion. The third area is concerned with
the nature and properties of far-from-onset patterns formed in the wake of
pattern-forming invasion processes, whereby a pattern is nucleated when a
disturbance invades an unstable steady state. These research areas will grow and
advance the theory of far-from-onset pattern-forming mechanisms through the
development of geometric singular perturbation methods and spatial dynamical
systems tools to be used in the existence, stability, and bifurcation analysis
of waves and patterns. Several of the phenomena explored in this project occur
in regions where standard singular perturbation methods break down, requiring
the development of novel techniques. Graduate students and undergraduate
students will participate in various aspects of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.