* 2238852
* CAREER: Magnetic Resonance Characterization and Application of Carbon-Based Quantum Dots as Multimodal Chemical Sensors
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Nicholas Whiting, Rowan University
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 04/30/2028
* USD 225,838.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging Program in the Division
of Chemistry, Nicholas Whiting and his group at Rowan University are studying
small carbon-containing nanoparticles in order to broaden their application as
chemical sensors. These “carbon dots” are smaller than 10 nanometers in diameter
and possess extraordinary properties that permit their use as light-emitting
molecular “beacons.” Carbon dots also possess an important, yet underutilized,
characteristic that allows them to be detected using techniques that are
analogous to medical magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). The Whiting lab is
leveraging these magnetic resonance properties to improve the synthesis and
purification of carbon dots, as well as applying a specialized technique to
temporarily boost their magnetic resonance (MR) signals by several orders of
magnitude. These advances aim to diversify the types of systems that can be
studied using carbon dots by enabling both fluorescence and magnetic resonance
detection. In addition to increasing the recruitment and retention of female
STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) majors from
traditionally underrepresented populations, Dr. Whiting is also developing a new
curriculum that provides hands-on learning about magnetic resonance techniques
and guides students to effectively communicate science topics to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While carbon dots possess many advantageous optical
characteristics, the underdeveloped utilization of their inherent 13C MR
properties limits their potentially broad applicability. The Whiting group is
addressing this shortcoming by synthesizing 13C enriched carbon dots, using NMR
for particle structure determination, devising and evaluating sample
purification techniques. Furthermore, they are using dynamic nuclear
polarization to enhance the 13C NMR signals of carbon dots by several orders of
magnitude, enabling high-sensitivity MR-based chemical sensing in real time.
These approaches can then directly translate to other MR-active nanomaterials to
grow a versatile network of cross-disciplinary applications. The research
objectives are integrated into an educational plan that incorporates hands-on
student engagement with magnetic resonance techniques in the classroom and
guides students to effectively disseminate science topics to a lay
audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.