* 2238141
* CAREER: Towards Polarimetric Visual Understanding
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Jinwei Ye, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 06/30/2028
* USD 112,615.00

Polarized light is very common in our surroundings. As most visual inference
algorithms leverage the color and brightness of images, the use of polarization
in computer vision has not yet reached its full potential. This CAREER project
will study how the way surfaces reflect polarized light can be used to help
recognize objects more effectively. The project will address the following two
questions: How does the polarization of light change after interacting with
various types of surfaces? What can polarized light tell us about the kinds of
objects that it has interacted with? Addressing these questions can lead to
significant improvements in machine vision systems by strengthening their
capability to do geometric and semantic scene understanding in which shapes are
described and named. This project will result in new polarization-based vision
systems for autonomous navigation and smart manufacturing. It will also produce
novel solutions to the challenging problems of imaging and sensing through
scattering media, including water, fog, haze, clouds, and bodily
tissues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate polarimetric light
transport and tackle the problem of polarimetric visual understanding through
analysis by synthesis. The research team will derive theoretical models for
polarimetric surface reflectance and volumetric light transport, design visual
inference algorithms for scene understanding, and develop computational imaging
systems for real-world data acquisition. Specifically, the project will first
study the transfer of polarization state upon local surface interactions.
Physics-based layered material models will be adopted for characterizing complex
surface scattering effects beyond direct mirror reflection. The project will
then study the transport of polarized light through a spatial volume. A bottom-
up approach will be taken to develop a voxel-based light transport model to
mitigate the ill-posed transport matrix decomposition problem. The project will
also study the challenging scenarios of turbid media, which could result in new
techniques for imaging through scattering media. Leveraging the polarimetric
light transport models, visual inference algorithms will be designed and
developed for understanding scene properties, such as depth, shape, reflectance,
and semantic composition. This project will develop novel computational imaging
systems for acquiring real-world data to validate and analyze our proposed
models and algorithms. A high precision polarimetric reflectance of various
surfaces will be collected in this project and shared with the research
community. Other broader impacts of this project include integrating the
research results into existing and new course curricula on computer
vision.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.