* 2238389
* CAREER: Inclusive Cybersecurity Through the Lens of Accessible Identity and Access Management
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Tempestt Neal, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 06/30/2028
* USD 155,474.00

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------------------------------------------&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project increases the cybersecurity
awareness of individuals identifying as members of racial and ethnic groups
historically excluded in Science and Engineering (S&amp;E). Such
underrepresentation could lead to reduced opportunities in S&amp;E in which
cybersecurity skills are developed. Thus, this research focuses on cybersecurity
awareness concerning the appropriate use and management of identity credentials
for user authentication. This focus is important as credential-related account
compromises are among the most common types of cyberattacks, while members of
historically excluded racial and ethnic groups are more frequently targeted by
cyberattacks. Further, while research on inclusive authentication is growing,
inclusive user authentication schemes for historically excluded racial and
ethnic groups are understudied. Through integrated research and education
activities, this project develops novel, inclusive user authentication systems
to reduce cybersecurity risk, with race and ethnicity central foci. Outcomes of
this project also provide cybersecurity-focused education material for K-12 and
university students and the broader population, thereby expanding the nation's
cybersecurity defense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project engages individuals
from historically excluded racial and ethnic groups in S&amp;E to inform the
design, implementation, and appropriate use of inclusive authentication systems.
The research team is conducting a series of focus groups to identify current use
and perceptions of existing authentication systems, how various cybersecurity
practices are applied in everyday life, and how various factors, including
racial equity and cultural values, shape perceptions of computing and
cybersecurity. Performance of authentication systems, including knowledge-based
and AI-derived biometric systems, is also investigated to identify data-driven
and algorithmic biases. This performance analysis is facilitated through a
multi-session data collection, through which mock credentials and physical and
behavioral biometric cues are gathered from volunteering research participants.
With these insights and data, novel authentication systems that address poor
generalization, failure trends, and authentication errors associated with
subgroups of users, the authentication type, or the authentication model are
developed using a variety of approaches, including soft biometric
classification, feature selection, and multimodal fusion. This CAREER project
informs the design and implementation of authentication systems that contribute
to inclusive and accessible cybersecurity solutions, transforms state-of-the-art
authentication systems by exposing when and how they isolate certain groups and
identifying biases in knowledge and biometric-based authentication systems,
contributes a novel, diverse dataset for cybersecurity research, and informs
future directions for inclusive identity and access
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.