* 2238298
* CAREER: Coherent Control, Measurement, and Entanglement of Single T-Center Qubits
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Songtao Chen, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Alexander Cronin
* 06/30/2028
* USD 179,662.00

A quantum network could be used to improve security and future economic growth
by enabling larger quantum computers, and by supporting fundamentally new types
of communication. However, identifying specific components and systems with all
the requisite optical and quantum properties for building a quantum network
remains challenging. One promising platform for developing this technology uses
atomic scale defects in crystalline materials. A relatively novel solid-state
defect to explore is known as a T center defect in silicon. This research
project aims to analyze the optical and spin properties of single T centers and
develop quantum optics methods to enable their efficient manipulation and
control, towards the realization of T-center-based quantum network nodes. The
knowledge gained about the fundamental properties of T centers and the methods
developed to interface with them will help to push forward the scientific
frontier of solid-state spin-based quantum information processing research, as
well as the technical advancement of quantum networking. The project also aims
to train a diverse workforce for the future quantum industry, by incorporating
comprehensive education and research components, such as the new quantum
curriculum, capstone research projects and summer REUs, for graduate and
undergraduate students including those from underrepresented groups. The team
will also organize outreach activities to local high school students to
invigorate their interest in quantum science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optically
interfaced solid-state spins provide a promising platform for quantum
information processing and quantum networking applications. Furthermore,
manipulating solid-state spins with light at telecom wavelengths will facilitate
large-scale quantum networks that leverage existing telecommunication fiber
networks. This project will explore how T centers in silicon can be controlled
with telecom band optical transitions and demonstrate long spin coherence times
for various quantum networking protocols and applications. This team will
analyze optical and spin properties of single T centers and develop new methods
for their coherent control, measurement, and entanglement generation. Central to
this effort is integrating single T centers with low-loss silicon photonic
cavities to enhance light-matter interactions. The group will employ cavity-
assisted interactions to explore high-fidelity spin readout and T-center spin-
spin interactions, as well as spin-photon entanglement generation. The work will
lay a foundation for using T centers in silicon to build telecom quantum network
nodes and future quantum repeaters for long-distance quantum networks. Methods
developed in this project will impact research fields including quantum optics,
quantum information, quantum communication, and materials science. The project
is integrated with education components, which will allow students to gain
advanced and interdisciplinary training in photonics, materials engineering, and
quantum science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.