* 2238489
* CAREER: Optimization in the Race to a Liquid Biopsy
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2028
* Andrew Li, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Reha Uzsoy
* 01/31/2028
* USD 549,649.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) grant will promote the
progress of science and advance the national health and welfare by aiding in the
development of accurate blood tests for early-stage cancer. Progress to date is
due to advances in data collection technology (next-generation DNA sequencing,
in particular), and in computational power for analyzing this new data. The
critical task remaining is optimizing the design of liquid biopsies to carefully
trade off between accuracy and cost. This award supports the development of
algorithms designed for these optimization problems, and interdisciplinary work
with medical researchers and practitioners to apply these algorithms. The
accompanying plan for integrating research with education will aid in the
dissemination of this work, and more broadly, interest in the intersection of
mathematics and biology, to students, the academic medical community, and
private companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research grant will study a new
family of optimization problems that unifies (a) discrete optimization problems
that occur in non-adaptive test design as it is conceived today, (b) online
optimization problems supporting different forms of adaptive testing, and (c)
the incorporation of important practical constraints unique to liquid biopsies.
This family of problems subsumes or extends a number of classic problems
including active sequential hypothesis testing, optimal decision trees,
submodular function ranking, and decomposable submodular maximization, which are
core problems in operations research, statistics, and computer science. The
expected outcome of this work is a generic optimization approach with provable
approximation guarantees and a linear runtime. Such an approach will be
immediately applicable to the design of liquid biopsies, and will be validated
with numerical experiments on publicly available data. More broadly, the
researched work will contribute to the cross-fertilization of optimization and
statistics, spanning active learning, approximation algorithms, and high-
dimensional statistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.