* 2238635
* CAREER: System Software Availability Foundations for Real-time Cyber-physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Ning Zhang, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 05/31/2028
* USD 92,754.00

As computing and communication are ever more embedded in our society, the
security and, in particular, the availability (timely access to computational
resources) of cyber-physical systems (CPS), such as autonomous vehicles and
surgical robots, is essential for our livelihood. The key novelty of the project
is a principled approach to tackle the availability challenges of CPS by
systematically addressing threats from different vulnerable layers that make up
a computer system. The project's broader significance and importance lie in the
development of new theories and systems for system availability, building the
foundation for security and safety in CPS, which our society now relies on for
daily necessities. This project broadens participation not only in the field of
CPS security but also in computing, through integrated educational activities
for students from diverse backgrounds in both K-12 and higher education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Threats from different layers of computing against system
availability motivate the research thrusts in this project, advancing three
lines of defense. The first line of defense tackles the long-standing problem of
availability in trusted execution environments to provide computational and
input/output (I/O) availability in the presence of an untrusted operating system
(OS) while minimizing the trusted computing base by leveraging the unique
predictability of real-time CPS. The second line of defense tackles a new
dimension (availability) in software protection by leveraging context-sensitive
software compartmentalization and rapid recovery to preserve safety-critical
process availability at the cost of functionality reduction. The last line of
defense formalizes, analyzes, and isolates the performance interference as a
security (availability) problem, thwarting attacks from the non-safety-critical
processes to the safety-critical processes. The open platform (OP) for CPS
security research (OP-CPS) not only allows scientific exploration within the
project but also tightly integrates education and research, enabling the
connections between the real-time, robotics, control, systems, and security
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.