* 2238715
* CAREER: Mechanics of Biological Motor Control: Assembly, Maturation, and Repair at the Neuromuscular Interface
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Ritu Raman, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 05/31/2028
* USD 649,659.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will advance fundamental
understanding of the tissues that produce voluntary movement in humans and other
biological creatures. These tissues, termed the biological motor control system,
help humans navigate unpredictable and dynamic environments by controlling the
actuation of skeletal muscle with motor neurons. Health, mobility, and quality-
of-life can be severely impacted when disease or damage disrupts the function of
skeletal muscle, or motor neurons, or the mechanical communication between these
cells. There is thus a significant need to develop model systems that enable
study of how mechanical signaling between skeletal muscle and motor neurons
impacts performance. This project will conduct experiments that study how
mechanical signals drive the assembly of healthy mature neuromuscular tissues
through exercise, and how mechanical signaling can guide repair after damage.
Developing the proposed model systems will be enabled by new biofabrication
tools and protocols for building complex three-dimensional tissues from living
cells. The research goals of this project are coupled to educational and
outreach goals that promote hands-on training in biofabrication for K-12 and
adult learners, with an emphasis on broadening access to experiential self-
learning for students from marginalized backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific goal of the research is to understand how exercise coordinates
intercellular signaling at the neuromuscular interface in both physiological and
pathological states. Uncovering the processes by which mechanically-mediated
biochemical signaling coordinates assembly, maturation, and repair at the
neuromuscular junction could enable application-driven research in both medicine
and soft robotics. Engineered models of the biological motor control system
could, for example, be used to enable high-throughput testing of new therapies
that restore health and quality-of-life to patients in need. Fabricating
contractile neuromuscular tissues could also enable deploying these systems as
adaptive and efficient actuators in soft robots. This project will enable the PI
to advance the knowledge base in mechanics and biology, establishing the
foundation for a long-term career in biofabrication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.