* 2238612
* CAREER: Sustainable Material Harvesting in Civil Engineering: A Building Lifecycle Approach to Maximize Recyclable and Reusable Demolition Waste
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Juyeong Choi, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 04/30/2028
* USD 398,843.00

The research objectives of this CAREER project are to investigate impacts of
decisions made by various stakeholders across a building’s lifecycle on material
use, reuse, and recycle, and to develop a holistic approach to maximize
recyclable and reusable material yields during the demolition phase. Many
investigators have emphasized the importance of optimizing the use of materials
throughout a building’s lifecycle, but most approaches have primarily focused on
early stages (i.e., design and construction). This is because there is only a
limited understanding of the impacts of collective decisions made by all
relevant stakeholders (i.e., building owners, demolition contractors, and
government agencies) across a building’s service life and the lack of a method
to integrate their independent actions toward achieving downstream
sustainability. This project addresses this knowledge gap. Specific research
activities include advancing understanding of the decision-making process of
stakeholders, (i) through the incorporation of recovered demolition material
benefits within building owners’ maintenance, repair, and rehabilitation
(MR&amp;R) decision-making process, (ii) the quantification of productivity of
different demolition options, and (iii) evaluating their impacts on recycling
and reuse under different scenarios of environmental policy implementation.
Focusing at a community level (i.e., in Tallahassee, Florida), this project will
develop an integrated planning method for sustainable demolition material
harvesting. The educational objectives are to instill in students and as much as
possible in the general public a positive attitude about demolition waste as
recoverable materials with untapped potential, and to educate the next
generation of engineers to adopt sustainable practices. Educational activities
include (i) developing educational modules on recycled construction materials
and sustainable material harvesting for undergraduate and graduate teaching,
(ii) engaging undergraduate and K-12 students in small-scale demonstration of
the sustainable material harvesting concept, and (iii) promoting the benefits of
recycled/reused construction materials and sustainable practices by working with
student chapters. The educational activities are designed to improve the
negative perception of demolition waste through interaction with students and
the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create a holistic approach to
sustainable demolition material harvesting, which not only advances phase-
specific sustainability methods but also enables integration to maximize
downstream sustainability across a building’s lifecycle. For the building use
&amp; occupation phase, this project will develop a new stochastic model to
evaluate MR&amp;R decisions made over a building's service life with respect to
their contribution to the carbon- saving potential of recycling, and enable
optimization of building owners’ decision-making toward sustainability. The
project will quantify the time-performance of demolition methods under various
management and operational conditions. Additionally, the project will develop a
policy- planning framework, which enables interrelating and driving decision-
making processes in a way that maximizes demolition material yields for
recovery. The integrated material harvesting planning tool developed will be
modified for use as an easy-to-comprehend learning medium by graduate students
to address regional material issues (e.g., high material needs for rebuilding
after a hurricane), thereby contributing to local environmental sustainability.
Research and education outcomes will be disseminated nationally through the PI’s
connection with natural hazards and construction engineering research
communities. Minority and K-12 students will be engaged in research and
education through FAMU-FSU College of Engineering's unique partnership with a
minority-serving institution and FSU's existing programs. As part of the
project, a new engineering-art collaboration will be created to improve
students’ and the public’s perception of demolition
waste.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.