* 2238743
* CAREER: Trustworthy and Robust Federated Learning for Computational Healthcare
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Sanjay Purushotham, University of Maryland Baltimore County
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 05/31/2028
* USD 130,457.00

The National Academy of Engineering has identified ‘Advanced Health Informatics’
as one of the grand challenges of the 21st century for improving patient care
and swiftly responding to public health emergencies. Computational healthcare –
a data-driven machine learning approach for healthcare, has a tremendous
potential to advance and revolutionize healthcare by supporting the evidence-
based practice of medicine, personalizing patient treatments, and reducing
costs. Unlocking this potential requires the seamless integration of health data
from multiple stakeholders such as patients, hospitals, providers, and local,
state, and national agencies, and protection against the dangers of compromise
or misuse of the information. However, integrating health data from multiple
stakeholders is prohibitive due to cost, patient privacy risk, and data
protection regulations. To tackle these important challenges, stakeholders can
collaborate to jointly build and evaluate machine learning models without
sharing data using a decentralized machine learning approach called Federated
Learning. However, using federated learning in the healthcare domain is fragile
due to a multitude of challenges, including heterogeneous patient data and
varying computational resources at the stakeholders’ sites, limited data
availability for diseases and patients, and vulnerability to adversarial attacks
on the data and models – all of these limit federated machine learning model
development. This project addresses these fundamental challenges of federated
learning for healthcare by pioneering next-generation robust and trustworthy
federated learning algorithms and methods for the generation, assimilation, and
analysis of heterogeneous data for computational healthcare applications,
contributing to the national effort toward precision medicine initiatives. The
project will have a real-world impact by accelerating medical discovery and
aiding in clinical decision-making in several ways: (a) securely integrating and
learning from distributed heterogeneous siloes of health data; (b) yielding
robust representations of diseases and patients; (c) building clinicians’ and
patients’ trust in the data-driven methods by providing a flexible open-sourced
evaluation toolkit. This project will also have a significant educational and
outreach impact via interdisciplinary research training and skills development
of undergraduate and graduate students through coursework and real-world
healthcare projects with medical experts. Directed efforts will be undertaken to
broaden the participation of women, underrepresented and K-12 groups in STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop new algorithms,
methodologies, and software to improve data-driven federated learning for
computational healthcare - by advancing the state-of-the-art in multi-view
learning, adversarial learning, and machine unlearning. This project’s
overarching theme is robustness and trustworthiness, and is organized into three
interrelated thrusts. The first thrust of the project focuses on ‘robust
federated learning’, and it involves developing multi-view federated learning
algorithms and coded federated learning methods to address the statistical and
system heterogeneity challenges inherent in healthcare settings. The second
thrust of the project is focused on ‘trustworthy federated learning’, under
which novel federated adversarial training and verifiable federated unlearning
algorithms will be developed to achieve resiliency to adversarial attacks and
data-deletion requests, and fair and interpretable algorithms will be employed
to make the proposed federated learning solutions unbiased and equitable to all
patients and stakeholders. Finally, in the third thrust of the project, the
researchers will study and develop algorithms for generating and evaluating
realistic synthetic health data for federated learning to enable reproducibility
and accelerate the development of federated learning methods in
healthcare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.