* 2238675
* CAREER: Towards Embodied Learning for K-12 Machine Learning (ML) Education
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Zhen Bai, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Amy Baylor
* 06/30/2028
* USD 732,923.00

Children are increasingly impacted by technological advances in artificial
intelligence (AI) that provide personalized recommendations regarding the books
they read, individualized lessons, career-path plans, and friend circles. As
smart learning companions (for example, animated intelligent characters/agents)
become popular, children are at risk of overestimating and over-trusting AI
given their tendency to anthropomorphize such intelligent systems. This CAREER
project investigates the development of novel embodied learning technologies
that help K-12 students demystify machine learning (ML), an integral aspect of
current approaches to AI. The project will provide hands-on and collaborative
learning experiences for children to make sense of the inner workings of ML,
similar to how they build, act, and experiment in collaboration with friends.
The learning experiences will be designed to be accessible to children,
regardless of their math and computing background, with special attention to
those from historically underrepresented backgrounds in STEM. The project
outcomes will advance an AI-driven society by preparing 21st century learners to
become critical thinkers about AI, as both consumers and future creators. It
will also promote inclusion in next-generation STEM education by addressing AI
inequality in life and work. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;AI and ML are often presented
to children as a black box, focusing on workflows and capabilities (e.g., data
training, image and voice recognition) which can lead to inaccurate or
oversimplified understandings. Further, many K-12 students lack math and
computing backgrounds that are required for understanding abstract Machine
Learning (ML) concepts and methods. To address these challenges in understanding
abstract ML concepts, this project will explore the design space of 3D and
tangible interaction technologies to provide embodied learning experiences that
draw upon children's real-life experience of object manipulation, body movement
and role-play. Knowledge discovery will be accelerated through a pedagogical
agent with curiosity-eliciting prompts to encourage exploratory learning. The
learning experiences will be evaluated for impact in supporting knowledge
acquisition, self-efficacy and interest in ML with elementary and middle school
students. Findings of this project are expected to: (1) deepen knowledge of
embodied and exploratory learning in supporting the understanding of abstract
and complex STEM concepts through the lens of ML education; and, (2) inform the
design of future learning technologies that seamlessly integrate sensorimotor
enactment and situated social prompts to make K-12 ML education highly
accessible to students with diverse backgrounds and
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.