* 2238912
* CAREER: How Many Intuitive Physics Systems are There, and What Do They Mean for Physics Education
* EDU,DRL
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Joshua Hartshorne, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 02/29/2028
* USD 778,756.00

Basic research into understanding how children learn physics concepts has been
pursued relatively independently in several different disciplines (cognitive
psychology, developmental science, and physics education research), each of
which has come to very different conclusions. One research literature suggests
that people's pre-educational intuitions about mechanical physics are largely
veridical, another literature suggests that these intuitions are largely
incorrect, and yet another suggests that they are incorrect in infancy but
become veridical even before significant physics education. These seemingly
contradictory findings complicate the development of educational interventions,
since interventions suggested by one line of research are contraindicated by
others. The overarching goal of this project is to start synthesizing and
reconciling these different lines of work. The project is inherently
interdisciplinary and will depend on new and emerging methods for robust and
reproducible research such as automated online testing, citizen science, and
advanced analytics. Such tools are increasingly important in human research but
relatively little training in them for students is available. Thus, the
educational component of this CAREER project will focus on enhancing such
training and includes updating an innovative, interactive textbook on
computational modeling and analysis, developing and running an intensive summer
training program for citizen science; and providing undergraduates with direct,
hands-on education. The project is funded as a CAREER award by the EDU Core
Research (ECR) program, which supports work that advances the fundamental
research literatures on STEM learning, broadening participation, and workforce
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multiple research literatures have engaged
questions about the nature of intuitive understandings of mechanical physics,
but they have often supported discrepant conclusions, thereby making ambiguous
what their implications are for the characterization of fundamental cognitive
architecture as well as for the design of educational interventions. Moreover,
because these conclusions arise from different disciplinary communities studying
different populations using different methods, it is not clear whether these
discrepancies reflect real differences in how people think about different
physical processes in different situations or whether they are simply
artifactual. Objective 1 of this project will apply the tools of psychophysics
in order to test the reliability of a range of tasks developed in these
literatures in an attempt to determine whether differential performance (if any)
suggests multiple underlying cognitive systems. Objective 2 will use the tools
of developmental psychology to study age-related differences in children on
tasks adapted from the range of literatures to see whether the developmental
patterns observed by developmental scientists are specific to their methods.
Objective 3 will investigate whether the measures developed in these disciplines
differentially predict student success in introductory university physics. Thus,
the three objectives will systematically assess and compare the stimuli, tasks,
and research methods common to the currently-disjoint literatures, allowing for
direct comparison and synthesis, with subjects ranging in age from 6 months to
adults. All three objectives will involve unusually large and diverse samples
--- often by utilizing automated online testing and citizen science -- and
advanced analytics. By attempting to reconcile these relatively disjoint
literatures, the project will have the potential to contribute to the
development of educational interventions in physics at a variety of
ages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.