* 2238818
* CAREER: Oscillatory Integrals and the Geometry of Projections
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2028
* Hong Wang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Tyson
* 08/31/2028
* USD 163,054.00

This project involves research at the interface of Fourier analysis and
geometric measure theory. Fourier analysis studies the relation between a
function and its Fourier transform. The Fourier transform of a function, in
rough terms, represents the function via a superposition of frequencies.
Geometric measure theory studies the geometric properties of sets and measures
under transformations. Fractal sets, or sets with highly irregular geometry, are
of particular interest in this regard. Recently, the connection between Fourier
analysis and geometric measure theory has led to substantial progress in both
fields. This project explores the interaction between these two fields, along
with possible applications to other fields such as dynamics and number theory.
The project also supports workshops for graduate students and early-career
mathematicians: these events will promote mathematical expertise within the
indicated research areas, will contribute to the professional training of
participants, and will foster new research
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project combines work in restriction
theory (within Fourier analysis) and the theory of projections (within geometric
measure theory). One component of the planned research involves the study of the
mass of a function, with Fourier transform supported on the sphere, on a fractal
set. Another component investigates the dimensions of fractal sets under certain
linear or nonlinear maps parametrized by curved manifolds. A final component
concerns the Kakeya conjecture, which asks how large must a set be if it
contains a unit line segment in every direction. These three components, while
distinct, are highly interrelated, and progress in each area is anticipated to
inform ongoing work in all of these areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.