* 2238616
* CAREER: Towards Responsible Graph Neural Networks
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Claire Donnat, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 06/30/2028
* USD 484,822.00

Heralded as the breakthrough for machine learning on relational data (i.e.,
graphs) that would allow the same “AI renaissance” that Neural Networks have
achieved in Computer Vision or Natural Language Processing, Graph Neural
Networks (GNNs) have recently emerged as one of the preferred algorithms for
reasoning on relational data. Yet, despite GNNs’ success on academic datasets,
their properties remain ill-understood. This severely compromises their use in
practical settings, where the requirements for rigor, transparency and
reliability are paramount. In response, this proposal focuses on two key
research agendas: (1) characterizing the properties, reliability and sensitivity
of GNN outputs through experiments and theory; and (2) advancing the theoretical
understanding of statistical properties in graph estimators, thereby providing a
stronger foundation for the development of improved GNNs. The resulting
algorithms will be deployed in diverse novel applications aimed at learning
understandable and reliable representations from data. Efforts will be made to
promote and spread the utilization of these methods through various means,
including developing open-source software, creating new graduate courses, and
supporting the investigator's university initiative to collaborate with local
community colleges.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project investigates
the relationship between data, GNN architecture parameters (such as embedding
distance or convolution operator), and the resulting embedding space geometry.
The overarching objective is to identify specific conditions under which
different GNN architectures can achieve optimal performance. To this end, the
investigator suggests leveraging insights from the rich statistics literature on
high-dimensional statistics and graph-based regularization. This approach seeks
to view GNNs as estimators for functions on a manifold in order to (a) analyze
the types of functions that GNNs can effectively learn, and (b) draw comparisons
and gain insights from high-dimensional models incorporating graph
regularization. By pursuing these research directions, this proposal aims to
transform GNNs from black-box models into actionable analysis pipelines that are
explainable, trustworthy, and reliable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.