* 2238368
* CAREER: Follow the Water: Understanding River Discharge Dynamics in Rapidly Changing High Northern Latitudes
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Eric Klein, University of Alaska Anchorage Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Rainer Amon
* 08/31/2028
* USD 528,202.00

The Arctic region is rapidly changing as average air temperatures, rainfall,
glacier and ice sheet melt rates, and permafrost depths all increase. However,
the connections between these processes and how they influence the discharge,
source, and nutrient concentrations of water in Arctic rivers are not well
understood. To characterize shifting river source contributions and bridge this
knowledge gap, this project will measure multiple components of the water cycle
in permafrost watersheds across a range of glacial coverages (including glacier
free) in Greenland. Models will test the hypothesis that in the warmer and
wetter future Arctic, contributions from flow through the ground to the river
will both increase and persist later in the season, which will help offset the
loss of river water from steadily decreasing ice masses. Research and education
are integrated by collaborating with the Alaska Native Science and Engineering
Program, research institutions in Greenland, the Belfer Center’s Arctic
Initiative at Harvard University, local Greenland communities, and the
University of the Arctic Læra Institute to develop a powerful platform that
increases Indigenous Alaskan and Greenland student participation in hydrology.
This platform includes programs like Greenland field research opportunities for
Indigenous Alaskan and Greenland students and development of Arctic water cycle
focused courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three important hydrological
shifts associated with a warmer and wetter High Arctic Greenland occurred within
the last million years: 1) increased freshwater from glacier melt; 2) deepening
active layer (permafrost thaw); and 3) increased precipitation. Current climate
changes are leading to an Arctic Greenland more like these past environments. A
warmer Arctic will likely increase active layer depths, which when coupled with
greater rain expected in the Arctic, could result in more flow through the
active layer contributing to river discharge, but this remains unknown. This
project will measure multiple components of the water cycle in permafrost
watersheds across a range of glacial coverages (including glacier free) in High
Arctic Greenland. These data will characterize shifting river source
contributions and provide critical field data needed to calibrate novel
numerical hydrological models. These models will then help test river discharge
hypotheses given future Arctic change under different climate scenarios (e.g.,
more precipitation, deeper active layer). These analyses will help understand
how increased active layer flow could mitigate the hydrological impact of
glacier recession and future transition to ice-free watersheds. This project
will support graduate and undergraduate students and develop a powerful
multifaceted platform to increase participation in STEM fields of Indigenous
Alaskan and Greenland students. A new Arctic focused hydrology course will be
taught via distance delivery and leverage relationships to bring together
Indigenous Alaskan and Greenland students. This project will also provide
Indigenous Alaskan and Greenland undergraduate students with a transformative
experience learning together in the field while working with researchers. Larger
societal benefits include understanding how the Arctic water cycle is changing,
which can impact the global water cycle, freshwater resources, and climate
patterns across Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.