* 2238304
* CAREER: Contact inhibition of locomotion as a positioning mechanism during endoderm morphogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2027
* Stephanie Woo, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 11/30/2027
* USD 750,000.00

In multicellular organisms, tissues, organs, and even the entire body plan are
built through the actions of many individual cells. Understanding how cells
coordinate their actions with each other remains an outstanding question in
biology. This study will use zebrafish embryos to understand how a population of
embryonic cells called endodermal cells work together to build a tissue that
will eventually become parts of the gastrointestinal and respiratory systems. In
humans, endoderm malformations affect an estimated 10 per 10,000 births.
Zebrafish embryos will be used in this study because they are transparent and
develop externally (outside the mother), making it easy to image cellular
interactions within a living, intact organism. Preliminary work suggested that,
counterintuitively, zebrafish endodermal cells disperse apart before coming back
together to form a tissue. This study aims to understand how and why endodermal
cells undergo these two very different behaviors (dispersal and convergence)
during tissue formation. This research will be integrated with an education and
outreach program designed to expand access to authentic research experiences and
enhance STEM education for undergraduate students and the general public. This
education and outreach program consists of: 1) a course-based undergraduate
research experience (CURE) for students enrolled at the University of
California, Merced, 2) a summer program that will give undergraduate students
direct experience working on an independent project in a research lab, and 3) an
educational exhibit on developmental biology and microscopy for a local
children’s’ museum designed in partnership with teachers-in-
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The endoderm is one of the three primary germ
layers that gives rise to the gut and respiratory epithelia and other organs.
However, endodermal cells are highly migratory during gastrulation and before
differentiating into mature epithelia. This study will take advantage of the
zebrafish embryo’s amenability for in vivo imaging to characterize the continuum
of cellular behaviors that occur as cells differentiate from migratory
endodermal precursors into epithelial cells. During gastrulation stages,
zebrafish endodermal cells first disperse away from each other before eventually
converging into a coherent epithelial sheet. Preliminary studies suggested that
endodermal cells initially avoid each other through contact-triggered inhibition
of locomotion. This study will determine the molecular mechanisms driving these
inhibitory interactions and their significance to tissue formation. Aim 1 will
identify the cell surface receptors that allow endodermal cells to recognize and
repel away from each other. Aim 2 will define the intracellular signaling
pathways that regulate inhibitory responses and the initial dispersal of
endodermal cells. Aim 3 will determine how these inhibitory interactions are
modulated as cells switch from dispersal to convergence movements. This study
will demonstrate how transient, hyperlocal cell-cell interactions can lead to
large-scale patterning, with broad implications for tissue
morphogenesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.