* 2238001
* CAREER: Identifying, quantifying, and explaining design principles and user practices that enable effective long-term key management
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Scott Ruoti, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 04/30/2028
* USD 133,002.00

Many new security-related technologies have the potential to revolutionize
individuals’ lives—for example, cryptocurrencies. However, the adoption of these
technologies is stymied by their reliance on needing users to manage
cryptographic keys (long strings of random characters). Prior research has shown
users struggle to manage cryptographic keys, with existing key management
systems often causing more problems than they solve. To improve the design of
key management, this project investigates how key management is used in the real
world. Data from these studies help identify which designs best promote utility,
usability, and security, which designs fail to do so, and what new designs are
needed. This project can improve our understanding of how to design key
management systems that can be integrated with security-related technologies to
increase their chance of being adopted. Results are being used to update and
generate new curricula for university and K–12 students, helping educate and
prepare the next generation of cybersecurity experts. The project will
positively impact societal welfare and national
defense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes collecting quantitative and
qualitative data about the utility, usability, and security of existing systems
that rely on key management. Data are gathered from users who have successfully
adopted key management systems, such as developers using end-to-end email
encryption and novice users adopting a key management system for the first time.
The studies examine general usage, how usage changes over time, how users manage
multiple cryptographic keys, how they synchronize keys between devices, and how
they recover access to lost keys. Methods include interviews, surveys,
observational studies, and usability studies. Design principles identified
throughout this research will be presented on a public-facing website that
synthesizes this project’s results in a manner easily digested by cryptographic
system vendors and other researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.