* 2238913
* CAREER: New Foundations for Multi-Fidelity Prediction, Estimation, and Learning Under Uncertainty in Dynamical Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Alex Gorodetsky, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Harry Dankowicz
* 08/31/2028
* USD 721,021.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will fund research that
enables autonomous systems to estimate the effects of prediction uncertainty on
planning and control decisions, with application to autonomous flight of soaring
aircraft and in urban environments, thereby promoting the progress of science
and advancing the national prosperity. Autonomous soaring aircraft offer new
fuel-efficient approaches for travel, reconnaissance, and observation, including
in hard-to-reach areas of the atmosphere. Their built-in simulators make
assumptions about the presence of atmospheric boundary layers and updrafts to
optimally extract energy from the prevailing winds. Computational models are
also integrated in the planning and control architecture of unmanned aerial
vehicles as they predict optimal paths through urban infrastructure based on
estimates of the surrounding flow fields. Without assessing the uncertainty in
their predictions, such simulators may result in suboptimal or catastrophic
decisions, as opportunities for optimal performance are missed or safety
constraints are violated. This project addresses this challenge by developing
new, fast, and automated algorithms for rigorously quantifying uncertainty and
updating computational models accordingly, and by validating these algorithms
using experimental aircraft in controlled but complex wind conditions. The
research is integrated with educational efforts aiming to bring a computational
perspective on modeling, data science, and statistics to engineering students
and the public through a series of workshops built around relevant case studies,
a new data science class for an aerospace engineering curriculum, and a
partnership with the Ann Arbor Hands-On Museum to develop exhibits accessible to
K-8 students and their parents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to
develop the foundations of automated approaches for deriving problem-specific
multi-fidelity uncertainty quantification techniques. Such techniques aim to
fuse information from simulation and data sources of varying fidelity and cost
to achieve accurate predictions at a significantly lower computational cost than
that required by the highest fidelity model. Current realizations are based on
heuristics that are not adapted to the specific relationships between data
sources of a given problem. To overcome this limitation, the research will
derive new statistical estimators through analysis of Bayesian posteriors and
maximum entropy distributions endowed with only the information available rather
than heuristics; use these estimators to develop new filtering, state
estimation, and Bayesian inference techniques; and demonstrate how these
techniques may be applied to challenging nonlinear, chaotic, and non-Gaussian
dynamical systems arising in the context of planning and control of soaring
aircraft in complex wind fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.