* 2238833
* CAREER: Towards High-Channel-Count Invasive and High-Resolution Non-Invasive Electrical Neural Interfaces
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Taiyun Chi, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 02/29/2028
* USD 403,393.00

Neural interfaces serve as a powerful tool in neuroscience research to better
understand the brain and are increasingly intended for clinical applications.
For example, emerging brain-machine interfaces built on the large-scale neural
recording can decipher brain activities; the decoded information can then be
used to control neural prosthetics to restore lost sensory or motor functions
for paralyzed patients. On the neural stimulation side, deep brain stimulation
has proven to be highly effective in treating certain brain disorders by
injecting a pulsed current with a pre-defined pattern. Although these results
are highly encouraging, to fully unlock the potential of neural interfaces for
future widespread and standard-of-care human clinical use, new device
capabilities need to be developed with significantly improved hardware
performance. For invasive neural interfaces, the biggest challenge now is to
increase the number of simultaneous recording channels to enable control of more
sophisticated prosthetics with higher degrees of freedom. For non-invasive
neural interfaces, an emerging need is to develop new stimulation techniques
that can replace todayâ€™s invasive deep brain stimulations to ensure long-term
safety in brain disorder treatment. This project aims to address the above two
pressing needs by developing a high-channel-count implanted neural interface and
a non-invasive high-focality deep brain stimulation system. Through its coherent
educational and outreach plan, this project will also train the next-generation
workforce in hardware engineering by engaging graduate, undergraduate, and high-
school students, especially those from underrepresented minority groups in STEM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are two research thrusts in this project. The first
thrust will develop a fully packaged implanted neural interface with higher
channel counts of more than ten times of the state of the art. Additionally, the
hardware will enable full spectrum coverage to record both local field
potentials and action potentials with programmable stimulation capability. The
complete hardware module will include a low-power application-specific
integrated circuit (ASIC) that can record, stimulate, digitize, and stream out
high-throughput neural signals, a flexible intracortical neural probe that will
be flip-chip packaged with the ASIC, and a high-speed digital backend that
relays the data from the ASIC to a computer for real-time data processing. The
second thrust will develop a non-invasive deep brain stimulation system based on
temporally interfering EM waves. The research tasks include multi-physics
modeling, stimulation hardware implementation, and validation using phantom and
animal model. Overall, this research will have the opportunity to impact the key
designs in future brain-machine interfaces, neural prostheses, and the treatment
of brain disorders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.