* 2238264
* CAREER: Improving the Lifecycle Security of Microcontroller Devices
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2028
* Le Guan, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 02/29/2028
* USD 105,779.00

Microcontroller units (MCUs) drive many security- and safety-critical embedded
applications. However, they inherit software bugs present in all computing
systems. Firmware vulnerabilities have thus become one of the main targets of
real-world exploitation. Successful exploitation can cause disastrous
consequences to critical infrastructures (e.g., power outages and plant damage)
and endanger human lives (e.g., by disabling a pacemaker). In the software
community, there has been a rich body of knowledge regarding bug discovery and
attack mitigation. However, it is notoriously difficult to apply these results
to MCU firmware. Indeed, MCU firmware runs on resource-constrained hardware with
heterogeneous architectures, integrates custom runtime environments, and makes
unpredictable interactions with the physical world. This renders existing
dynamic analysis techniques incompatible, expensive, and ineffective. The
proposed research will cross the technical barriers imposed by the
aforementioned challenges and greatly enrich the arsenal of MCU firmware
security with new knowledge, frameworks, analysis tools, and supporting
techniques. Due to the critical roles that MCU devices take in real life, this
project will make huge progress towards securing the cyberspace and enhancing
national security.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A key observation of this project is
that MCU devices usually cannot operate by themselves. Rather, they have to rely
on certain external computers in their entire life cycles. Therefore, around a
unifying theme of offloading security analysis from the original application
workload to more capable nearby workstations or hubs, this project will deliver
a series of new methodologies and theories to significantly improve the lifetime
security of MCU devices. With the decoupled design, three research thrusts will
be investigated. The first thrust focuses on new techniques to automatically
discover firmware vulnerabilities, such as bugs lurking deeply in the program
space. The second thrust targets run-time monitoring of firmware execution in
the production environment, allowing the stakeholders to detect ongoing attacks
and catch bugs that never happen during in-house testing. The third thrust,
cooperating with the second thrust, investigates vulnerability remediation
techniques, in particular, how to efficiently diagnose production bugs without
leaking privacy. The outcomes of this research will be freely distributed to the
community. This research will also be integrated into the investigator’s
education plan to develop a set of Virtual Machine-based labs to educate young
minds and future embedded system developers and architects about MCU
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.