* 2238734
* CAREER: The Research of Noise-Aware Scheduling for Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum Systems
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Qiang Guan, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 05/31/2028
* USD 568,627.00

In the Noisy Intermediate-Scale Quantum (NISQ) era, it is crucial to improve the
fidelity of quantum computing, enabling the correctness of quantum algorithms.
Designers of quantum algorithms need to clearly understand the hidden noise of
different quantum computers and the noise inside different compiled circuits on
the same quantum computer for a specific quantum algorithm. However, this is not
a trivial task. The community lacks a systematic solution to overcome the impact
of noise on the execution of the jobs. Existing error mitigation methods suffer
from unaffordable overhead or unpredictable performance. The proposed approach
addresses the major challenges that come from the complex and dynamically
evolving quality of quantum computers and significant variations of the compiled
circuits. The project's impacts include designing a novel noise-aware scheduling
system for quantum cloud systems and a simulation framework for testing
scheduling algorithms for quantum cloud systems. The proposed research will
enhance the utilization and efficiency of the NISQ-era quantum cloud system. The
proposed cloud system simulation toolkit bridges the gap of the lack of an
experimental platform for quantum cloud system research by enabling a simulation
platform for new resource management and scheduling approaches. In addition, the
curriculum development and the student training program support the development
of a diverse and competitive workforce of quantum information and science. New
courses and new curriculum concentrations in quantum computing will be
developed. Graduate and undergraduate students, especially from underrepresented
groups, will be trained in multiple disciplines that will enable them to have
successful careers in quantum information and science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project builds upon existing knowledge to create a new insightful approach that
enables the efficient usage of noisy quantum computers. This project presents
the novelty of the research, practical value, and domain impacts. The research
team will design, develop, and apply new methods to 1) profile and model
hardware fidelity's temporal and spatial pattern, study the spatial and temporal
noise model based on the temporal pattern, and further build the fidelity
forecast mode; 2) build a novel noise-aware scheduling system, which proposes
the optimal scheduling approach for backend allocation and qubit allocation
based on the circuit noise tolerance factor and the prediction of the hardware
fidelity; 3) build quantum cloud simulation toolkit to allow the quantum system
engineers and researchers to test and evaluate the new resource management and
scheduling strategies; 4) build a new training program “Quantum Computing for
All”, by compiling the research outcomes to foster the workforce of quantum
information and science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.