* 2238648
* CAREER: Intelligent Multi-Contrast Imaging Platform for Needle-Based Interventions
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Qinggong Tang, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 03/31/2028
* USD 390,970.00

Needle-based interventions (NBIs) are procedures that require a minimally
invasive approach to mitigate tissue damage. This Faculty Early Career
Development Program (CAREER) project aims to develop an intelligent and
miniaturized imaging platform that can recognize tissue structures in real-time.
The resulting platform will be small enough to fit inside of a medical needle
and able to quickly collect detailed images that will train an automated machine
learning tool for improved needle guidance. The outcomes of the research will
inform the design of future technologies to improve NBI outcomes and multi-
contrast imaging. A comprehensive integrated education plan will be initiated to
serve Native American students. This effort will allow Native American students
to have access to world-class research facilities and increase STEM
participation and retention. Other educational activities including curriculum
development and specific microscope demonstrations for local K-12 students will
be organized to increase the students’ interest in
bioimaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project will establish a new
research paradigm for imaging in needle-based interventions through integrating
a unique forward-imaging multi-contrast optical coherent tomography (MC-OCT)
needle technology with advanced computer-aided guidance tools. Endoscopic
systems have been widely reported, however, they are not suitable for NBI
guidance as they are limited by probe size and optical design. The proposed MC-
OCT needle will incorporate forward-imaging capability and eliminates the need
to scan optics inside the body. This miniaturized OCT system can fit inside the
hollow bore of relevant needle geometries for different NBIs without additional
invasiveness and needle modification. Integrated quantitative polarization-
sensitive capability into this MC-OCT needle device will promote further
understanding the tissue composition and enhance the contrast between different
tissue types. In collaboration with the Riverside Indian School, the project
will develop the Biophotonics for Native Americans in Oklahoma program to engage
and mentor local Native American high school students and teachers in biomedical
engineering and optics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.