* 2239099
* CAREER: The effects of power, support, and information on animal social dynamics
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Elizabeth Hobson, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 06/30/2028
* USD 328,677.00

Social species can benefit in many ways from living in social groups, but these
groups are also dynamic and change over time, which requires individuals to
navigate a constantly changing social environment. The direction and magnitude
of social changes can be difficult to predict but are important to understand
because they can strongly affect each animal’s health, reproductive success, and
survival as well as group-level social predictability and resilience. This
project focuses on testing how aggression and power, affiliation and social
support, and social connectedness and information may individually (or in
combination) affect the social dynamics of groups, using the socially and
cognitively complex monk parakeet as the study species. The study capitalizes on
captive parakeet colonies to take an experimental approach that involves
detailed behavior data collection. The project carries themes of social
networks, behavioral interactions, and cutting-edge analytical approaches over
to the educational side by developing a new educational tool to improve data
science education and workforce development for biology students as well as
providing structured mentoring opportunities for recently-graduated students as
a pathway to graduate school and networked peer mentoring opportunities for
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding how power, support, and
information interact within dynamic social system is crucial to predicting how
these systems evolve, collapse, and thrive in group-living species as well as
the connections between sociality and cognition. The proposed work aims to fill
gaps in the current state of knowledge of animal sociality by systematically
manipulating power, support, and information in groups of captive monk
parakeets. This research tests the central hypothesis that power, support, and
information are essential factors in explaining social dynamics in socially and
cognitively complex species. In Aim 1, a 2x2 experimental design will be used to
manipulate support and information in captive parakeet groups to test for
independent and combined effects of support and information on power dynamics.
In Aim 2, information will be manipulated using experimental group fission-
fusions to evaluate how birds react to a lack of information with information-
gathering behaviors. In Aim 3, agent-based models will be used to test how
variation in cognitive skills and information use affects power dynamics, social
resiliency, and recovery speed more generally across species. In the Educational
Plan, this research on animal sociality will be integrated with education using
the “Sociality Game”, an online multiplayer game which uses engaging questions
about animal sociality to teach students quantitative analyses, the fundamentals
of data science, and R coding skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.