* 2239183
* CAREER: Next-Generation Active Internet Measurement
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Paul Pearce, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 06/30/2028
* USD 126,192.00

Researchers, businesses, and governments use a variety of technologies to
quickly map the Internet and understand how it behaves. Exploring these
behaviors lets us understand things such as how organizations and governments
control what websites people globally can visit or how networks are attacked.
Unfortunately, current technologies largely concentrate on how quickly and how
much of the Internet can be explored, and it is very challenging to ensure our
understanding is complete and correct. This project will create the next
generation of Internet measurement technologies that will improve measurement
correctness and completeness by better understanding the structure and
connections of networks, temporary behaviors, and the results of measurements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing next-generation Internet measurement requires
understanding the complex real-world behavior of network operators around the
globe. The project has three thrusts. First, the project will explore and
develop methods to understand how routing impacts on-path measurements,
globally, with an emphasis on Internet censorship. Second, the project will
explore and develop methods understanding how routing impacts end-to-end in-path
measurements, focusing on latency, non-determinism, and completeness, with an
emphasis on whole-Internet scanning technologies. Third, the project will
develop numerous open-source tools and datasets to facilitate the next-
generation of path-aware active Internet measurement.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Internet measurement is used for a range of tasks from
influencing government policy, to identifying criminals and state-sponsored
attacks, to understanding weather-induced network failures. The correctness of
active Internet measurements facilitated by the methodologies, datasets, and
tools from this project will enable researchers, industry practitioners, policy
makers, and governments to more effectively and correctly achieve these diverse
goals. Furthermore, this project will establish a community college-focused
pathways program aimed at the dual goals of preparing community college transfer
students for a successful experience at a research university, while also
providing them network and security research opportunities. This integrated
pathways program will improve the likelihood of transfer student's successful
progression to graduate school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Additional information
about the project, including all research papers, datasets, code, repositories,
tools, results, and outreach activities can be found on the project's website:
https://cc.gatech.edu/~pearce/career/. The website will be maintained for a
period of at least 5 years after completion of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.