* 2239331
* CAREER: Principles of Firefly Rhythmic Synchronization
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Orit Peleg, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Angel Garcia
* 06/30/2028
* USD 158,768.00

Biological communication in large animal groups is often accompanied by immense
noise levels due to the presence of multiple signals and interference from the
environment. One common way to deal with noise is to synchronize the signals, so
that individuals signal in unison. Communication in well-studied synchronous
animal groups across a broad range of organisms (frogs, fish, birds, and
primates) is characterized by complex signals. In contrast, the PI will work
with a tractable model system of firefly swarms where communication signals are
visual, in the form of approximately digital light flashes, and visually
traceable in three dimensions, even throughout large swarms of motile
individuals. The PI will combine field and lab experiments with physical and
information-theoretic theories for signal synchronization, using firefly swarms
as a model system. This will enable fundamental advances in our understanding of
communication strategies and enable the PI to integrate models and experiments
across a wide range of length and time scales. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will
focus on fundamental aspects of signal synchronization. The PI will use
innovative field-recording technologies for fireflies and Virtual Reality (VR)
systems to obtain quantitative spatiotemporal recordings of firefly flashes and
test hypotheses about synchronous communication by exposing the fireflies to
carefully designed visual stimulus. These information-rich datasets will
facilitate the development and validation of agent-based models of possible
underlying mechanisms. In turn, modeling can provide feedback on experiment
design and serve as a tool to design VR stimuli whose responses will either
validate or disprove a given hypothesis. This interwoven theory-experiment
approach will allow an unprecedented level of model validation via simultaneous
refinement of both models and experiments until the underlying principles are
extracted and clarified. The same approach will directly inform the PI's
educational goals as they develop a class that will engage students in concepts
of animal communication via visualization of computational and experimental
data. Therefore, this CAREER award will fundamentally advance the PI's long-term
goals by providing insight into the principles that enable synchronization and
incorporating the acquired firefly data in STEM
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.