* 2239712
* CAREER: Elucidating the Roles of Extracellular Metal Ions in Gut Microbiota Interactions
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Melissa Zastrow, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 01/31/2028
* USD 487,089.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes program in the Division of
Chemistry, Melissa Zastrow of the University of Houston is studying how metal
ions affect cell-cell and cell-host interactions in the gut microbiota. Metal
ions such as calcium, iron, and zinc play critical regulatory, catalytic, and
structural roles in biology. In gut microbiota, changes to the availability of
these essential elements are linked to changes in the colonization of different
bacterial species along with infection and disease, but the underlying molecular
mechanisms are unclear. The proposed research investigates how metals affect
interactions between bacteria and host proteins. Uncovering molecular mechanisms
for how metals affect the gut microbiota can lead to novel therapeutics and
provide guidance for more effective use of current medical treatments. These
studies will be integrated with the development of an interactive bioinorganic
training project, the “Inorganic Chemistry at Biological Interfaces” (ICBI)
workshop, which is centered on investigating the roles of metal ions at
biological interfaces and tailored to undergraduate and graduate students.
Participating students will have the opportunity to engage in interdisciplinary
research while furthering their growth as scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research project centers on elucidating the fundamental mechanisms through which
metals affect cell-cell and cell-host interactions in the gut microbiota.
Hundreds of microbial species co-exist in the gastrointestinal tract and can
interact via cell-cell or cell-host interactions. Changes in metals could
enhance or disrupt these interactions by binding to bacterial cell surfaces,
including surface proteins, or host proteins such as mucins. The proposed work
will use bacteria from the Lactobacillaceae family and a combination of
biochemical and analytical methods to establish mechanisms through which metals
affect 1) bacterial cell-cell interactions and 2) cell-host interactions between
bacteria and host mucin proteins. To test the effects of metals on cell-cell
interactions, biochemical and microscopic characterization will be used to
measure biofilm formation in single and multi-species systems. Similar
techniques will be used to probe cell-mucin interactions in single and multi-
species systems. Site-directed mutagenesis will be used to study the role of
surface protein metal-binding sites in mediating both cell-cell and cell-host
interactions. Collectively, these studies will test the hypothesis that metals
can mediate bacterial interactions in gut microbiota by binding to specific cell
surface macromolecules and host proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.