* 2239691
* CAREER: An Embodied Intelligence Approach to Neural Architecture Search
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Nicholas Cheney, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 08/31/2028
* USD 549,866.00

Recent advances in Machine Learning (ML) models like deep neural networks have
shown immense promise to solve problems in a wide variety of fields, ranging
from health and wellness to environmental science to national defense. Yet the
practical use of these methods currently requires a great deal of ML-training
and experience to implement due to their sensitivity to nonintuitive and complex
configuration settings like the size and shape of deep neural networks. The
subfield of Automated Machine Learning (AutoML) seeks to help reduce the
barriers to entry by creating models and pipelines which automatically self-
configure based on the needs of a given problem. Within AutoML, Neural
Architecture Search (NAS) aims to automatically find the ideal structure of a
deep neural network. The process of using ML to find the optimal shape and form
of a deep neural network is roughly analogous to the well-studied evolutionary
and developmental processes that create shape and form in biological creatures,
or that automatically find the shape and form of robots in the field of
Evolutionary Robotics. Despite the analogies between these subfields, and the
outsized impact that work in AutoML may have on our ability to Harness the Data
Revolution and make practical impacts across a wide variety of application
areas, few examples of Neural Architecture Search algorithms have been inspired
by methodologies, successes, and challenges in the evolution of development of
embodied robots and animals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this work, we propose to:
(1) Systematically compare the quality of different neural network architectures
by analyzing the amount of “embodied intelligence” in their network topologies.
(2) Highlight a shortcoming of current “weight-sharing” approaches to NAS and
demonstrate how an embodied perspective to brain-body co-optimization may
improve search for high quality neural architectures. (3) Demonstrate how neural
architectures that grow and prune their structures throughout training compare
to static neural network architectures. (4) Create infrastructure to more easily
integrate collaborations on real-world problems datasets into the teaching of
machine learning and data science at the University of Vermont. (5) Create
scientific communication materials for engaging non-STEM students in machine
learning via interactive network visualizations and generative art. This project
is jointly funded by the Electrical, Communications and Cyber Systems Division
(ECCS) and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.