* 2239951
* CAREER: Entropy Oxide Memristors for Software-equivalent Neuromorphic Computing
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2028
* Gina Adam, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 01/31/2028
* USD 406,578.00

Training of artificial intelligence (AI) is foreseen to consume exponential
amounts of computing resources in the next decade, at large environmental and
financial costs. Memristive technology has shown significant potential to be
part of high-density next generation neuromorphic processors to support energy
efficient AI algorithms. The physics of memristive switching is promising since
in theory, the device state can change through the movement of only few ions
under very low voltage. However, device non-idealities have prevented using
memristor chips for neural network training due to performance sub-par to
software solutions. Memristors and other emerging devices promise major societal
impact via key applications e.g. medical implants, robotics, Internet of Things,
etc. that need compact and efficient computing. However, their commercial
adoption requires academic leaps in performance, yield, reliability and
workforce training. This project will develop the next generation of memristors,
based on entropy-stabilized oxides with engineered switching dynamics. This work
will enable the discovery of new materials for memristor devices and support the
development of efficient computing technologies, in line with the national focus
on semiconductor competitiveness and next generation microelectronics. Moreover,
this project seamlessly integrates the research and education objectives to
support the necessary workforce development in this field. The efforts include
overhaul of a nanoelectronics course to make it more accessible,
interdisciplinary research training for diverse students, the development of a
comprehensive virtual reality memristor simulator, providing github
documentation to the community and outreach to local high schools. The developed
models and experimental platforms will give students a hands-on education on
these devices, their manufacturing, and their use in neuromorphic hardware for
novel applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER project aims to create
ultra-low variability analog memristors by exploiting the underlying material
properties and physical phenomena in entropy-stabilized oxides. By comparison
with existing approaches attempting structural filament confinement at
mesoscopic (micron) scales using phase separation, this project proposes
filament confinement at nanometer scales for better switching uniformity.
Entropy-stabilized oxides will be explored because they provide a broad
compositional space and potential for high-quality films deposited at CMOS-
suitable temperatures where the requirements for desired switching dynamics can
be met. These complex oxides will be used to investigate the nanoscale control
of the filament dynamics by allowing the oxygen vacancies to preferentially move
along energetically-favorable trajectories, while the lattice is entropy-
stabilized. To this effect, the work will innovate across four intertwined
research and educational objectives. Objective #1 will focus on the
identification of suitable entropy-stabilized films and their use in engineering
memristor devices with ultra-low variability. Objective #2 will integrate and
characterize these entropy-stabilized memristors on transistor chips using
suitable buffer layers. Objective #3 will use the experimental dataset to
develop multi-dimensional device models useful in neural network simulations and
use the fabricated chips to prototype perceptrons and transformer neural
networks with software-equivalent accuracy. Objective #4 will target the
development and incorporation of experiential learning activities to support the
training of diverse students in the field. This project will make critical
advances in the understanding of the underlying material and physical
requirements for ultra-low variability memristors and investigate their
potential performance for next generation artificial intelligence
hardware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.