* 2239265
* CAREER: Computational Foundations of Modern Machine Learning
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Vatsal Sharan, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 01/31/2028
* USD 207,424.00

Machine learning is poised to play a central role in various areas of society,
including healthcare, transportation, education, and commerce. Despite this
immense potential, there are significant gaps in the theoretical understanding
of some of the most foundational aspects which are crucial for these modern
applications. These applications pose complex requirements, such as memory or
space constraints on the learning algorithm and robustness of the learned model
to changes in the data distribution. Classical learning theory, however, mainly
focuses on more traditionally examined metrics, such as the running time of the
learning algorithm and the average error that the model obtains on a test set.
Therefore, the goal of this project is to re-examine some of the foundations of
learning theory and develop a theory that takes into account modern requirements
such as memory efficiency and robustness. In doing this, the project will not
only help build a rich algorithmic suite to meet these requirements in practice
and hence significantly increase the scope of current applications; it will also
develop insights that can guide the understanding of new theoretical angles on
learning and computation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more detail, the project’s
objective is to understand the fundamental limits and trade-offs of what is
achievable under these contemporary requirements and use this understanding to
develop new algorithmic frameworks to meet the requirements. To achieve this,
the project will examine if there are inherent trade-offs between the available
memory and the best achievable convergence rate for a number of fundamental
learning and optimization problems. The project aims to leverage these trade-
offs to identify suitable classes of problems where it is possible to achieve
the convergence rate of memory-intensive algorithms but with much less memory
usage. Finally, the project aims to establish a principled framework that goes
beyond the classical training/test paradigm to understand the generalization
abilities of learned models, and to develop a toolbox that effectively addresses
modern robustness demands. To aid in the translation of theoretical results to
practical settings, open-source software will be developed, and algorithms will
be evaluated on benchmark datasets. An educational plan is tightly integrated
with the research objectives of the project, including outreach activities with
high-school students and a collaboration with the Los Angeles County Office of
Education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.