* 2239205
* CAREER: Discovering the Microphysics of Dark Matter with Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2028
* Vera Gluscevic, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 06/30/2028
* USD 400,000.00

This CAREER grant funds the research activities of Professor Vera Gluscevic at
the University of Southern California (USC).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
of Professor Gluscevic focuses on enabling the discovery of cosmological dark
matter. Dark matter comprises 85 percent of the matter in the universe, and
thereby governs the evolution and dynamics of galaxies. However, it cannot be
explained by any known particles or forces. Professor Gluscevic will combine the
available empirical evidence --- in particular, observations of the universe on
both small and large scales --- with fundamental theory and novel computational
methods, in order to identify the forces that govern the dark matter and uncover
its origins. The knowledge generated in this program will advance the national
interest by promoting the progress of fundamental science and by generating a
novel understanding of matter and physical reality itself. This program will
also directly create research opportunities for underrepresented minorities in
astronomy and physics and involve training of 8 junior scholars, including 5
undergraduate members of the National Society of Black Physicists. Their
training will involve contributions to the proposed research and emphasize
computation and data analysis, preparing them for careers in research. Professor
Gluscevic will also help to promote student retention and bolster the sense of
belonging for physics majors, through a new course on programming and data
literacy at USC. The associated activities will create a blueprint for an
interactive and inclusive physics classroom and help to diversify the workforce
in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, this project aims to enable new
methods for fast prediction of dark matter effects on galactic substructure. It
will also begin the first exploration of cosmological concordance in light of
dark matter interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.