* 2239635
* CAREER: Social tolerance and the neurobiology of group living
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Annaliese Beery, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Lynch
* 02/29/2028
* USD 680,000.00

Why do some individuals come together to live in groups while others are
solitary? This project investigates the brain basis of behaviors that promote
formation of social groups. Meadow voles provide an ideal opportunity to study
mechanisms that support social grouping because they naturally transition
between solitary and colonial in the wild, depending on the season. In summer,
meadow voles maintain individual territories, while in winter they come together
to form communal nesting groups. The goal of this research program is to
understand how the nervous system changes to support this transition to
sociality. By mimicking summer and winter day lengths in the laboratory,
researchers can drive changes in meadow vole social behavior. These changes in
behavior are accompanied by physiological changes in signaling pathways involved
in stress, fear, and affiliation. This CAREER award focuses on how the pathways
that change alongside social behavior are involved in shaping different aspects
of social behavior including avoidance of unfamiliar individuals, social
interest and tolerance, and preferences for specific companions. The proposed
studies cross levels of analysisâ€”connecting molecules, brain, and behavior to
reveal neural mechanisms underlying the tendency to form social groups. These
research activities are coupled to educational goals that will provide numerous
training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, and will lead to
the development of a new undergraduate research course to engage students in
inquiry-driven learning. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For species that live in groups,
peer social interactions are fundamental to group structure, and relationships
regularly form between group members who are not reproductive partners. These
relationships can be supported by prosocial factors such as motivation for
social interaction, and/or by lack of antisocial tendencies such as avoidance,
intolerance, and social fear. This project will test the hypothesis that winter
sociality in meadow voles is facilitated by relaxation of antisocial factors
including territoriality and fear, promoting social tolerance. Targeted
pharmacological and viral manipulations will be used to investigate the
functional role of seasonal changes in three pathways related to social fear and
arousal. Specifically these include (1) the role of seasonal changes in oxytocin
receptor signaling in mediating social selectivity and interaction with novel
individuals; (2) how day length-mediated changes in corticotropin releasing
factor signaling in specific brain regions influence social behavior; and (3)
the role of seasonal changes in autonomic nervous system regulation.
Understanding the neural causes and consequences of social grouping in meadow
voles will yield fundamental insights into how non-reproductive relationships
are mediated. The complementary educational plan focuses on undergraduate
research training in the laboratory and classroom. These activities will make
use of the data sets generated within this proposal and engage students in
studying behavioral and physiological variation in meadow
voles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.