* 2239615
* CAREER: NgOS: Towards Better Operating Systems: Fast, Secure, and Reliable
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Anton Burtsev, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 07/31/2028
* USD 240,389.00

Six decades ago, the first computer operating systems were developed as a
relatively simple software layer aimed at providing multiplexing of hardware and
ensuring basic isolation of users. Today, operating systems provide an industry-
standard execution environment for nearly every consumer and enterprise device
ranging from home entertainment systems to medical devices and scalable cloud
infrastructure. We trust these systems not only to run correctly when faced with
thousands of development commits and massive re-engineering efforts but also to
withstand targeted security attacks and provide an efficient execution
environment for a broad variety of modern applications. Unfortunately, the
impact of design decisions that were made six decades ago hinder the
reliability, security, and performance of modern systems. The proposed research
will explore a new operating system organization, NgOS, that incorporates novel
approaches for improving security and reliability of operating system kernels.
NgOS is aimed at providing a foundation for mitigating the vast economic damage
that is enabled by programming errors and security vulnerabilities in modern
operating systems. By changing the legacy architecture of the kernel, NgOS
builds a practical foundation for secure and reliable systems that eliminates
many kinds of software faults, targeted security attacks, malware botnets, and
related activities. NgOS will be open source, directly benefiting the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main contribution of this work is a clean-
slate operating system architecture designed to explore the benefits of low-
overhead isolation, language safety, and formal verification for security,
reliability, and performance of the operating system kernel. NgOS will leverage
novel hardware mechanisms aimed at support for isolation and control flow
integrity to develop new isolation mechanisms that enable low-overhead, fine-
grained isolation of operating system components. This will allow pushing the
principles of microkernelization to the extreme, i.e., enabling isolation across
subsystems that historically remained monolithic due to performance reasons.
NgOS then combines isolation with novel formal verification techniques to enable
modular verification of the kernel subsystems that are inherently shared, i.e.,
provide multiplexing of hardware resources. NgOS leverages advances in zero-
overhead safe programming languages like Rust, i.e., languages that implement
safety without garbage collection, to enable traditionally prohibitive high-
level programming language techniques in low-level systems code. A combination
of modular operating system organization and recent advances in practical
verification tools that leverage automation of verification for languages based
on linear types enable scalable verification of NgOS's kernel. Finally, for
subsystems that are beyond the reach of modern verification, NgOS leverages
high-level programming language abstractions to enable transparent recovery from
transient faults through lightweight, language-based
transactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.