* 2239627
* CAREER: Physics-Based Differentiable and Inverse Rendering
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Shuang Zhao, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 08/31/2028
* USD 112,947.00

This project will develop new computational tools to infer physical parameters
such as object shape and optical properties of a scene from measured images such
as photographs. These tools are essential for building digital twins of real-
world objects and will enable new applications in a wide array of fields
including computer vision, computational imaging, robotics, and
virtual/augmented reality (VR/AR). Unlike many existing methods that are purely
data-driven, this research will develop inference techniques that leverage a
simulator of how light propagates. This simulator will be differentiable,
meaning that it is possible to smoothly relate its control parameters to its
decisions, offering a new level of generality and physical accuracy for
recovering parameters reliably under complex scenarios such as illumination from
reflected light. Project outcomes have the potential for broad impact by
creating new areas in computer graphics and computational photonics. Additional
broad impact will derive from the PI's commitment to promoting STEM education
for underrepresented minorities, and from the project facilitating UCIâ€™s
outreach programs at the undergraduate and high school levels including lab
visits to allow hands-on experience with software development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will enable differentiable and inverse
rendering that is efficient, physically accurate, and sufficiently general to
handle arbitrary scene parameters under a wide variety of light transport
phenomena. The work will make the following four core contributions: first,
devising new mathematical tools to describe how infinitesimal changes in a
virtual scene affect the distribution of light, supporting a variety of light
transport models including steady state, polarized, and transient; second,
introducing physics-based differentiable rendering algorithms that enjoy the
generality of the new formulations while providing low-variance derivative
estimates; third, leveraging these algorithms to build differentiable rendering
software systems capable of efficiently handling complex real-world
configurations; and, lastly, utilizing the new algorithms and systems to
introduce physics-based inverse rendering pipelines that offer a new level of
generality and accuracy benefiting a wide array of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.