* 2239416
* CAREER: Continuous atmospheric water harvesting through gels
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Han-Jae Cho, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 02/29/2028
* USD 470,834.00

With the lowest surface water levels in the Southwestern US in 1,200 years,
there is an urgent need to tap into alternative water sources. One source is the
water vapor in the atmosphere. Even in arid regions, there is a vast quantity of
water that, if tapped, would represent an important new source. Potentially, a
solar-panel-sized device could collect enough water to satisfy one’s daily
drinking requirement. However, the challenge is that transforming water vapor
into liquid form and purifying it requires a sizeable amount of energy and
advanced materials. Additionally, the water production rates with state-of-the-
art approaches are very low, especially in arid, low-humidity regions. The
funding will support an investigation into a fundamentally different approach
utilizing easily synthesized gel materials and natural solar energy that could
provide substantially increased water production rates. Furthermore, this
approach would be tested in the driest city in the US—Las Vegas, Nevada—a
metropolitan area where alternative water sources are needed most. In addition,
this project will involve the local educational community by distributing water
harvesting stations to local high schools to provide valuable real-world data
that will support the research effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of
this project is to demonstrate how a flow-through atmospheric water harvesting
approach with hydrogel membranes can provide advantageous water production
through a focused study of transport and material science. Using the sun to
distill captured water, the solar limit of water production is approximately 10
liters per day per square meter of device footprint. The proposed approach uses
separate, specialized capture and distillation membranes as well as a storage
basin to segregate tasks and improve performance. The central hypothesis is that
gel membranes of high poroelastic diffusivity and tunable thermal conductivity
are needed to maximize water flux. To test this hypothesis, the project will (1)
study heat and mass transport around the membranes and develop new models to
incorporate relevant physics, (2) uncover new polymer physics that dictate
material transport bottlenecks within membranes, and (3) investigate system
behavior in varying conditions and discover viable prototype designs. The work
will include a mixture of heat and mass transfer experiments and material
testing as well as computational modeling with the finite element method. The
work will also involve local water quality experts and an effective
demonstration of this harvesting approach will be communicated with the greater
community to generate interest in alternative sourcing of
water.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.