* 2239062
* CAREER: Geometric Approaches to Simulation
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Albert Chern, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 03/31/2028
* USD 269,343.00

Physical simulations and visual computing are pivotal in exploring physical
sciences and technological innovations. Despite increasing computing power over
the years, fundamental numerical challenges still await solutions. This project
addresses two such challenges: (A) Simulating vortex-dominated fluids; (B)
Solving partial differential equations on infinite domains. These computational
problems frequently occur when one computes physical systems in large
environments. The research aims to exploit geometry to tackle these problems at
a fundamental level. A mathematical focus on geometry affords nuanced
formulations for fluid dynamics systems that can be more resilient to numerical
error. It also offers systematic approaches for identifying the invariants under
transformation. Project outcomes are expected to simulate turbulent flows at
microscopic scales and remove infinite-domain challenges through suitable
transformations, while bringing mathematical ideas in geometry to a larger
audience. A diversity-supporting education and outreach plan will likely result
in closer communication between different fluid dynamics communities such as
computer graphics and the climate sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many physical
simulations take place in a flat Euclidean space. Therefore, a deeper set of
geometric tools, usually motivated by non-Euclidean geometry, has yet to draw
much attention in developing numerical solvers. This project explores geometric
ideas expected to solve fundamental challenges in simulation. One challenge is
to simulate fluids at a high Reynolds number, which is central to computer
animation, aerodynamics, climate science, etc. The dominating phenomena are
intricate vortex dynamics and turbulence often lost during simulation. One
thrust of the project aims to develop an implicit flow representation that
faithfully encodes the vorticity, in contrast to the traditional formulation
using a velocity field. Such an implicit representation can resolve Kolmogorov
microscales at low cost. The other thrust, an Erlangen program for simulation,
explores transformations of the domains and the variables such that a partial
differential equation (PDE) is left invariant. When a transformation can turn an
infinite domain into a finite domain, finite-domain PDE solvers are
automatically infinite-domain PDE solvers after being wrapped by the
transformation. This method would fundamentally solve numerical challenges
involving infinite domains. Preliminary results suggest that many important PDE
systems, including wave equations, signed distance fields, optimal transport
problems, and minimal surface problems admit such a hidden
symmetry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.