* 2239351
* CAREER: An Automated End-to-end Machine Learning System
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Zhihao Jia, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Jason Hallstrom
* 04/30/2028
* USD 244,731.00

Machine learning (ML) has surpassed human performance in some contexts,
including image classification, natural language processing, game playing, and
content generation. ML’s success is enabled by the recent development of ML
systems that offer high-level programming interfaces for people to prototype
various ML models on modern hardware platforms. However, deploying these models
in diverse, real-world computing environments requires significant engineering
effort to design and implement the required performance optimizations. To
address this challenge, this project explores an automated, end-to-end approach
to building efficient, scalable, and sustainable ML systems for diverse ML
applications and hardware platforms. The project takes a bottom-up, three-
pronged approach that involves (1) automatically discovering and verifying
various systems optimizations for different ML models and hardware backends; (2)
new methodologies for applying the discovered systems optimizations in an end-
to-end fashion; and (3) combining systems and ML optimizations for fast and
accurate ML computations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As ML techniques move closer to
end-users and become increasingly integrated into today’s society, the proposed
work can effectively reduce the energy consumption and financial cost of modern
ML techniques. The key improvements of the proposed research will arise along
two axes: (1) replacing manually designed performance optimizations used in
today’s ML systems with automated generation, verification, and application of
systems optimizations for ML computations on modern hardware platforms; and (2)
democratizing ML techniques by lowering the monetary cost of developing and
deploying ML applications. The project also includes outreach activities to
attract students from populations currently underrepresented in computing. Key
to these activities is embracing the interdisciplinary nature of ML systems
research, which spans computer systems, compilers, programming languages, and
machine learning. The software artifacts of this project will be released and
regularly maintained.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.