* 2239400
* CAREER: Composable Memory Consistency Models for Heterogeneous Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Tyler Sorensen, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 06/30/2028
* USD 101,482.00

Today’s computer systems are heterogeneous, i.e., composed of different
processing units (PUs). Historically, each processing unit has largely worked on
its own task, e.g., central processing units (CPUs) run web browsers, while
graphics processing units (GPUs) perform graphics computations. However,
emerging workloads, e.g., in image recognition and particle simulation, have a
complex structure that can achieve an order-of-magnitude performance benefit
from close collaboration between PUs. This requires precise rules for how data
flows between PUs, e.g., so that critical updates are not missed. These rules
are called the memory consistency model. While these models have been studied
for individual PUs, they have not been widely studied for heterogeneous systems.
The project’s novelty is to design a logical framework for heterogeneous memory
consistency models, which will enable system designers to provide precise rules
for how different PUs can collaborate. The project’s impact will utilize this
logical framework to specify the behavior of prevalent real-world heterogeneous
systems, such as mobile phones, and thus enable more efficient computation of
emerging workloads on these devices. Additionally, this project will develop
equitable educational material for GPU programming by focusing on portable
abstractions, which can be deployed across many devices and price points; in
contrast, most existing material is tied to expensive vendor-specific
frameworks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will utilize relational logic to
design a modular and composable framework for specifying heterogeneous memory
models. The framework will allow existing memory models, e.g., for CPUs and
GPUs, to be composed together to describe a heterogeneous system. In order to
compose different models, the investigator will provide a new relation, called
the heterogeneous happens-before, which provides a partial order across memory
accesses in the system. The framework will be implemented in an executable
constraint solver, which will allow: (1) small programs to be analyzed under the
new memory models, and (2) the automatic generation of test cases, which can be
used to test existing heterogeneous systems to validate that they conform to a
specification. The investigator will analyze existing heterogeneous applications
to characterize the required collaboration (i.e., synchronization) patterns and
ensure that the logical specifications can be used to reason about the
correctness of the applications. Combined, these tasks provide a theoretical
foundation for reasoning about heterogeneous memory models and show how complex
real-world systems (and applications) can be reasoned about using compositional
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.