* 2239507
* CAREER: Highly Tunable Dry Adhesion through Constrained Buckling
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Wanliang Shan, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 05/31/2028
* USD 547,315.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award aims to investigate tunable
dry adhesion of soft hollow pillars. Hollow pillars are unique in that they
exhibit adhesion changes over 1000 times when buckling under pressure. Tunable
dry adhesion has many applications including pick-and-place manufacturing and
haptics. However, current approaches to tunable dry adhesion still suffer from
limited adhesion changes. Many also require high power consumption and long
activation time. This research will introduce a new approach to highly tunable
dry adhesion using soft hollow pillar structures. The study will examine the
effects of geometry, material stiffness, and buckling on the fundamental
adhesion mechanics of these soft hollow structures. The results from this
project will advance the development of soft grippers for manipulation of small,
curved, and thin parts that are difficult to manipulate using current
approaches. The new mechanics knowledge gained will also benefit the design of
other robotic mechanisms, such as haptics. This project also has a set of
integrated education and outreach programs to broaden its impacts including
course development, undergraduate research opportunities, soft robotics summer
camps at a local STEM museum, and interactions with industry
partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research objective of this CAREER project is
to unravel fundamental mechanics of highly tunable dry adhesion of soft hollow
pillars through constrained buckling for compliant manipulation applications.
Specifically, the project will investigate (1) constrained buckling of
cylindrical soft hollow pillars under low pressure and how the geometric and
material parameters impact its adhesion mechanics; (2) the impact of cross
section shape on tunable adhesion of soft hollow pillars; (3) the impact of
using smart materials with tunable stiffness on tunable adhesion of soft hollow
pillars; and (4) the impact of bistable bottom surface on tunable adhesion of
soft hollow pillars. Both experiments and finite element simulations will be
used to address these fundamental mechanics problems. The success of this
project will generate new mechanics knowledge that advances the field of tunable
dry adhesion for compliant manipulation and other robotic
mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.