* 2239801
* CAREER: Learning and Information Processing in Non-linear Mechanical Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2027
* Arvind Murugan, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvio May
* 12/31/2027
* USD 239,999.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award will support
research to understand how mechanical systems can learn intelligent behavior in
ways similar to neural networks. Mechanical materials will be studied that
actively re-organize themselves through local processes so as to recognize and
respond to subtle patterns in physical stimuli. The fields of condensed matter
physics and materials science have traditionally focused on systems with fixed
capabilities. Inspired by the brain, this project seeks to understand the
principles that allow physical systems to change themselves and `learn’ new
functions. The brain is remarkable not only in its ability to learn but in that
learning is done without any global coordinator who decides which neurons should
connect to whom in order to recognize a friendly face. Instead, neurons wire up
with each other through local processes, such as Hebbian learning (‘fire
together, wire together’), and self-organize to recognize patterns in the world
around us. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inspired by such local self-organization in
service of global function, the PI recently proposed training a material in
using Hebbian-like learning to reinforce right behaviors and anti-Hebbian
learning to penalize wrong behaviors. The ability to eliminate undesired
behaviors in addition to enhancing desired ones will allow for a powerful
physical analog of supervised learning in neural networks. However, a material
cannot autonomously learn in this Hebbian and anti-Hebbian manner without
special forms of memory. Further, fundamental principles of thermodynamics
dictate that these forms of memory and their erasure require materials to
consume energy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate such non-
equilibrium requirements for Hebbian-inspired learning in materials. The
consideration of non-equilibrium phenomena is at the frontier of condensed
matter physics, but instead of order and pattern formation, this project focuses
on non-equilibrium information processing. Besides developing the underlying
theory, this project will investigate how feedback loops between mechanics and
chemistry can lead to non-equilibrium learning behaviors in practice. The PI
will also investigate what physical aspects make a mechanical system act like a
neural network, i.e., be capable of recognizing complex patterns in stimuli.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will provide insight into how biological systems
adapt to their environment since feedback between mechanics and chemistry is
common in cell biology. At a fundamental level, this project will expand our
view of what non-equilibrium mechanical systems can do beyond mechanical
responses to learning behaviors like neural networks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate and graduate students will be trained in
interdisciplinary research. The PI will develop courses that target the emerging
scientific interface between physics and materials science. For the broader
public, the PI will develop hands-on demos that illustrate and relate to
cutting-edge ideas in both physics and theoretical computer science. These demos
will include 3-D printed networks and mechanical structures that change and
adapt as they are used. They will communicate to the broader public how exciting
new research emerges at the interface of different sciences. The demos will be
disseminated through outreach events and to K-12 educators for use in the
classroom. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this proposal is to elucidate the non-
equilibrium requirements for mechanical systems to physically learn new
functionalities in a way rivaling neural networks. While many existing
frameworks for adaptive materials can enhance a desired behavior by lowering its
energy during a period of training, these frameworks are missing key ingredients
that we will address here. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Unlike artificial neural
networks that are trained by global optimization, biological neural networks are
thought to learn through local rules such as Hebbian learning. Since physical
systems are also typically constrained by locality, the PI has explored training
a material in a supervised way by using Hebbian learning when it shows the right
behaviors and anti-Hebbian learning when it shows the wrong behaviors. The
ability to eliminate undesired behaviors in addition to enhancing desired ones
will allow for a powerful physical analog of supervised learning in neural
networks. However, for a material to learn autonomously through such Hebbian and
anti-Hebbian learning, it must have forms of memory that are only allowed when
detailed balance is broken. This project will determine the non-equilibrium
memory requirements for supervised learning in matter that experiences desired
and undesired behaviors over time. In addition to abstract theory, this project
will also explore how natural chemo-mechanical feedback circuits, found in
numerous biological and synthetic systems, can implement such memory. Through
collaborations with materials scientists, this project will instantiate the
theory here in specific systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will expand our
understanding of what non-linear non-equilibrium disordered mechanical systems
can do. While non-equilibrium driving has been extensively studied as a
mechanism of order, organization and pattern formation, our framework shows how
non-equilibrium driving enables a system to learn statistical stimuli-response
behaviors, much like a neural network. A frontier in soft condensed matter is to
reveal the universe of behaviors enabled by chemo-mechanical coupling; but
developments are currently siloed with sophisticated neural network-like
information processing investigated in well-mixed molecular circuits without any
mechanics. This work will build a unified theoretical framework, combining
statistical physics models of molecular circuits with adaptive mechanical
networks, allowing us to compute the dissipation requirements for adaptive
behaviors in mechanical systems. Finally, by contrasting learning in mechanical
systems and in neural networks, this work will provide a new perspective on
learning itself. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed theoretical condensed matter
work will develop tools that will impact materials engineering, including
metamaterials and bio-materials, and biological physics. While current
approaches optimize for desired behaviors chosen ahead of time, the new
framework here allows materials to autonomously learn and improve function over
time by harnessing recent advances ranging from DNA nanotechnology to ceramics
and alloys. The interdisciplinary research here is also an ideal platform for
impacting high school education through engaging demos based on 3-d printed
meta-materials and shape-memory alloys. These demos will be disseminated through
public science outreach events in Chicago.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.