* 2239666
* CAREER: Magma transport and volcanic seismicity of Hawaii, from the summits to the hotspot
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Zachary Ross, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 01/31/2028
* USD 248,723.00

This project aims to use precise locations of tiny earthquakes to illuminate the
geometry of magma chambers and pipelines beneath Hawaii's active volcanoes. This
will help volcanologists understand how magmas move from the Earth's mantle to
volcanoes, and why this movement can cause earthquakes. Dr. Ross and his team
will use new artificial intelligence techniques to identify microearthquakes in
seismometer data from the past 14 years, which will make the list (or
'catalogue') of documented Hawaii earthquakes at least ten times as long as it
was before. Locations of these quakes will outline features such as magma
chambers and conduits connecting these chambers to each other and to volcanoes.
Measurements of shaking caused by some of these earthquakes will also be used to
generate a separate, complementary image of the subsurface (like a medical CT
scan). Dr. Ross will participate in the newly created “Earthquake Fellows”
program at Caltech for high school students from predominantly underserved
minority communities in the Los Angeles area. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The magmatic
architecture of the Hawaiian volcanic system is central to understanding the
transport of magma from the upper mantle to the individual volcanoes. This
process in turn is at least partly responsible for the abundance of seismicity
in Hawaii. This project will leverage recent advances in earthquake monitoring
with deep learning algorithms to produce a substantially enhanced seismicity
catalog for Hawaii by reprocessing the entire continuous waveform archive. A key
goal of the project is to better understand these transport structures and
associated driving processes. As part of this project, Dr. Ross and his team
will develop a 14-year seismicity catalog to shed more light on the magmatic
conduits in this system and their role in generating seismicity. This will be
accomplished using three interrelated components: (i) a seismic tomography of
the magmatic architecture with a state-of-the-art machine learning inversion
technique, (ii) systematic analysis of the spatio-temporal seismicity patterns
and the associated magma transport structures across the island, and (iii)
derived earthquake source properties to study the physical processes driving
these events and their relation to the causative transport
structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.