* 2239311
* CAREER: Rebuilding the Virtual Memory Abstraction Across Hardware and Operating Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Dimitrios Skarlatos, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 03/31/2028
* USD 215,988.00

Virtual memory is a cornerstone abstraction of modern computing systems that
enables virtualization, programmability, and isolation of memory resources.
However, existing virtual memory mechanisms have not been designed for the
current era of datacenter computing with ample memory capacity, a plethora of
heterogeneous hardware resources, and microarchitectural attacks that are able
to bypass current isolation mechanisms. To address these inefficiencies this
project will rebuild virtual memory from the ground up. The proposed research
agenda will enable high utilization of hardware resources and greatly improve
the security of software and hardware systems leading to efficient, sustainable,
and secure datacenters. The project includes a comprehensive education plan that
is integrated with the proposed research agenda. This includes undergraduate and
graduate course offerings, research opportunities, and outreach activities.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research project tackles fundamental
research challenges in designing and building a pliable virtual memory
abstraction that is scalable, heterogeneous, and secure. The technical approach
is based on a virtual memory abstraction that will enable: (i) scalable address
translation for terabyte-scale memory systems, (ii) heterogeneous hardware-aware
virtual memory support across the stack, and (iii) strong and configurable
security for multi-tenant environments in the presence of microarchitectural
vulnerabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.