* 2239550
* CAREER: Understanding the Physics of Turbulent Flow, Erosion and Depositional Patterns in River Systems
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Laura Alvarez, University of Texas at El Paso
* Continuing Grant
* Amanda Keen-Zebert
* 07/31/2028
* USD 100,637.00

Rivers are geomorphologic features that play an essential role in landscape
evolution. As the river landscape changes due to climate change, severe
droughts, floods, and human interventions, the fluvial ecosystems and their
ecological and economic values respond in unprecedented ways, and the majority
of these cases cannot currently be predicted. Understanding and predicting
transient dynamics in river systems through tools that accurately estimate flow
and sediment transport is still limited, partially because of the difficulty of
monitoring sediment but also because of the inability to understand the fluid
dynamics. This work aims to provide a theoretical and numerical framework to
study the feedback between turbulent flow, sediment transport, and
geomorphologic changes in river systems. The principal investigator and students
will develop and implement state-of-the-art physically-based models aided by
machine learning that allow the quantification and forecasting of the flow and
sediment dynamics in field-scale rivers. The education and outreach plan,
integrated with the research objectives, focuses on (1) engaging young women at
college, undergraduate, and graduate levels into Earth science, through
participatory writing for the creation of a science comic book, followed by high
school curriculum development, as tools to enhance Earth science pedagogy and
promote gender equity, and (2) public outreach through the university art museum
that is considered to be an informal learning
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study addresses explicitly how convoluted
fluid dynamics manifest in fluvial environments, such as regions of massive flow
separation, secondary flows, high-velocity core plunges, velocity inversions,
and free shear layers; and the role played by macro-turbulence in sediment
transport and river morpho-dynamics. The overall objective is to transform the
state of the art in quantifying and predicting the fundamental physics of the
coupled fluid and sediment mechanisms that control the morpho-dynamic changes in
fluvial systems. A hybrid physics-based/ machine learning algorithm coupled with
a sediment transport and morphodynamic solver will be developed and tested at
different spatial scales, from laboratory to large river reaches. The hydro-
morphodynamic model will use the Large Eddy Simulation (LES) techniques to
resolve macro-turbulence and predict the sediment concentration and riverbed
evolution in the computational domain. A dynamically adaptive, process-based
domain re-meshing, based on machine learning algorithms, will be applied to
refine the complex topography in areas where turbulent structures are dominant
and fundamental to understanding and quantifying erosion and depositional
processes present in recirculation zones and plunging flows, thus ensuring a
sufficient spatial scale resolution to represent geomorphologic processes. Once
the fundamental framework is validated, it could be adapted to different river
environments to test its spatio-temporal transferability. The expected societal
outcomes of the educational component are focused on: (1) enhancing Earth
science learning among women and racial minorities, (2) modifying stereotypes of
women in the Earth science community, and (3) increasing the representation of
women in Earth science and creating new literacy in gender
equity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.