* 2239242
* CAREER: Using Tracer Interrelationships to Understand Large-Scale Geophysical Flows and their Changes
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2028
* Marianna Linz, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 02/29/2028
* USD 897,379.00

This project will explore a new method to understand the history of the large-
scale patterns of winds in the stratosphere and currents in the ocean. These
winds and currents are important components of the global climate, affecting
radiation in the stratosphere, the recovery of the ozone layer, and the storage
of heat and carbon in the deep ocean. A tracer is a substance that has a small
concentration and follows the flow of a fluid. Wildfire smoke can be a tracer;
smoke from fires in the Western United States follows the jet stream, bringing
air pollution all the way to the east coast in a large plume that can be seen
from space. Carbon dioxide is a trace gas that has no appreciable chemical
losses, so it can be used to examine the properties of the winds or currents
that are transporting it. The relationships between different tracers have long
been used to qualitatively describe winds and currents; for example,
measurements of very high salt content and high temperature in the ocean
demonstrate that the water started at the surface in the Mediterranean, even if
the measurement is taken in the middle of the Atlantic. Just high temperature or
high salt content would not lead to the same conclusion. This project involves
developing and applying theory to use relationships between different tracers
quantitatively to examine trends in the global patterns of winds in the
stratosphere and currents in the ocean.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Measurements of
different tracers go back well over a century in the ocean and nearly 70 years
in the stratosphere, and so the ability to use relationships between them to
understand the winds and currents potentially unlocks a vast quantity of data to
be analyzed in a new way that provides information about the history of global-
scale winds and currents. This work will provide new insights into how these
winds and currents affect radiation and climate by examining the storage of
carbon in the deep ocean and the chemicals that set the rate of the recovery of
the ozone layer. Three graduate students will be trained as part of this
project. Tracers are one of the best ways to visualize the flow and are
therefore excellent for learning about fluid motion. The PI will develop
curricula that bring fluid experiments to a range of college-level classes with
an inexpensive apparatus made of Lego components and a kitchen turntable. In
addition, stratospheric science teaching materials, including a textbook and
programming activities, will be developed and made available as part of these
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.