* 2239105
* CAREER: Impacts of the Chemical and Physical Properties of Surfactants on the Hygroscopic Growth of Atmospheric Aerosol Particles
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Amanda Frossard, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 02/29/2028
* USD 100,940.00

This CAREER project focuses on the study of surfactant compounds in atmospheric
aerosol and their effects on particle hygroscopic growth. Field collections and
laboratory experiments using high resolution chemical and physical analyses will
be used to assess the influence of surfactant molecular composition and
associated properties on the hygroscopic growth of atmospheric particles.
Hygroscopic growth can alter particle size and composition, both of which are
important determinants in the influence of aerosol particles on visibility and
human health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The effect of surfactants on particle
hygroscopic growth is expected to be nonlinear and dependent on the surfactant
molecular composition, structure, and critical micelle concentration. The
experimental plan will address the following questions: (1) What are the
compositions, structures, and interfacial properties of surfactants in
atmospheric aerosol particles? How do these surfactant characteristics vary as a
function of particle size and air mass source region (e.g., natural,
anthropogenic, marine, aged influences)? (2) What effects do surfactant
structure, composition, and interfacial properties have on the hygroscopic
growth of submicron and supermicron aerosol particles? Chemical and physical
measurements of aerosol particles collected as part of two field campaigns at
the Skidaway Institute of Oceanography, on the coast of Georgia, will be made
during two seasons to capture seasonal variability. Laboratory experiments will
also be conducted to measure the hygroscopic growth of model laboratory-
generated aerosol particles to determine the influence of the surfactant
fraction directly. Multivariate statistics will be used to determine the
surfactant properties in different particle types.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
education and outreach plan includes working with high school students to
collect local air quality measurements, developing a new laboratory course to
explore the principles of analytical chemistry through measurements of aerosol
chemistry, and conducting a first-year research seminar course and a summer
research experience for undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.