* 2239707
* CAREER: Developing a list-mode imaging paradigm
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2028
* Abhinav Kumar Jha, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 02/29/2028
* USD 393,148.00

Imaging sciences have revolutionized discoveries in a multitude of scientific
applications. Multiple imaging systems, which include systems for imaging living
systems and those for gamma-ray astronomy, have the unique ability to acquire
data on a per-photon basis and store this data in list format. However, the full
potential of these systems, referred to as list-mode systems, remains untapped
since current methods to process data from these systems are sub-optimal and
result in information loss. This information loss is even more concerning for
list-mode systems, since typically these systems are photon-starved, and it is
vital that maximal information be extracted from each detected photon. Towards
addressing this important need, in this CAREER project, a new paradigm to
process data from list-mode systems will be developed. The development of this
paradigm will open new frontiers on imaging small-sized regions and low-count
imaging. Direct impact will be demonstrated in quantifying physiological
properties of small structures deep in the brain towards the goal of
understanding the pathophysiology of Parkinson disease. The paradigm is also
poised to impact many other sciences where such systems are used including
astrophysics, biomedical research, geoscientific process monitoring, and nuclear
security and safety. The highly integrated educational objective will be to
train, educate, and motivate students at all levels about the fundamental
aspects of imaging science, with the goal of grooming the next generation of
imaging scientists who possess strong mathematical proficiency and the ability
to translate this proficiency to develop methods to process data from imaging
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed program aims to push the fundamental
limits of imaging by developing novel theoretical and computational methods to
extract task-specific information from list-mode imaging systems. Conventional
computational imaging methods are typically designed to operate with discrete
data. Thus, when processing data from list-mode systems, these methods first bin
that data, which, as has been shown in multiple studies, results in loss of
task-specific information. To avoid this information loss, there is a crucial
need for new methods that can process the list-mode data in this continuous
format. The intellectual significance of this proposal stems from this need and
lies in the development of a continuous-to-continuous operator-based paradigm
and associated methods to process list-mode data. The research approach is to
(a) develop new information-theory-based techniques to quantify limits on task
performance with list-mode systems, (b) design and validate algorithms to
extract task-specific information from list-mode systems, including new
reconstruction algorithms that will estimate continuous representation of the
underlying object and (c) develop algorithms to estimate mean regional uptake in
small regions of the brain from single-photon emission computed tomography
images. The proposed list-mode paradigm will strongly impact both the
fundamental and applied aspects of imaging science by providing new rigorous
mathematical formalisms to process list-mode data, thereby yielding the ability
to retrieve previously unextracted information from these
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.