* 2239862
* CAREER: RI: Structural Linguistic Generalization Through Expert-Designed Tasks
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Tal Linzen, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Eleni Miltsakaki
* 08/31/2028
* USD 112,182.00

As speakers of a language, we can understand complex sentences that we have
never read before. We do so through a process called structural generalization:
we divide the sentence into smaller parts, interpret the meaning of each part,
and then put these meanings together to interpret the full sentence. Current
language technologies, such as the virtual assistants installed on many mobile
phones, are not always able to generate meaning in this way. This leads them to
make mistakes when they are expected to understand more complex commands; these
mistakes may be more common in languages that are spoken by smaller communities.
The researchers involved in this project will create tests in multiple languages
in order to measure a computational system’s structural generalization
capabilities, and will use those tests to teach the system to generalize
correctly. This will result in systems that work more reliably and across a
wider range of languages. Alongside its technological contribution, this project
will help train a new generation of scientists that are well-versed in both
artificial intelligence and the structure and diversity of human languages. The
project will also draw new populations to the field through outreach events that
will introduce students interested in language to artificial
intelligence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;From a technical standpoint, the researchers
will create both expert-designed and real-world semantic parsing tasks –
mappings from natural language utterances to a formal language that captures
their meaning – which will span a diverse sample of languages. In the expert-
designed tasks, natural language inputs will be generated from a grammar created
by a linguist, and the outputs will be lambda calculus formulas computed from
the input. The distribution of linguistic structures will differ systematically
between the training and test set of each task (“structural splits”). The
structural splits of the expert-designed task will be used to endow artificial
neural networks, such as large language models, with an inductive bias that
favors structural generalization; such an inductive bias will then lead to
structural generalization on real-world tasks. This will be accomplished using a
meta-learning approach, whose objective is to learn from one part of the split
and generalize to the other. These behavioral experiments will be accompanied by
an investigation of how the network’s internal properties, such as initial
weights, training dynamics and loss landscape, give rise to structural
generalization. Overall, by providing tools for measuring and promoting
structural generalization across languages, this project will lead to more
robust and sample-efficient language understanding
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.