* 2239393
* CAREER: Towards Understanding and Control of Surface-Impinging Particle-Laden Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2027
* Shyam Menon, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 11/30/2027
* USD 454,996.00

Gas flows laden with dispersed solid particles are generated in a variety of
engineering applications where their interaction with material surfaces can lead
to positive or negative outcomes. Positive outcomes include spray coatings and
cold spray additive manufacturing, while negative outcomes include surface
erosion and deposition affecting the performance of aircraft propulsion systems,
wind turbines, and spacecraft in dusty atmospheres. Achieving control of the
multiphase interaction process is limited by gaps in fundamental fluid dynamical
understanding of momentum and energy transfer processes between the continuous
gas phase and dispersed particles, which subsequently drives the interaction
outcome between the particles and material surfaces. The PI will pursue an
integrated research and education program to achieve three specific goals: 1)
establish a connection between gas phase-influenced particle conditions and
collision outcomes when the particles impact a solid surface, 2) use this
connection to develop a control scheme to mitigate surface damage utilizing
fluidic injection into the boundary layer, and 3) advance aerospace education
through implementation of hands-on rocketry and aerodynamics courses for
undergraduate and high-school students as well as a traveling exhibit on
shockwave propagation aimed at the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
overall goal of this work is to address knowledge gaps pertaining to the
critical role played by fluid dynamics in influencing surface impingement
processes by particle-laden gas flows. Impulsively-accelerated single particles
will be studied at controlled conditions in a shock tube setup, wherein,
particle motion and temperature measurements will be used to study unsteady
particle drag and heat transfer, and evaluate existing models for the same.
Ultra-high-speed imaging of particle impact with a solid surface will be used to
map collision outcomes to a regime map characterized by non-dimensional
temperature and kinetic energy. Validation of the regime map and attempts to
control surface damage through fluidic injection in the surface boundary layer
will be pursued in a multiphase hot cascade setup generating continuous,
particle-laden flow over an airfoil surface. The research program will serve as
a platform for aerospace education through outreach activities including: a
laboratory component on hybrid rockets incorporated into an undergraduate
propulsion course, a mini-course on aerodynamics and propulsion for K-8
students, a middle-school summer research mentorship program, and an interactive
shock wave demonstration incorporated into a traveling exhibit that visits
schools and state fairs to further science education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.