* 2239225
* CAREER: GLOW: Linking the atmospheric and bulk compositions of rocky exoplanets: Constraints from meteorite outgassing analyses
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Myriam Telus, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Continuing Grant
* Martin Still
* 06/30/2028
* USD 463,707.00

The investigator, Dr. Myriam Telus of the University of California-Santa Cruz,
has developed experiments to measure gases released when meteorites are heated
to the high temperatures occurring during planet formation. These experiments
are used to understand the link between the interior and atmospheres of rocky
planets. This work also provides hands-on research experience for students at
both the undergraduate and graduate level. There is still much that is not
understand about atmospheres, the layer of gases surrounding planets. Rocky
planets, like the Earth, may form atmospheres during the early stages of their
formation. Planet atmospheres form when gas is released from the planet due to
heating within its interior. Meteorites are left over rocky material from the
early stages of planet formation. They provide a unique way to link the initial
makeup of atmospheres to the ingredients that went into building planets. This
connection is important because planets are not easily observed by telescopes;
the main window into other worlds is through their atmospheres.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will determine the composition of
meteorite outgassing species, especially those relevant for exoplanet
observations such as H2O, CO, CO2, and CH4. The objectives are to 1) use a
thermogravimetric analyzer combined with a small gas chromatograph system to
measure the outgassing of gas species for various meteorite types at
temperatures up to 1600°C and under various redox conditions and 2) use
complementary geochemical techniques to track changes in the bulk composition
and mineralogy of outgassing residues. These experiments are relevant for rocky
planets, including those around Sun-like stars, those that formed in more
oxidizing conditions, hot rocky planets, and those that experience open-system
conditions. This research can provide foundational data for observing, modeling,
and interpreting atmospheric signatures of exoplanets. The experimental approach
of this investigator is an important shift from model-based methods typically
used to address this connection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Co-funding was provided by
the Division of Astronomy and Division of Earth Sciences through a partnership
focused on Geoscience Lessons for and from Other Worlds
(GLOW).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.