* 2239602
* CAREER: CAS-Climate: Environmental Sustainability of Combined versus Separate Sewer Systems along the U.S. West Coast
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Hassan Davani, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2028
* USD 457,099.00

The integrated research and educational activities of this CAREER project target
advancing scientific understanding of chronic stressors along the coast, such as
Sea-Level Rise (SLR), and their associated sustainability implications for
wastewater infrastructure. The project will analyze the interconnected
environmental and social dimensions of SLR-induced groundwater shoaling by
taking into account the impacts of potential adaptation strategies. Shoaling
occurs when rising seawater pushes inland. The denser marine water underlies
shallow freshwater aquifers, pushing them upward. Thus, SLR is likely to disrupt
urban systems below the ground, for kilometers away from the coastline. Of
particular focus are the processes through which wastewater infrastructure is
impacted by SLR-driven groundwater shoaling and precipitation intensification.
Disruptions are expected to cause an increased likelihood of sewer overflows,
especially in communities that lack quality infrastructure resilient against
groundwater infiltration. Communities with vulnerable and underrepresented
populations are the place-based locations for study in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to (i) discover to what extent
SLR and precipitation intensification may result in a systemic increase of
groundwater flux in coastal wastewater systems, (ii) assess sewer overflow-
related eco-toxicity impacts on marginalized communities that are susceptible to
a disproportionate impact; (iii) develop a novel, twofold machine learning
paradigm to boost the efficacy of sewer footage big data analytics for the
systemic evaluation of groundwater infiltration risks; and (iv) quantify the
sustainability of adaptation strategies by developing a mutual framework where
underserved stakeholders provide input into what challenges and mitigations are
to be assessed, while learning longer-term sustainability implications. In
support of educational affordability, this project will develop open educational
resources benefiting many undergraduate students during the project and beyond.
It will also engage K-12 students and teachers through yearly workshops on
infrastructure and sustainability. Additionally, the project will develop a new
course as a technical upper-division elective for civil and environmental majors
at SDSU to fill curricular needs in PI’s department in the area of
infrastructure sustainability. As a faculty member at SDSU, a Hispanic Serving
Institution (HSI), the PI aims to actively engage students from underrepresented
groups through existing recruiting initiatives for broadening participation. The
project will engage engineers and planners in public works departments through a
workshop on sustainability implications of SLR. The findings of this research
will be submitted for publication in peer-reviewed journals and presented at
scientific and industrial conferences, such as the annual training event of
Industrial Environmental Association (IEA), a non-profit organization in CA that
provides education for industrial units to facilitate environmental
compliance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.