* 2239664
* CAREER: The evolutionary causes and functional consequences of sexual dimorphism in flight muscle size in birds
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Natalie Wright, Kenyon College
* Continuing Grant
* Miriam Ashley-Ross
* 07/31/2028
* USD 501,512.00

This project aims to understand why males and females of many (but not all)
types of birds differ in the size of their flight muscles, and how these
differences affect their flight. Flight in birds has been and continues to be an
inspiration for engineers designing better flying machines, but much is still
unknown about how small differences in bird anatomy, like those within a
species, influence flight ability. This project also has a strong educational
component: undergraduate students will be involved in all aspects of the
research, learning to create hypotheses, design studies, collect and analyze
data, and write up results. Students in an undergraduate biology course will
create play-based vertebrate anatomy teaching materials for use in a local
children’s science center and in Head Start preschool classrooms. In doing so,
they will gain valuable skills in science communication while improving their
understanding of anatomy. Underserved children from a rural community will
benefit from new engaging educational materials designed for them.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aims of this project are to understand why many
species of birds exhibit sexual dimorphism in flight muscle size, but many
others do not, and to understand how this dimorphism in flight muscle size
impacts flight performance in wild birds. A team of undergraduate students, a
postdoc, and the principal investigator will compile a dataset of skeletal
measurements of at least five male and five female specimens each for at least
1,000 species, with a complementary dataset on species life history and
ecological traits, to test hypotheses about which ecological traits best predict
sexual dimorphism in flight muscle size. To understand how sexual dimorphism in
flight muscle size affects flight performance, high-speed video cameras will be
used to measure velocity and acceleration of birds engaging in escape-style
takeoffs under multiple conditions: natural, vertical, through an obstacle
course, and in each of these settings while carrying additional weight. These
experiments will be conducted in three different species: one in which males
have larger flight muscles than females, one in which females have larger flight
muscles, and one that does not exhibit sexual dimorphism in flight muscle size.
The project will greatly increase our understanding of the extent and
consequences of intraspecific variation, offer insights to engineers regarding
the design of small aerial vehicles, and provide opportunities for students in
quantitative research to prepare them for STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.