* 2239545
* CAREER: Understanding Strain and Strain Relaxation Mechanisms in Complex Two-Dimensional Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Yimo Han, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 04/30/2028
* USD 650,707.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award supports research to
investigate how two-dimensional (2D) films deform to release strain, and how to
leverage this knowledge to engineer new applications of 2D materials.
Deformation mechanisms and defects play a critical role in the mechanical,
electrical, and chemical properties of 2D materials due to their atomic
thinness. However, a fundamental understanding of how strain relaxation in these
materials differ from their bulk counterparts remains elusive due to challenges
in characterization at multiple length scales. This project aims to develop new
electron microscopy approaches to observe and understand novel strain relaxation
mechanisms. The insights gained from this study will advance the use of complex
2D materials in flexible electronics, quantum computing, catalysis, and
protective coatings. Additionally, the project will support several activities
to support broader participation in STEM, with a focus on underrepresented
minorities and women, including a Research Experience for Teachers program for
local high school teachers, interactive science demonstrations for young
learners in collaboration with a local museum, and integration of research and
education through curriculum development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conventional
understanding of strain relaxation in bulk materials have not been successful in
describing the deformation behavior of 2D materials and heterostructures. The
central hypothesis of this project is that additional novel deformation
mechanisms besides the traditionally observed dislocation-based mechanisms
contribute towards stress relaxation in 2D materials. To investigate this
possibility, this project will use state-of-the-art four-dimensional scanning
transmission electron microscopy (4D-STEM) and related techniques to map the
lattice strain and deformations in 2D heterostructures. By investigating various
sizes and shapes of 2D epitaxial heterostructures, a comprehensive understanding
of novel deformations mechanisms in complex 2D materials is expected. This
knowledge will enable precise and predictable engineering of strain and defects
in these materials and their heterostructures, with significant implications for
the development of advanced devices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the Mechanics of Materials and Structures (MoMS) program in
the Division of Civil, Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation (CMMI) and the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry (SSMC) program in the Division of Materials
Research (DMR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.