* 2239481
* CAREER: Computer Science Education State Supervisors: Toward Support for All
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Janice Mak, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 06/30/2028
* USD 120,327.00

Arizona State University will investigate a key lever in K-12 computer science
(CS) pathways - - the position of the CS education state supervisor (CSEdSS)
housed at state education agencies (SEA). Since 2016, K-12 computer science (CS)
education policy work has accelerated through various intermediary
organizations, state legislatures, governors, and national organizations.
Despite the tremendous work around expanding K-12 CS education policy, equity
issues persist in terms of access and opportunity to learn CS. There is a need
to understand structural barriers to diversity in computing with a view to the
entire ecosystem, from pre-K through the workforce. State education agencies
(SEAs) are instrumental in ensuring that equitable access to K-12 CS learning
pathways is enacted – often through a combination of teacher training, resource
development, teacher certification pathways, community outreach, and
administrator support. This CAREER project will study CSEdSS and ensure diverse,
inclusive, and accessible CS educational pathways across schools and districts
within states by informing the development of research-based resources and tools
to support CSEdSS as they enact their roles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
uses a critical lens to examine how the national policy of creating a state
CSEdSS position at SEAs is enacted. Surveys, interviews, observations, focus
groups, and documents will be used to explore how CSEdSS operationalize and
enact their roles to ensure diverse, inclusive, equitable, and accessible CS
educational pathways within their states. The specific aims of this study build
on one another: 1) conduct a landscape study of K-12 CSEdSS that will inform
selection of four states 2) conduct a comparative case study of CSEdSS in four
states to illuminate the mediators, drivers, and outputs of CSEdSS; and 3)
develop a toolkit and set of resources to support the CSEdSS community of
practice with a view to equity. This project contributes to how research,
policy, and practice can work together to advance equity and excellence for all
students in terms of access, experience, and outcomes by (a) advancing a
critical and systemic approach to assessing the implementation of CS education
policies; (b) framing CS education policy research while considering the
national landscape and variance in local context; (c) operationalizing CSEdSS’
role with inclusive and equitable CS education pathways; and (d) developing a
system of support for CSEdSS nationally. This work lies at the intersection of
policy, practice, and research, to investigate the root causes of systemic
inequities while working in partnership with non-profit organizations, state
departments of education and policymakers to illuminate and advance solutions to
dismantle structures that perpetuate inequity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.