* 2239760
* CAREER: Integrating Sensorimotor Models into Human-Robot Collaboration in Gait, Posture, and Unsteady Tasks
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Daniel Jacobs, Temple University
* Standard Grant
* Alex Leonessa
* 05/31/2028
* USD 698,057.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant supports research that will
contribute new knowledge to the design and control of wearable robotic devices
for assisting everyday movements, such as walking and standing balance. Wearable
robotic devices, such as exoskeletons, can be used to provide assistive forces
to those who have impaired mobility or other disabilities. Although the symptoms
driving disability are varied and specific to the individual, current robots do
not yet have the intelligence to modify their behavior based on the user’s
specific needs. This award supports fundamental research on methods to use
measurements of specific deficits in the user’s primary senses to improve how
humans and robots collaborate during movement tasks. The results of this
research will advance interdisciplinary knowledge in robotics, biomechanics,
neuroscience, and control. Reducing the impact of disability and helping people
return to work will greatly benefit the U.S. economic and societal goals to
advance science and promote human health. The broader impacts of this work
include training and research partnerships with local high schools and a nearby
historically black university to attract and retain women and underrepresented
minorities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To estimate the body’s movement, humans use
three primary sensory systems: visual, vestibular, and somatosensory. A major
element of the brain’s ability to control movement is to use information from
multiple sensory systems to improve the ability to estimate self-motion and
sensory feedback. When one of the sensory systems experiences a dynamic loss of
accuracy, such as a step transition into soft ground or a loss of vision, the
brain compensates by reducing the contribution of the impacted sense to the
overall estimation in a process called sensory reweighting. This fundamental
research in robot-assisted gait and posture will advance scientific
understanding by studying how machines affect the dynamics of the perception of
self-motion, cognition, and motor control in the presence of sensory deficits.
In the first objective, the researchers will perform experiments with the
exoskeleton and virtual reality to identify how exoskeletons affect the sensory
reweighting processes in self-paced walking and standing balance. These results
will provide novel measurements of the physical and sensory dynamics of human-
robot collaboration. In the second objective, they will develop methods to
incorporate individualized perceptual models of sensory reweighting into
simulations of walking and standing. In the final objective, they will explore
methods for real-time detection of sensory reweighting and the usage of haptic
feedback as a tool to communicate state and trust between person and
machine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.