* 2239690
* CAREER: Unveil the Electrical Double Layer Structure in Battery Electrolyte Systems
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Feifei Shi, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Read
* 01/31/2028
* USD 473,900.00

Energy storage is a key technology to the Nationâ€™s economy, safety, and
commitment to mitigate climate change. It has been increasingly important with
the expanded widespread demand among most industries, spanning from large-scale
electrical grid storage to electric vehicles and consumer electronics. While the
innovation of lithium-ion batteries (LIB) has revolutionized daily life, the
industry is hitting a major obstacle to keep pace with increasing demand of
customers due to the lack of breakthrough in fundamentals of battery technology.
The electrical double layer (EDL) is the interfacial layer at the
electrode/electrolyte boundary. It governs the electron transfer, ion migration,
and solvent molecular adsorption/desorption processes. In battery applications,
EDL significantly impacts performance like cyclability, power rate, capacity
retention, and safety. However, the fundamental knowledge of EDL in battery
electrolytes is still lacking. This project aims to unveil the properties and
structures of the EDL in LIB electrolyte systems, determine how these properties
impact battery performance, and thus guide the development of safer, more
efficient, powerful, and reliable battery systems. Moreover, this program will
serve as an education vehicle to 1) build a strong and sustainable pipeline that
supplies high quality battery experts to academia and industry and 2) create an
inclusive and equitable battery research and education environment for students
and scholars with diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
CAREER project is to develop a novel in-situ characterization platform to
directly probe the potential dependent properties and structure of EDL in
typical LIB electrolytes (high concentration and nonaqueous). The objective of
this work is to 1) characterize EDL properties by electrocapillarity with static
mercury electrode, 2) resolve the EDL structure by varied angle Attenuated Total
Reflection-Fourier Transform infrared (ATR-FTIR), and 3) bridge the EDL
properties to electrochemical behavior of battery electrolytes. This interfacial
characterization platform will enable the characterization of a series of
interfacial and EDL properties in LIB electrolytes, including interfacial free
energy, surface excess of ions, Potential of Zero Charge (PZC), surface charge
density, and double layer capacitance. The knowledge derived from this project
will accelerate the design optimization of electrolyte, shed light on
interfacial modification of electrode, and advance the fundamental knowledge of
solid/liquid interface. The characterization approaches developed in this
project are transformative in more battery electrolyte systems beyond LIB
electrolytes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.