* 2239863
* CAREER: Effects of pregnancy and lactation on muscle-tendon form and function in the rat, Rattus norvegicus
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Nicole Danos, University of San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 08/31/2028
* USD 204,457.00

This project investigates the structure and function of skeletal muscle and
associated connective tissues during pregnancy and lactation. Pregnancy and
lactation are two of the most expensive physiological states in mammals. Because
individuals cannot increase energy utilization indefinitely to keep up with
these metabolic demands, other processes must become less costly. The research
project tests the hypothesis that locomotor costs are reduced during pregnancy
and lactation to offset the higher energetic costs. An integrated suite of
experimental techniques, including computational modeling, will be used to
quantify locomotor activity and form and function of muscles and tendons during
movement. This information will lead to a more complete understanding of the
metabolic costs of muscle-tendon interactions during locomotion and how they
change during pregnancy and lactation, and the results should allow better
tailored advice regarding exercise for women in the pre- and post-natal phases.
The project will create 10 paid summer research internships for undergraduates
and 10 for high school students, 5 years of a paid lab technician position for
an undergraduate student, and three mentored postdoctoral training opportunities
at a Primarily Undergraduate Institution. Teaching resources to identify new
areas of female-specific anatomy and physiology research will be developed and
disseminated. The project will also test whether teaching female-specific
anatomy and physiology in introductory classes increases the sense of belonging
for female students in STEM, which could lead to changes in how the subject is
taught at the undergraduate level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching aim of
this project is to understand the form and function of skeletal muscle and its
connective tissues during pregnancy and lactation. It is hypothesized that
hormonal effects on elastic tissues during pregnancy and/or lactation improve
locomotor performance by increasing the usage of elastic potential energy. Using
a model of mammalian muscle-tendon physiology, the rat Rattus norvegicus, the
Principal Investigator will lead a team of undergraduate and postdoctoral
researchers to complete the following research and educational aims: [1]
Quantify the effects of pregnancy and lactation on gait mechanics, energetics
and in vivo muscle-tendon function, using high-speed videography, implanted
electromyography, sonomicrometry, and indirect calorimetry. [2] Characterize in
situ, during pregnancy and lactation, the form and function of an isolated
hindlimb muscle-tendon unit, the lateral gastrocnemius and its contribution to
the Achilles tendon. By using the same subjects to track the function of leg
muscle-tendons in vivo and when the muscle-tendon is isolated in an anesthetized
animal, muscle-tendon function will be directly linked to whole body movement.
[3] Develop teaching resources to identify new areas of female-specific anatomy
and physiology research and enhance female STEM students’ sense of belonging.
The work will set the stage for a career-long research program that integrates
laboratory work on a model organism with comparative field studies, and advances
an under-invested field of research with potential impacts on human health and
welfare. The research will be conducted at a Primarily Undergraduate
Institution, integrating the project’s educational goals with the scientific
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.