* 2239557
* CAREER: Bioelectronics-embedded hybrid brain tissues
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Brian Timko, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 08/31/2028
* USD 534,378.00

This CAREER award aims to explore lab-grown brain tissues that are monitored and
controlled through embedded bioelectronic devices. In vitro brain tissue models
play an important role in neuroscience because they enable studies that cannot
be performed in living humans, for example how the young brain develops or is
affected by injury or disease. These models, however, are limited. Brains are
composed of networks of neurons that communicate through electrical impulses,
yet current technologies cannot interact with these signals. This project will
develop a brain-machine interface that will provide bioelectronic outputs and
inputs from multiple locations throughout the brain tissue. The outputs will
provide insights into how the brain develops or responds to stimuli, while the
inputs will provide insight into how sensory signals are processed. In addition
to generating knowledge about neuroscience and materials science, the tools
generated in this project could provide insights into brain dysfunction,
including neurological disorders which affect one in six people globally. This
project will also use neuroscience as a tool to recruit and retain
underrepresented minorities into Science, Technology Engineering and Math fields
through high school outreach, funded summer internships, and coursework designed
to engage a diverse audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award aims to
develop an engineered hybrid brain tissue model that merges functional neuronal
networks with bioelectronic devices in 3D configurations. Central to the work
will be a BioElectronic Mesh (BioEM) that will support multiplexed stimulation
and/or recording elements and their interconnections; and will seamlessly
integrate with the surrounding tissue. The central hypothesis is that
information stored and transmitted in engineered neural networks can be decoded
or reprogrammed via this two-way bioelectronic interface. The project will
incorporate investigations at the materials, device, and tissue scales. The
first goal is to develop a BioEM suitable for neuronal integration. Chemical and
nanomaterials-based approaches will be explored to achieve bioactive interfaces
that promote electronic coupling. The second goal is to investigate how outputs
can be used to derive information about the structure of the networks and how
they respond to chemical perturbations. Network analysis and machine learning
techniques will be developed to analyze the volumes of data produced and derive
predictive frameworks. The third goal is to incorporate stimulation devices to
achieve sensory-like inputs and study how they affect neuronal function
including synaptic plasticity or “memory” formation. The final goal is to
incorporate nanoelectronic probes that enter the cytosol and measure
intracellular signals. In addition to enriching our understanding of
neuroscience, the tools and knowledge generated will bolster the utility of in
vitro models for brain dysfunction, including neurological disorders which
affect one in six people globally. The research could also be transformative for
other fields, including hybrid biological/solid-state computation, bioelectronic
medicine, developmental biology and regenerative medicine. In addition, the
program will incorporate an education component aimed at increasing
participation and retention among underrepresented minorities in Science,
Technology, Engineering and Math fields. It will establish a high school
outreach program, funded summer internship opportunities, and coursework that
incorporates culturally sustained pedagogies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.