* 2239376
* CAREER: Robustness, Active Learning, Sparsity, and Fairness in Classification
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Jie Shen, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 06/30/2028
* USD 113,864.00

Learning and making accurate inferences from complex data is a core task in
modern data analytics. Over the past few decades, a large volume of efficient
algorithms has been developed and tested in a broad range of science and
engineering problems. However, rigorous analysis of these algorithms often
relies on simplified assumptions about the structure of the data, which may not
capture the real characteristics. The project aims to go beyond standard
theoretical frameworks by developing new theories and algorithms to address
pressing challenges arising from contemporary applications, such as adversarial
data contamination. In particular, this project will study and lay solid
theoretical foundations for the classification problem, which plays a
fundamental role in machine learning. A crucial educational component of the
project involves the development of a new undergraduate program in artificial
intelligence and machine learning that has the potential to inspire a
transformation of nationwide STEM education. Furthermore, the principal
investigator will continue to mentor undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will address several fundamental
questions in classification for which there is a large gap in our current
understanding. A wide range of modern tools will be leveraged to design new
algorithms that can tolerate adversarial corruptions in the data, mitigate data
annotation costs, circumvent the curse of high dimensionality, and fortify
models with fairness guarantees. Complementary to the algorithmic results, the
project will also develop information-theoretic and statistical-query lower
bounds to broaden the understanding of fundamental limits posed by the practical
constraints. The comprehensive investigation of these problems and their
interplay will lead to new analytic and algorithmic tools, enrich various areas
(such as learning theory, statistics, and optimization), and build new bridges
between them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.