* 2239881
* CAREER: Harnessing the Positive Power of Negative Links for Network Analytics
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Tyler Derr, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Yang
* 07/31/2028
* USD 221,487.00

Much of today's big data can be best represented as networks, which has led to
the rise of network analytics for harnessing this inherent structure to best
capture the data. However, most traditional network analytical methods have
primarily been developed without consideration of modeling negative relations
within the data. For example, online social media users can not only create
positive friendships with one another, but they can also unfollow, block, and
develop distrust or even animosity towards each other. The goal of this project
is to provide dedicated advancements in network analysis methods built to fully
harness not only the positive but also these negative relations in data, which
is both desired and essential to better analyze the past and make predictions
about the future. The results of this project will advance state-of-the-art
network analysis methods having both a strong and immediate impact in multiple
domains including in industry and academia, online social media and e-commerce.
This project will play an integral role in introducing existing network
analytics to students through developed undergraduate and graduate courses,
while also providing first-hand research experiences through semester projects.
Additionally, this project will support the mentorship of underrepresented
groups through various university programs, including first-generation and
neurodiverse students to leverage their unique strengths and to promote
diversity in our next generation of scientists and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is focused on the advancement of
methods, theories, models, and measurements, for networks with negative links,
known as, signed networks. The project will provide dedicated efforts towards
deeper analysis and better predictions on networks with negative links while
spanning the four main pillars of network analytics. Specifically, novel network
theories are proposed and built upon the complex positive/negative link
interactions, dedicated signed graph neural networks will be developed for
overcoming existing challenges in prior models, improved signed network modeling
towards better synthetic generation and evaluation, and finally robust signed
network measurements. The project is motivated by unprecedented opportunities to
harness the additive power of negative links to improve network analytics, but
also in solving the research challenges associated with mining and learning on
signed networks. Each of the proposed research directions is positioned to
advance network analytics through investigating original unexplored problems and
developing novel theories and methodologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.