* 2239943
* CAREER: Interactive Dietary Monitoring
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Edison Thomaz, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 04/30/2028
* USD 105,817.00

While tracking sleep and physical activity such as walking is now commonplace
using smartwatches and other wearable devices, keeping track of what a person
eats and drinks remains an onerous task. From a health perspective, this is a
missed opportunity; dietary self-monitoring is an effective way for people to
reflect on and improve their eating habits, reducing the chance of developing
costly diet-related chronic diseases such as obesity. This project addresses the
weaknesses of existing dietary monitoring methods by advancing a new approach
called Interactive Dietary Monitoring. The idea is to envision dietary tracking
as a human-machine collaboration, combining the strengths of manual and
automated food tracking. For example, people know what food they are eating, but
can forget to make a note of it in the moment. Automated systems can detect when
people are eating, but have limited insight into the identity of the foods.
Thus, a collaborative approach can shore up the complementary weaknesses. To
move this vision toward reality, the project team will prototype, evaluate, and
refine novel wearable devices, algorithms, and visual interfaces for food
tracking, with the goal of reducing the burden of dietary self-monitoring while
keeping individuals aware of their eating behaviors. The devices and methods
developed are likely to be useful for other pressing problems, including
flagging behaviors associated with eating disorders and smoking events,
measuring tremor in Parkinsonâ€™s disease patients, and helping nutritional
epidemiologists understand the link between diet and
disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the fields of human-
computer interaction and ubiquitous computing through (1) developing and
evaluating algorithms to detect fine-grained finger motion and novel interaction
techniques around diet tracking, (2) investigating sensing methods for alcohol
drinking detection and food recognition from volatile organic compounds present
in human breath, (3) producing new knowledge about developing wearable devices
for dietary tracking, (4) exploring a new mobile food journal interface that
leverages the relationship between color and nutrients to provide visual dietary
insights, and (5) generating usability and algorithmic findings from the
inclusion of older adults, seniors with chronic diseases, and under-represented
individuals in studies. The outcomes of this proposal will be developed and
assessed through a human-centered process consisting of formative studies,
implementations, and evaluations in both controlled and naturalistic conditions.
To enhance the impact and social reach of this research, the outcomes of the
project will be embedded into graduate and undergraduate courses, the wearable
platforms will be integrated into a science camp for economically disadvantaged
students, and high school interns will play a role in the execution of the
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.