* 2239046
* CAREER: Computation-efficient Algorithms for Grid-scale Energy Storage Control, Bidding, and Integration Analysis
* ENG,ECCS
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2027
* Bolun Xu, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 12/31/2027
* USD 396,186.00

Energy storage is a cornerstone in future low-carbon power systems for reducing
carbon emissions and enhancing power system reliability against extreme events.
This NSF CAREER project aims to develop new computation tools aiding grid
integration of energy storage with the overarching goal to provide affordable
and reliable electricity supply in sustainable power systems. The project will
bring transformative change to enable power system operators and storage owners
to more accurately bid and dispatch a variety of existing and emerging storage
technologies. This will be achieved by developing a novel computation framework
combining model-based optimization with machine learning, achieving both
reliable performance and computation efficiency. The intellectual merits of the
project include developing novel control algorithms for complex storage energy
models and investigating approaches to integrate existing and emerging storage
technologies into electricity markets. The broader impacts of the project
include developing university curricula and K-12 outreach programs on
incorporating data science into energy decarbonization and climate change
education, and developing an outreach program to promote community solar plus
storage deployments with a focus on disadvantaged neighborhoods in New York
City.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project simultaneously addresses several
technical challenges in energy storage grid integration including multi-stage
uncertainties, nonlinear and nonconvex storage models, and computation
scalability over a large number of networked storage resources. The project will
i) develop a fully open-source analytical algorithm without proprietary
commercial solvers tailored for energy storage to solve nonlinear stochastic
dynamic programming with extreme computation speed; ii) develop new market
models and pricing schemes inspired by the opportunity value function from
dynamic programming to economically manage storage state-of-charge in grid
dispatch; iii) combine machine learning with dynamic programming into a two-
stage learning model to more efficiently analyze and manage a large number of
storage resources participating in electricity markets. The results of this
project will benefit power system operators and storage owners to develop energy
management system software for storage resources that more accurately reflect
the storage operating characteristics and future uncertainties, and aid
education and outreach activities related to energy storage deployments for
energy sustainability and resiliency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.