* 2239478
* CAREER: Revealing the Dynamics of Charge Carriers in Strongly Correlated Materials with Scanning Tunneling Potentiometry
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Victor Brar, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 05/31/2028
* USD 183,622.00

Non-technical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The way in which electrons and
heat move through a material is often assumed to resemble billiard balls or
diffusive spreading, but in many materials this is not the case and the movement
is unknown. This project aims to develop new microscopy techniques that can be
used to directly visualize the flow of electrons and heat in a material at the
microscopic level. Understanding that motion allows materials to be produced
that have less resistance, better heat conductivity, and that can model fluid
and air flows in ways that are less costly than current methods. A significant
aspect of this project is to develop touch-based learning tools for
understanding the physics of materials, where students use tactile models and
haptic-feedback systems to ‘feel’ the crystal lattice of a material in the same
way an electron or molecule would. These lessons are being developed for
advanced undergraduate labs and for K-12 outreach programs, with an aim of
explaining the properties of materials in an intuitive and memorable way. A
travelling class is also being developed for older adults and differently
sighted individuals, so that they can learn about materials in an engaging
tactile manner; and a class in being developed for Grandparents University at
the University of Wisconsin, where older adults and their grandchildren learn
about scientific concepts together.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to advance and utilize two scanned probe
techniques – scanning tunneling potentiometry (STP) and scanning tunneling
superconducting thermometry (STST) – to separately image the nanoscale flow of
charge and heat in materials, such as graphene, with hydrodynamic and quantum
hall phases. Hydrodynamic material systems exhibit novel thermoelectric
properties that violate the Wiedemann-Franz law, and have been predicted to
display vortical or even turbulent electron and heat flow. Combined STP and STST
measurements are used in this project to determine the degree to which heat and
charge flow becomes uncorrelated in such systems, and this project also utilizes
engineered potential barriers that affect heat and charge flow differently, with
an aim of further decoupling the two. Moreover, by probing how heat is
dissipated in viscous electronic phases, this project explores the mechanisms
that limit the conductivity of such phases and provides data that allows the
complete problem of thermoelectric flow to be solved self-consistently in
hydrodynamic materials. STP measurements of charge motion in magnetic fields,
meanwhile, explore how weakly bound states and snake states can perturb the
values of quantum hall conductance plateaus and precipitate the formation of
vorticies of circularly flowing charge as the viscosity of the system is
increased. These measurements also test predictions that electron viscosity
itself should become quantized in quantum hall systems. This project has broad
implications for creating improved thermoelectric devices from hydrodynamic
materials, and for understanding the effect of hydrodynamics on other material
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.