* 2239994
* CAREER: Elucidating the Neuronal Basis of Sexual Dimorphism in the Drosophila Circadian System
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Maria de la Paz Fernandez, Barnard College
* Continuing Grant
* Edda Thiels
* 02/29/2028
* USD 599,669.00

The circadian system provides internal temporal order for an animal’s physiology
and behavior. Circadian disruption has significant implications for health, and
a growing body of evidence indicates the existence of sex differences in the
circadian systems of many species. Drosophila is a powerful model system to
study the neuronal basis of sexual dimorphism in timekeeping due to its well-
characterized circadian clock neuron network and the highly conserved molecular
circadian clock. The main goal of this project is to understand how differences
in the underlying architecture of the circadian system in the Drosophila brain
underlie sex differences in sleep/wake cycles and robustness in timekeeping.
Understanding the mechanistic basis of sexual dimorphism in the circadian system
will inform our understanding of how males and females may be differentially
affected by the challenges of complex modern environments. The education plan of
the project consists of a summer research program for undergraduate students to
conduct research involving connectomics, neurogenetics, and behavior that will
allow students to gain research experience in the interface of biology,
bioinformatics, and engineering. In addition, community outreach efforts will be
conducted in partnership with the Columbia Zuckerman Institute’s public outreach
programs office. They will involve participation in an event for families, Brain
Clocks, in the context of the Saturday Science program, and a public event
focused on conversations with New York City-based musicians in the context of
the Breakout Science program, a series of interdisciplinary events that aims to
create public engagement in science through the arts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
circadian system provides internal temporal order for multiple aspects of
physiology and behavior, allowing the anticipation of environmental changes. As
in mammals, most of the work on Drosophila circadian rhythms has focused on
males. The overarching hypothesis of this proposal is that sex differences in
sleep/wake cycles are mediated by differences in the network properties of the
brain’s timekeeping center. In Aim 1, the research team will test the hypothesis
that the sexually dimorphic phenotypes of the Pigment Dispensing Factor (PDF) /
PDF receptor (PDFR) pathway mutations are due to differential effects of PDF
signaling in the clock neuron network. The team will use time-course
immunohistochemistry to compare expression rhythms of clock proteins and CRISPR-
Cas9 to knockout PDFRs in subsets of clock neurons. In addition, the team will
determine if the PDFR-immunopositive neurons in females are less responsive to
PDF-mediated Morning cell output using the ATP/P2X2 functional connectivity
approach. In Aim 2, the team will test the hypothesis that the Morning
oscillator has more influence over the male timekeeping neuronal network by
changing the speed of the molecular clock in specific cell types and disrupting
molecular oscillations in specific clock classes in males and females. In Aim 3,
the team will characterize sex differences in structural and functional
connectivity patterns between the Dorsal Neurons 1 posterior (DN1p’s) and the
Morning oscillator. The team will compare the strength of the DN1p connections
to Morning and Evening cells and test the hypothesis that glutamatergic
inhibition of the lateral clock neurons by DN1p’s is more pronounced in males
than females analyzing physiological responses to bath-applied glutamate.
Collectively, the studies will advance our understanding of the mechanistic
basis of differences in sleep/wake cycles between females and
males.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.