* 2239565
* CAREER: Modern Machine Learning on Graphs: From Theory to Practice
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Pan Li, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Sorin Draghici
* 07/31/2028
* USD 200,000.00

Graphs or networks provide a fundamental tool to model data throughout the
sciences. For instance, graphs can be used to represent people and their social
relations, proteins and their interactions, and brain neurons and the
connectome. Many real-world applications involve solving prediction tasks based
on graph-structured data such as network anomaly detection, recommendation, drug
design, material property analysis, and particle collision denoising. Therefore,
it is crucial to develop robust and trustworthy algorithm tools that may learn
from graph-structured data. This project aims to address the challenges posed by
the emerging complex features of modern graph-structured data. Firstly, the
project will focus on learning from higher order relations that are often missed
by traditional graph models. Secondly, it will explore deep learning models for
graph-structured data. Both directions pursue the approaches that are both
principled in theory and useful in practice. The success of this project will
lead to an improvement of the understanding of social and biological networks
and the quality of data processing for high-energy physics. Moreover, this
project will foster collaborations across college students in data science, the
computing industry, and domain scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical
contributions of this project are organized into two interrelated themes: (i)
Developing expressive hypergraph models with their fast-learning algorithms.
This research theme proposes to study hypergraph diffusion problems, where each
hyperedge is associated with a nonlinear diffusion function that can be either
handcrafted or learned to model complex higher-order relations. (ii) Developing
provably expressive and generalizable graph neural network (GNN) models. This
research theme proposes to design provably more expressive GNN architectures
based on a framework of structural feature augmentation, analyze and improve
their generalization capability. The developed approaches will be evaluated in
the graph learning tasks such as node classification, link prediction, graph
anomaly detection, and emerging problems in high-energy
physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.