* 2239752
* CAREER: Digging deeper to the roots of soil organic carbon formation, persistence, and function: An integrated research, education, and outreach program.
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Vidya Suseela, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Kirsten Schwarz
* 02/29/2028
* USD 290,128.00

Soil organic carbon (SOC) is critical for sustainable food production as it
improves nutrient and water retention and enhances soil biological activity. SOC
can also help mitigate climate change as it can act as a sink for atmospheric
carbon dioxide. Soils in many ecosystems are depleted in SOC due to intensive
management practices. Plants are a significant pathway through which atmospheric
carbon can be channeled to SOC through the microbial decomposition of the shoot
and root tissues. Thus, regenerative practices such as using diverse plant
mixtures can potentially enhance SOC in managed ecosystems. However, obtaining a
deeper understanding of how SOC is formed and, more importantly, where this
newly formed carbon is sequestered, is critical to making informed decisions
regarding plant species diversity for enhancing SOC. This research investigates
how diverse plant mixtures with varying shoot and root chemistry interact with
soil microbes and soil minerals to influence the formation, persistence, and
function (e.g., nutrient availability) of SOC in ecosystems. The research is
integrated with education and outreach activities while ensuring the
participation of underrepresented groups in science. The educational activities
include research training and experiential learning opportunities for K-12 and
college students, and a new soils course for undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SOC is highly heterogenous, with a multitude of
biomolecules resulting from the decomposition of plant and microbial biomass
that can be sequestered in different soil fractions. SOC stored in different
physical fractions, such as particulate organic matter (POM; short-term
sequestration) and mineral-associated organic matter (MAOM; long-term
sequestration), will regulate the persistence of SOC under projected warming
scenarios. The research evaluates how plant tissue type and plant functional
type affect dissolved organic matter formation and chemical composition and, in
turn, the interaction of these plant factors with microbial parameters and soil
mineralogy to SOC formation, persistence, and function in POM and MAOM
fractions. The research uses multifactor lab, greenhouse, multi-site field
experiments, and advanced analytical techniques to obtain a molecular-level
understanding of SOC dynamics in ecosystems. The research and outreach
activities are integrated with cross-disciplinary training for K-12,
undergraduate, and graduate students. The research provides a mechanistic
understanding of SOC formation processes and informs knowledge-based management
practices to enhance SOC sequestration, persistence, and function in
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.