* 2239981
* "CAREER:" Shark Survivor! Interdisciplinary approaches to modern and paleo- ecology in research and education
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Sora Kim, University of California - Merced
* Continuing Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 02/29/2028
* USD 191,451.00

Sharks have roamed the oceans for the past 400 million years and survived past
periods of severe climate change. Today, sharks live in a range of habitats, but
are increasingly impacted by human activity. Many scientists study the movement,
diet, and ecology of today’s sharks, but how does this compare to ancient
sharks? Fortunately, shark teeth are one of the most abundant fossils and
biological details are encoded within their chemistry and shape. This project
seeks to bridge our understanding of modern and ancient shark ecology using
techniques from geochemistry, paleontology, and modeling. This project focuses
on the Eocene Epoch (56 - 34My) with its warm temperatures and high carbon
dioxide levels, which is often invoked as a deep-time analogue for future
climate change. Some shark samples will be collected by undergraduate students
from the University of California, Merced during a hands-on course at Field
School based in Miami, Florida. These students will also learn laboratory skills
and build a research community with the Summer Undergraduate Research Institute.
This interdisciplinary approach will also be part of “Shark Survivor!” a one-
week summer workshop of middle school students as part of CalTeach’s Bobcat STEM
Academy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal seeks to delve into shark
macroecology and bridge concepts between modern and ancient marine ecosystems by
integrating geochemical and modeling approaches within paleobiology. The regions
of interest are the Arctic Ocean/North Sea, Antarctic Southern Ocean, and Gulf
of Mexico; these regions have multiple Eocene localities and together span a
latitudinal range, which allows for ecological comparisons across environmental
gradients. Objectives for this project include: 1) a comparison of temperature
and salinity gradients within a region using stable isotope analysis and global
climate outputs; 2) advancement of zinc and enameloid bound nitrogen isotopes as
trophic level indicators for fossil sharks; 3) exploration of marine food web
structure while considering demography dynamics and community diversity. The
goal of this project is to transform shark paleobiology and align modern and
paleo- ecological concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.