* 2239677
* CAREER: Semantic and Goal-oriented Status Updating for Real-time Inference, Monitoring, and Decision-Making
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Yin Sun, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 04/30/2028
* USD 105,077.00

Information usually has the greatest value when it is fresh. For instance,
timely inference about the trajectories of nearby vehicles and pedestrians is
imperative in autonomous driving, and real-time knowledge about the movements of
surgical robots is essential for remote surgery. In these examples, the
freshness of information is tightly related to its significance for the
application. "Freshness" is an example of the "semantic" properties of the
information. "Semantics" are properties that relate to the "goal" and "purpose"
of information, which is to improve the performance of systems using the
information. In semantic and goal-oriented status updating, the design objective
is no longer sending as much as possible (i.e., increase throughput), or as fast
as possible (i.e., reduce delay), without regard to the intended use of
information. Instead, the transmitter should choose the right piece of
information that is important for the system operating at the receiving end, and
try to deliver the information to the receiver when it is most useful. This
project provides innovative and foundational approaches to interpreting the
freshness and semantics of information in a way that is both rigorous in theory
and meaningful in practice, by characterizing the significance of such
information in real-time inference, monitoring, and decision-making.
Application-centric communications and scheduling techniques are developed to
optimize the performance of these real-time systems. The research outcomes are
expected to significantly impact numerous applications, ranging from artificial
intelligence (AI) and robots to health, safety, and security, all of which are
of paramount importance for the Nation's future. This project will also provide
AI education and research experiences to K-12 students, undergraduate students,
and students from underrepresented groups. This project develops novel semantic
and goal-oriented status-updating techniques for a broad range of real-time
inference, monitoring, and decision-making systems. The main goals of this
project are (i) to use information-theoretic analyses and experimental studies
to interpret how the freshness and semantics of information affect the
performance of these real-time systems, (ii) to design new communication
techniques and networking protocols for optimizing freshness/semantic measures
and the system performance, and (iii) to explore the benefits of signal-aware
status updating that goes beyond Age of Information to realize additional
performance gain. The new status-updating techniques will be implemented to
evaluate their practical performance. These research efforts are likely to lead
to far-reaching impacts in the relationship of networking, machine learning,
communications, and information theory at a fundamental level. This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.