* 2239234
* CAREER: Statistical Inference in High Dimensions using Variational Approximations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Subhabrata Sen, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2028
* USD 86,479.00

Modern data applications routinely involve massive datasets comprising a
multitude of observations and features. To facilitate statistical learning in
real time, there is an urgent need for principled and computationally efficient
statistical methodology. Variational Inference methods have recently emerged as
a popular choice in this context. The term "Variational Inference" refers to a
general out-of-the-box strategy to develop statistical algorithms for a wide
class of problems. For example, these algorithms are used as a sub-routine in
text mining, generation of hyper-realistic artificial text and images, machine
translation, etc. This approach is extremely attractive due to the computational
efficiency of the proposed methods, and their superior practical performance.
Despite these advantages, rigorous guarantees for these variational methods are
still in a nascent state. This project will develop statistical guarantees for
the validity of this approach in diverse settings. Subsequently, these new
insights will be exploited to develop novel statistical methodology for modern
data applications. The outcome of the proposed research will allow practitioners
to deploy Variational Inference methods with confidence. In addition, the
outcomes will add a new set of principled, computationally efficient methods to
the statistician's toolkit. The PI will interweave his research and teaching
throughout the research period and beyond. In particular, the PI will develop
new undergraduate/graduate courses focusing on Variational Inference and mentor
students (particularly those from under-represented backgrounds) with the aim of
introducing them to opportunities in statistics and data science. The proposed
research and educational activities will broaden participation in STEM
generally, and encourage careers in statistics and data
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study statistical inference
based on variational approximations focusing on three concrete thrusts: (i)
Statistical inference based on the Naive Mean Field (NMF) approximation for
regression models, (ii) NMF approximation beyond regression and (iii) Advanced
Mean Field approximations. Under theme (i), the PI will develop empirical Bayes
methodology for the high-dimensional linear model, and compare Bayesian variable
selection algorithms using the NMF approximation. Theme (ii) will focus on the
NMF approximation for Hidden Markov Random Fields and Bayesian Neural Networks.
Finally, theme (iii) will focus on certain alternative mean-field
approximations. Physicists conjecture that if the number of datapoints and
features are both large and comparable, the NMF approximation is no longer
accurate; instead, the Thouless-Anderson-Palmer (TAP) approximation, an advanced
mean-field approximation, should facilitate Bayes optimal inference. The
proposed research will establish this conjecture in the context of high-
dimensional linear regression under a proportional asymptotic regime. The
theoretical foundations of the proposed methodology will rest on disparate ideas
originating in non-linear large deviations (studied in probability and
combinatorics), spin glasses (studied in probability and statistical physics)
and graphical models. In turn, these ideas will be combined with classical
statistical ideas (e.g. nonparametric maximum likelihood) to develop
computationally efficient methods for high-dimensional inference. This cross-
pollination of ideas will generate independent follow up research directions in
each domain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.