* 2239795
* CAREER: Towards Particle Physics Discoveries With Double Cascades In IceCube and Beyond
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Carlos Arguelles Delgado, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* William Wester
* 04/30/2028
* USD 179,299.00

Particle physics has progressed over the last century by exploring new,
increasing energy scales; more generally, physics has moved forward by studying
physical phenomena under new, unexplored conditions. The discovery that the
supposedly massless neutrino actually has a mass, inferred through the
observation that the three types of neutrinos, electron, muon, and tau can
change flavor, i.e. spontaneously change from one to another, is one of those
phenomena. This unexpected and unexplained observation suggests that the study
of neutrinos will yield additional discoveries. The PI of this project aims to
explore neutrinos in yet uncharted territories and contexts to make precision
measurements of neutrino interactions and discover new physics. The IceCube
Neutrino Observatory at the South Pole allows studying neutrinos whose center-
of-mass energy is comparable to the Large Hadron Collider at CERN, Switzerland,
and whose traversed distance from production to detection can be as large as
gigaparsecs (one gigaparsec equals 3.26 billion light years). Using these unique
neutrinos, the PI will study neutrino flavor changes in astrophysical scales by
measuring the appearance of tau neutrinos, which can be differentiated from
other neutrino species by their characteristic light emission and will search
for the production of heavy particles in neutrino interactions. The measurement
of tau neutrinos from distant, high-energy astrophysical sources demonstrates
that neutrino flavor change, which is a purely quantum mechanical phenomenon,
operates on cosmic scales. Additionally, the PI will perform the first
measurement of heavy particles produced in high-energy neutrino interactions,
which has implications for the quark content of the proton and the existence of
new neutrino species. During the implementation of this project, the PI will
additionally make significant contributions to physics education and underserved
communities. First, the PI will extend his current undergraduate particle
physics class to incorporate elements of computational physics. These activities
complement data analysis classes and expose students to modern simulation and
reconstruction techniques. Second, taking advantage of his fluency in Spanish,
the PI will expand existing work with a local middle school to expose Hispanic
students to neutrino physics. The project includes a plan to deliver
introductory lectures in Spanish to middle school students and instructors.
Spanish-speaking undergraduate and graduate students will be incorporated in
outreach activities and educational videos in Spanish about the physics of our
project will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this award the PI plans to
significantly improve the selection efficiency of astrophysical tau neutrinos
and measure for the first time the production of D-mesons in high-energy
atmospheric neutrino interactions. The observation of tau neutrinos is crucial
as they are predominantly of astrophysical origin and prove that neutrino
oscillations operate at cosmic baselines. Measuring D-meson production will
constrain the proton's strange quark content. Additionally, the PI will perform
the first search for heavy neutrinos produced in atmospheric neutrino
interactions in the sub-TeV energy range. These heavy neutrinos are one of the
leading explanations for the unexplained excess of events observed by the
MiniBooNE experiment. These analyses are tied together by their common double
cascade signature in IceCube, which the PI proposed to identify by developing a
graph neural network. This project also prepares the PI to perform follow-up
analyses on the NSF-funded and currently under-construction IceCube-Upgrade and,
on a longer timescale, optimize the IceCube-Gen2 design so that it continues to
have a strong particle physics program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.