* 2239654
* CAREER: Control-Aware System Identification of Heterogenous Multiscale Brain Network Dynamics
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Erfan Nozari, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 03/31/2028
* USD 548,157.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project aims to develop
mathematical models of the human brain, with an eye on laying the foundation for
their implementation in clinical treatments. Treatments of neurological and
psychiatric disorders impose over $1 trillion annually on the US population
alone. A large body of literature on mathematical modeling in neuroscience had
little impact on clinical treatments because most models either rely on
simplifying assumptions or use machine learning methods that obscure the link to
the underlying biology. This research will develop a new category of
mathematical models for the brain that are at once biologically meaningful and
interpretable, without relying on simplifying assumptions. These models will be
rooted in engineering approaches that combine data-driven and nonlinear
dynamical systems methods. The research is tightly integrated with a diverse and
solid body of educational activities targeted towards high school,
undergraduate, and graduate students at UCR, the local Inland Empire community,
and across the globe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop data-driven
models of the human brain that rigorously incorporate three critical but often
ignored aspects of biological neural networks: (i) spanning across multiple
scales, (ii) heterogeneity, and (iii) response to neuromodulation. The first
thrust will be achieved through data-driven modeling of feedforward and feedback
interactions between neural dynamics at different spatial scales (neurons,
neural populations, and brain regions), that move beyond simple macroscopic
readouts of microscopic dynamics and enhance our understanding of how
macroscopic dynamics emerge from, and feed back into the smaller scales. The
second thrust will develop structurally heterogeneous brain models that
incorporate data of brain heterogeneities in nonlinearity, dimensionality, and
neural code across cortical and subcortical regions. The third thrust will
generate a data-driven, sample-efficient framework for modeling the effects of
deep brain stimulation at the level of the whole-brain network, thus moving
beyond local predictions based on first principle modeling of electromagnetic
diffusion. The expected outcomes are potentially transformative models and
modeling techniques that provide the neuroscience community with solid and
clinically translatable tools for the design of neuromodulation, while also
significantly increasing our understanding of the multiscale, heterogeneous, and
input-driven dynamics of the human brain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.