* 2239207
* CAREER: Non-Reciprocally-Coupled Load-Modulation Platform for Next-Generation High-Power Magnetic-Less Fully-Directional Radio Front Ends
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Kenle Chen, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 02/29/2028
* USD 399,577.00

The exacerbating congestion and overcrowding of wireless spectrum strongly
demand new spectrally efficient communication system architectures, e.g., full
duplex and massive multi-input multi-output (mMIMO). These emerging systems
necessitate fully-directional radiofrequency (RF) front-ends, which normally
involve bulky and expensive magnetic devices for a critical function of signal
circulation/isolation at the antenna interface. Although the non-magnetic
counterparts promise chip-level integration with massive manufacturability,
their very low power-handling capability remains as the bottleneck. This CAREER
project aims to fundamentally unleash the high-power operation of non-magnetic
non-reciprocal devices though a new paradigm of indirect signal
circulation/isolation integrated into the prevailing load-modulation power
amplifiers (PAs), named Non-Reciprocally-Coupled Load Modulation (NRC-LM). More
broadly, this ‘indirect’ design paradigm can be generalized to other power-
sensitive devices, e.g., tunable filters, acoustic-wave filters, and switches,
which could enable high-power frequency-agile RF front-ends and impact the field
of cognitive radios. Beyond the technological frontiers, this research will
address the nation’s core interests in spectrum sustainability and ubiquitous
coverage of high-speed connectivity, potentially leading to immense economic
benefits. Moreover, by enhancing the efficiency of PAs (the most energy-
consuming unit on all wireless platforms) with NRC-LM, the energy efficiency and
environmental impacts of the entire wireless ecosystem can be improved. The
impact of this research will be further expanded through several educational and
outreach activities: (1) The RF/microwave curricula at the University of Central
Florida will be enhanced with new class modules. (2) Diverse mentoring and
outreach programs will be designed to attract students of underrepresented
minority groups in STEM, thus preparing a new diverse workforce for the RF
industry. (3) The engagement of undergraduate students in RF/microwave research
will be promoted through a comprehensive set of intriguing efforts. (4) To
stimulate interests from K-12 students and general public, a series of
“demystifying wireless communications” mini lectures will be designed, exhibited
in outreach activities, and disseminated on social media platforms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this CAREER project is to establish the
theoretical foundation and practical design methodologies for high-power
magnetic-less fully-directional RF front-ends based on NRC-LM. By leveraging a
unique characteristic of active load modulation, the circulator placement is
transformed from the high-power node of PA output to an inner low-power node,
while maintaining the critical signal circulation/isolation behavior. This
transformation not only inherently eliminates the unaffordable power stress on
non-magnetic circulator but also greatly mitigates the impact of its unforgiven
loss and non-linearity on the overall transmitter. The proposed research
comprehensively spans over theory, design practice, and system architecture: (1)
As a foundation of practical designs, the new NRC-LM theory in terms of
directional transmission and reception will be systematically established and
generalized to all existing load-modulation modes. (2) Moreover, mixed digital-
RF design in conjunction with advanced multi-input NRC-LM transmitter
architecture will be investigated to synergize an optimal cooperation between
non-magnetic circulator and active LM at arbitrary in-band frequencies, pushing
extreme bandwidth, efficiency, linearity, dynamic range, etc. (3) Meanwhile, a
novel quadrature-commutated circulator is proposed to offer ultra-wide
bandwidth, watt-level power handling, and low loss. (4) Furthermore, innovative
system-level designs will be studied to integrate the NRC-LM-based front-ends
into mMIMO (antenna-array-based) and full-duplex systems, which can lead to
unprecedented spectrum and energy efficiencies as well as multi-band and multi-
standard capabilities. Overall, the success of this research will significantly
enhance the next-generation spectrum- and energy-efficient
communications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.