* 2239678
* CAREER: All-Scale Continuum Models to Enable Load Path-Specific Material Design
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Justin Wilkerson, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 02/29/2028
* USD 533,432.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will support research,
education, and outreach on multiscale mechanics. Predicting plastic deformation
and failure is vital to the design and safe operation of countless technologies
in the energy, transportation, defense, and space sectors. Plasticity and
failure are simultaneously affected by atomic-scale defects and structure-scale
geometry. This “tyranny of scales” is a long-standing problem in the field of
mechanics. The primary research objective is to develop a new method to
efficiently bridge these scales. The method explicitly accounts for strain-rate
and stress-state effects. The award will integrate the research into educational
and outreach experiences. The primary educational goal is to increase the 6-year
graduation rate of Hispanic mechanical engineering students. The outreach plan
will also broaden the participation of K-12 Hispanic students in STEM
activities, education, and research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
seeks to develop and demonstrate an all-scale continuum modeling framework. The
novelty lies in its efficient and comprehensive extension of continuum modeling
down to atomistic-scales. The method will represent and predict the full
tensorial response of structural materials. The model will be calibrated and
validated against a large suite of atomistic calculations and experiments. These
datasets will span a wide swath of microstructures, e.g., from dislocation-
starved to dislocation-rich regimes, as well as a wide range of stress-states
and strain-rates. The material systems to be studied include: (i) magnesium-
aluminum micropillars; (ii) nanoporous gold; and (iii) coated cellular
nanocomposites. The research contributes to the field of mechanics through a
greater understanding of the deformation and failure processes of these three
classes of materials and nano-structures across a broad range of loading
conditions. This award integrates research with education to develop a game-
based learning platform. The interactive teaching tool will give students a
deeper understanding and intuition of core concepts. Selected topics include
structural-scale deformation and failure, atomic-scale deformation and failure,
structural optimization, and materials-by-design. Outreach activities will
target middle school students through “STEM Family and Friend Nights.” These
annual events will provide learning experiences and build a network of
supporters, advocates, and champions that strengthen the pipeline of STEM
participation at all levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.