* 2239530
* CAREER: Characterizing the repeated evolution of dioecy in plants to engineer artificial chromosomes
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Alex Harkess, HudsonAlpha Institute for Biotechnology
* Continuing Grant
* Kan Wang
* 01/31/2028
* USD 332,454.00

Separate male and female individuals have evolved in many major branches of
life, often through the evolution of a unique chromosome pair, such as the human
X and Y chromosome. These unique chromosomes also exist in some plants and
contain genes that can determine whether a plant is male or female; however,
these genes are highly challenging to discover and characterize. This project
will generate genome sequencing data for at least 100 different plant species
that have separate male and female individuals and will focus particularly on
this unique chromosome to identify these genes that control maleness and
femaleness in diverse plants. The discovery of these genes that control maleness
and femaleness in plants can lead to the improvement of plant breeding by
controlling how pollen moves from plant to plant, potentially increasing the
yield of major crop species. With respect to training and outreach, this grant
will support the expansion of a program called ACTG: American Campus Tree
Genomes, where undergraduate and graduate students sequence, assemble, annotate,
and publish iconic college campus tree genomes. This program will be taught on
an online teaching platform in multiple formats, such as semester-long courses
and two-week short courses, and open to students from diverse universities
around the country, ultimately increasing the workforce readiness of students
entering computational biology fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chromosomes that
control dioecy (separate male and female individuals) have evolved hundreds, if
not thousands, of independent times across flowering plants (angiosperms).
However, the genetic mechanisms that control male and female flower development
on these diverse dioecy controlling chromosomes remain elusive, in part because
these unique chromosomes are far more difficult to contiguously assemble than
autosomes in genome assemblies due to their fundamental differences in size and
potential structure variations. This project takes a phylogenomic approach to
characterize at least 75 independent origins of dioecy using an Illumina
sequencing pipeline “Cytogenetics-by-Sequencing” to identify the frequency of
male or female-specific k-mers and discern if a species has X/Y or Z/W sex
chromosomes. PacBio long-read genomes will be generated for at least 25 of those
species to assemble and fully phase the X/Y or Z/W chromosome pair, identifying
the mechanism of non-recombination (e.g. inversion, translocation, deletion),
and identify genes that might control male and female flower development. These
genes will be used to engineer artificial chromosomes (XY or ZW) and create a
novel hybrid crop breeding system by assembling cassettes of conserved
reproductive genes and functionally converting an autosome pair in a
hermaphroditic species into an XY and ZW chromosome pair, forming a dioecious
species. The broader impacts of this proposal include a large-scale online
training opportunity for bioinformatics, genome assembly, and comparative
genomics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.