* 2239162
* CAREER: LungEx for Probing Multiscale Mechanobiology of Pulmonary Respiration-Circulation Coupling in Real-Time
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2028
* Hadi Tavakoli Nia, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 07/31/2028
* USD 566,473.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will provide unprecedented
insight into the real-time and multiscale lung mechanobiology that bridges
single-air sac to whole-organ functions of the lung. This will be achieved by
utilizing a novel transparent ribcage that provides transformative capabilities
to probe lung mechanobiology at high spatial and temporal resolutions. The
planned research will provide foundational understanding of lung function
including respiration, circulation, and immunity, at the cellular level and in
real-time. Understanding the lung function (and dysfunction) at an unprecedented
spatiotemporal resolution will address key challenges in the emerging fields of
lung mechanobiology and mechano-immunity. The focus on multidisciplinary and
multiscale approaches, both experimental and mathematical, will also provide
exciting opportunities for students on all levels to participate in the
unexplored area of pulmonary biomechanics and mechanobiology. The central goal
of this research and educational program is to inspire and train students from
K-12 to graduate school to think conceptually about how quantitative and
interdisciplinary approaches can help understand lung microphysiology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will utilize a novel platform, termed LungEx,
that includes the ex vivo maintenance of the mouse lung in near in vivo
physiological conditions. A key and novel element of LungEx is a transparent
ribcage, termed “crystal” ribcage, with geometrical and physical properties of
the intact native ribcage. Use of the crystal ribcage will allow, for the first
time, visualization of the dynamics of lung microphysiology in real-time, at the
cellular resolution, and over nearly the entire surface of the lung. Utilizing
the transformative LungEx technology, the project goals will be achieved by 1)
probing how alveolar distension is coupled to red blood cell trafficking and
oxygen transport at the capillary level, 2) determining whether alveolar
lymphatics serves as the main driver of flow in visceral lymphatics, and 3)
probing the real-time dynamic mechanical interactions of immune cells with
capillaries at the single cell level. By integrating this research with a
carefully designed educational plan for students at all levels, we will train
the next generation workforce in pulmonary biomechanics and mechanobiology to
make discoveries in foundational pulmonary biology and
physiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.