* 2239525
* CAREER: Integrated Visible-Light Optical-Phased-Array-Based Devices, Systems, and Applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Jelena Notaros, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 02/29/2028
* USD 400,000.00

Integrated optical phased arrays (OPAs) enable emission and dynamic control of
free-space light in a compact form factor, at low costs, and in a non-mechanical
way. Motivated by initial applications in LiDAR sensing for autonomous vehicles,
integrated OPA demonstrations so far have primarily focused on systems operating
at infrared wavelengths and emphasizing non-mechanically beam steering. There
are wide-reaching and high-impact applications including augmented-reality (AR)
displays, optical trapping for biphotonics, and 3D printing which require OPAs
operating at visible wavelengths and generating complex reconfigurable
holographic emission profiles. This work targets corresponding development of
novel integrated silicon photonics OPA-based platforms, devices, and systems
complemented by proof-of-concept demonstrations of chip-based AR displays,
optical traps, and 3D printers. The novel OPAs will impact wide range of
consumer, military, and medical applications. The proposed mentoring, outreach,
and DEI initiatives will engage and support students with diverse backgrounds at
the K12, undergraduate, and graduate level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will include novel fundamental-science developments in integrated visible-light
OPA-based platforms, devices, and systems, and exploratory proof-of-concept
visible-light OPA-based application demonstrations. This will include
development of (1) novel OPA-based system architectures that enable
reconfigurable holographic emission profiles and compatibility with the entire
visible spectrum, including the first visible-light 2D-beam-steering OPAs,
active holographic and focusing OPAs; (2) a suite of novel integrated visible-
light devices, including the first visible-light liquid-crystal-based modulators
for compact and low-power modulation, unidirectional visible-light grating-based
antennas for efficient emission, actively-tunable visible-light grating-based
antennas, and optimized broadband passive devices for compact spectrum-spanning
routing; (3) new 300-mm wafer-scale visible-light fabrication platform with
unique transparent and flexible substrate capabilities; and (4) novel visible-
light OPA-based application demonstrations, including the first integrated-
photonics-based holographic AR display, OPA-based optical trap, and chip-based
3D printer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.