* 2239715
* CAREER: Nitrogen Sources, Pathways, and Fluxes in Chesapeake Bay Watershed Wetlands
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2028
* Kimberly Van Meter, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 04/30/2028
* USD 372,551.00

The water quality of rivers, lakes, and coastal regions across the U.S. is at
risk due to growing urban populations, large-scale use of commercial
fertilizers, and runoff from high-density livestock production. Within the
Chesapeake Bay Watershed, watershed managers and landowners continue to struggle
with reducing nutrient runoff, despite decades of initiatives to improve the
health of the Bay. In recent years, as stakeholders have worked to implement
better watershed management practices, there has been increased interest in
wetland restoration as a tool to improve water quality, while also providing
aquatic habitat and increasing biodiversity. Unfortunately, our understanding of
how to optimize the placement and function of restored wetlands to improve water
quality remains limited. In this project, the investigator will use a
combination of intensive wetland monitoring and large-scale data analysis to
better understand how to reduce agricultural nutrient runoff to downstream
waterways under changing climate and land-use conditions. The project also has
an outreach component that will involve development of a pilot Chesapeake Summer
Water Institute program. The program will bring graduate student researchers
together with Chesapeake Bay-focused agency staff and other stakeholders to
facilitate exchange of information, the development of ‘problem-focused’
research teams, and the use of process-based and data-driven modeling approaches
to answer questions regarding improvement of Chesapeake Bay water
quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of the proposed research is
to better understand controls on fluxes of landscape nitrogen (N) to current and
restorable wetland sites and, thus, to better predict the contributions of
wetlands to water quality in the Chesapeake Bay Watershed. To meet this
objective, the PI will use MESA–a metabolite of the widely used herbicide
metolachlor–as a novel tracer of agricultural nitrate to identify the extent to
which wetlands across a range of land-use types and positions intersect N flux
pathways, and to quantify the resulting magnitudes of wetland N removal. The PI
will leverage hundreds of existing water-quality samples from the National
Wetland Condition Assessment together with more intensive monitoring of MESA at
individual wetland sites to better our understanding of the spatially varying
connectivity of wetlands with both groundwater N fluxes, and thus to refine
estimates of wetland N removal magnitudes and associated N2O fluxes. In
addition, analysis of MESA chirality will be used to estimate fluxes of legacy N
to existing wetlands, thus bettering our understanding of the contribution of
legacy N to current water quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded
by the Division of Earth Science's Hydrologic Sciences program and the Division
of Environmental Biology's Ecosystems Sciences
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.