* 2239243
* CAREER: Engineering crop plants to metabolize products of CO2 electrolysis to enable food production with artificial photosynthesis
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Robert Jinkerson, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 06/30/2028
* USD 454,624.00

Plants capture sunlight and perform photosynthesis to drive plant growth.
Biological photosynthesis is very energy inefficient. Therefore, large areas are
required for food cultivation. Artificial photosynthesis is more energy
efficient than natural photosynthesis but has never been used for food
production. This project seeks to develop an interface between plants and
artificial photosynthesis systems (APS). Once the interface has been developed,
plants will be engineered to grow more efficiently utilizing APS augmentation.
The research will be integrated with educational and outreach activities. These
will include engaging undergraduates in labs focused on CO2 electrolysis and
creating and running a ‘Startup Design Competition’ to encourage students to
translate research results into entrepreneurial
pursuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Artificial photosynthesis has the potential to be
much more energy efficient than biological photosynthesis but has not yet been
applied to food production. A hybrid inorganic–biological artificial
photosynthesis system for energy-efficient food production was recently
developed. In a two-step process, CO2 electrolysis converts CO2 into acetate,
which serves as a carbon and energy source for food producing organisms (algae,
yeast, and mushrooms) grown in the dark. Coupling this system to commercial
photovoltaics gives a solar energy-to-biomass energy conversion efficiency of
~4% for the growth of algae. Crop plants cannot currently be cultivated with CO2
electrolysis effluent as their sole carbon and energy source. Many knowledge
gaps exist about plant metabolism of short chain carboxylic acids, alcohols, and
aldehydes found in CO2 electrolysis effluent. The goals of this project are to
discover how plants metabolize products of CO2 electrolysis and to engineer
plant metabolism to better use these products as heterotrophic sources of carbon
and energy. To achieve these goals the project has two main objectives: (1)
engineer plants with improved acetate tolerance and utilization; and (2)
discover how plants tolerate and metabolize other products of CO2
electrolysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is being jointly supported by
the Cellular and Biochemical Engineering (CBE) Program in ENG/CBET and by the
Systems and Synthetic Biology (SSB) Program in
BIO/MCB.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.