* 2239262
* CAREER: Mechanical Regulation of Chromatin Motion
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Jing Liu, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 07/31/2028
* USD 126,784.00

The overarching goal of this CAREER award is to understand how the chromatin
motion in human cell nucleus responds to external mechanical stimuli. Chromatin
is the mixture of DNA and proteins that form the chromosomes in the cells of
humans and other organisms. The nanoscale movement of chromatin may modulate the
interaction of DNA in the cell with regulatory molecules, which impacts many
fundamental cell functions, such as DNA replication, DNA repair, transcription
and, finally, gene expression. Understanding the mechanical regulation of the
chromatin dynamics has the potential to power the engineering of living systems
and to create new transformative strategies for the treatment of
disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will in particularly focus on the
long-lasting question in nuclear mechanotransduction, i.e., if the change of
chromatin motion in the nucleus is directly driven by the pico-Newton forces
transmitted through the cell or is indirectly dominated by the diffusion
throughout the cytoplasm. The preliminary data clearly concludes that both
intracellular tensions and chromatin dynamics are mechanosensitive and are
possibly connected. This project will design and develop a new imaging platform
that can simultaneously quantify the intracellular tension and chromatin motion
under mechanical stimuli. In addition, this project will develop an experiment
to use a magnetic bead to mechanically disturb the live cell with high
sensitivity and resolution. With this, it is expected to observe the
spatiotemporal changes of the intracellular tension and chromatin motion in
real-time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on the dynamic signature
of the chromatin, with an exquisitely sensitive imaging system and broadly
applicable analytic tools for quantitative fluorescent imaging. In addition,
this project will also develop a consortium that integrates high performance
computational tools and cyberinfrastructure into biological research.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project will serve as a vehicle to increase the awareness of
educational opportunities and career paths in computational biology and
biophysics for high school students and undergraduates in related disciplines.
An annual and free summer camp of bioimage informatics, which is part of the ACS
SEED project, will be offered to high school students from economically
disadvantaged families. The PI will integrate computational components into this
project with the undergraduate teaching. Finally, an undergraduate research
internship is developed on the IU-MSI initiative, which aims to attract
underrepresented students from minority serving institutes, by providing short-
term internship opportunities for the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.