* 2239782
* CAREER: Towards a Living Neuron Twin for Improving Human Cognitive Health
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Minghan Chen, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Yang
* 09/30/2028
* USD 501,329.00

Alzheimer's disease is a fatal and devastating cognitive disorder that affects
millions of people worldwide, posing significant challenges to global health.
Despite striking efforts, there is currently no effective treatment. The
overwhelming societal burden threatens our future. This project aims to develop
Neuron Twin, a digital system that simulates the human brain as a dynamic system
using multimodal data analysis and multidomain knowledge integration to provide
an accurate and efficient prediction of Alzheimerâ€™s disease, and ultimately
elucidate a mechanistic understanding of cognitive decline. Such an innovative
system will offer new insights into treatment strategies and precision medicine
that can benefit the Alzheimer's disease community and broader applications of
neurodegenerative diseases. Furthermore, it leverages modeling and machine
learning techniques to solve complex health data science problems, discovering
relationships within large datasets and overcoming barriers across different
domains. The interdisciplinary effort promotes education, diversity, and
collaboration by transforming research findings into instructional materials,
providing training opportunities for students from diverse backgrounds, and
engaging undergraduate and underrepresented students in summer bootcamp and
research activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on developing a
computational framework for the Neuron Twin system. The backbone of Neuron Twin
is the coalition of deep learning and multiscale modeling, which complement each
other to overcome inherent limitations and leverage method scalability. Unlike
existing approaches that rely on statistical inference, this system jointly
analyzes multimodal data, including genetic data, neuroimages, and clinical
data, and integrates multidomain knowledge from bioinformatics, systems biology,
and network neuroscience to facilitate reliable early diagnosis and prognosis of
Alzheimer's disease. The framework consists of three research thrusts. The first
thrust is to build a multiscale model that can capture the spatiotemporal
dynamics of disease progression by synthesizing information from gene
regulation, protein interaction, and phenotypic heterogeneity. The second thrust
is to develop continual model-guided learning to provide neurologically
consistent predictions for small data regimes and continuously improve the
system with sporadic data updates. The third thrust is to design hybrid
learning-aided inference to address model incompleteness in parameterization and
hypothesis validation. The project will be evaluated through large-scale
neuroimaging genetic studies of neurodegenerative
diseases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.