* 2239325
* CAREER: Analysis of uncertainty, long-time statistics and singularity formation in fluid flow models
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Cecilia Mondaini, Drexel University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2028
* USD 154,264.00

The study of many real-world complex systems - e.g., in weather and climate,
economics, and biology - involve the prediction of future states of a certain
physical system or estimation of unknown parameters. Methods for addressing
these prediction or estimation questions frequently rely on suitable
mathematical models often combined with measurement data. Here challenging
issues arise in the form of unavoidable errors or uncertainties in both model
and measurements, as well as a limited understanding of the underlying
theoretical properties of the model. All such challenges are severely amplified
in complex physical systems due to the presence of a large number of degrees of
freedom. This project aims to advance rigorous understanding of these problems
and develop new techniques in the context of high-dimensional complex systems,
particularly arising in fluid dynamics applications. Specifically, the following
topics will be addressed: recovery of missing physical parameters from sparse
and noisy observations; long-time behavior of stochastically forced models; and
investigation of finite-time singularity formation of certain deterministic
hydrodynamic models. The research will be integrated with several educational
activities to promote learning and professional development opportunities for
students and the organization of a workshop on statistical sampling, with
participation from both academia and industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research component of this project is subdivided into the following specific
projects: 1) Bayesian inverse PDE problems and Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
algorithms. This project will expand on a developing theory of MCMC algorithms
on general state spaces, including the development of new algorithms and
rigorous convergence results. These will be applied in the recovery of infinite-
dimensional physical quantities from sparse and noisy data as described by a
Bayesian inverse PDE problem, in the context of various fluid dynamics examples.
2) Mixing rates for stochastic PDEs and weak convergence of associated numerical
approximations. The PI will show Wasserstein contraction for the Markovian
semigroup associated to several stochastic fluid models, a result that implies
exponential mixing rates as well as uniqueness of the associated invariant
measure. The PI will also consider suitable numerical discretizations of these
models and show uniform in time weak convergence and asymptotic numerical bias
estimates. 3) Analysis of locally self-similar singularity scenarios in
hydrodynamic models. As a means of investigating reliability of mathematical
models, the PI will analyze the possible occurrence of finite-time blowup of
locally self-similar type in the context of hydrodynamic models. The PI will
consider the generalized surface quasi-geostrophic equation as a paradigm and
analyze both dissipative and non-dissipative cases.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.