* 2239742
* CAREER: in situ Polymer Gelation in Confined Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Sara Hashmi, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 04/30/2028
* USD 435,599.00

Polymer gels form in many natural and industrial flows: proteins gel in
preparing foods like Jell-O or eggs; plastics can gel during 3D printing; blood
proteins can crosslink to form clots in vessels. Flows become complex when
polymer molecules crosslink, or gel, transforming the fluid into a soft solid.
Crosslinking can result in intermittent flow or complete flow stoppage,
resulting in clogging of small channels, nozzles, or vessels, and eventual
failure of the system. The ability to predict flow regimes is key to assessing,
controlling, and preventing intermittency and clogging. This award will advance
our fundamental understanding of crosslinked polymer flows through small
channels to enable such control. The outcome of this award could result in
advances for a variety of applications including in bioprinting and 3D printing
by enabling efficient printing of a wider variety of polymers. It will also help
designing polymers to flow through small spaces, ranging from fluid fertilizers
to biomedical and pharmaceutical products. Education and outreach activities are
planned to engage and train high school, undergraduate, and graduate students in
emerging topics in complex fluids. Curriculum development, engaging the general
public, and supporting underrepresented populations in STEM are also
planned.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this award are twofold: (1) to
understand the range of system parameters that lead to intermittency and
clogging in crosslinking polymer flows through microchannels, and (2) to provide
quantitative descriptions of intermittency and the rheological and material
properties of intermittent flows. Video microscopy and in situ rheology combined
with theoretical transport models will be employed for this purpose. Polymers
can be crosslinked by chemical or physical methods, both of which are found in
bioprinting. In chemical crosslinking, gelation proceeds quickly, as in alginate
crosslinked by calcium. Gelation rate is controllable in physical crosslinking,
as in gelatin crosslinked by lowering temperature. Both types of gelation will
be investigated to determine the importance of reaction rate and mechanism.
Dependence of flow regimes on chemical concentrations and flow rates will be
studied. The outcome will provide parameters to predict and control flow regimes
in a broad range of crosslinking polymer systems. The intermittent flow regime
will be investigated by in situ rheological measurements to determine gel
strength and viscoelasticity in flow, which will be compared to bulk rheological
characterization of comparable systems. This will facilitate strategies to
prevent and overcome intermittent flows in practical
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.