* 2239156
* CAREER: Experimental Investigation into the Impact of Incoming Boundary Layer State on the Unsteady Dynamics of a Transverse Jet in a Hypersonic Crossflow
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2028
* Christopher Combs, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 03/31/2028
* USD 393,899.00

Hypersonic flight has obvious appeal given the potential to connect people
across the globe by reducing international travel times by a factor of 5 or
more, enhancing access to space, and strengthening national defense. Traditional
aerodynamic control surfaces seen on aircraft like flaps and fins are
ineffective at certain speeds and high altitudes owing primarily to the low
pressures and densities in the Earth’s upper atmosphere. This necessitates the
use of alternative means of vehicle control for hypersonic systems, which
generally takes the form of control jets. An improved understanding of the
physics of these interactions will also help improve high-speed engine
efficiency and reduce their carbon footprint. When fired into a high-speed flow;
however, these jets can create massive disturbances in the flowfield that are
complex to model. The current lack of proper predictive tools has rendered jet-
based control and fuel-injection unreliable, yet little validation-quality
experimental data for this fundamental problem exists in the current literature
base. This project will address this need by producing validation-quality
experimental datasets of jets issuing into a hypersonic crossflow using the Mach
7 wind tunnel facility at The University of Texas at San Antonio. The acquired
data will help unravel the complex physics of this critical flow phenomenon and
impact future high-speed vehicle design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
program will be accomplished in three phases: 1) in-depth characterization of
the unsteady dynamics of a jet-in-crossflow over a wide high-speed parameter
space; 2) comparison of jet-in-crossflow fluid physics to an analogous standing
cylinder geometry; 3) investigation of the transient dynamics of the initiation
of a jet in a high-speed crossflow. This work will impact hypersonic aerodynamic
research by: 1) quantifying unsteady dynamics and surface loads of jet-in-cross-
flow interactions for varied incoming boundary layer states and Mach numbers; 2)
characterizing the impact of these jet interactions on control moments for a
flat plate; 3) generating validation data for model development. This research
will also be tightly integrated with educational outreach. Given the diverse
population in San Antonio and The University of Texas at San Antonio’s status as
a minority-serving institution, this project will serve as a platform to engage
a diverse group of students. The ambitious educational activities include the
incorporation of research into new courses (&gt;100 students per semester) and
design projects through innovative curricula. Internship experiences with local
community college partners will support at least three summer students each
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.