* 2239787
* CAREER: Interpretable and Robust Machine Learning Models: Analysis and Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Jeremias Sulam, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 06/30/2028
* USD 219,202.00

While the impact of machine learning continues to increase in different areas---
from recommendation systems to algorithmic trading, and from medical imaging
diagnosis to molecular biology---some limitations of these increasingly complex
models represent important shortcomings for their safe and responsible
deployment. One of these limitations is the lack of interpretability of these
predictors, making it difficult to faithfully determine the role of the most
relevant portions of a given input in producing a certain output. Another
limitation is their brittleness, as these outputs can also be remarkably
unstable even to very small perturbations of the inputs. These problems can
compromise the safe deployment of modern machine learning tools in sensitive
domains, such as medical imaging. This project will develop formal methods and
algorithms to alleviate these shortcomings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER
project will develop a general framework to interpret complex predictors in a
robust and certifiable manner. In particular, this project will first define new
notions of local feature importance and develop correct and efficient methods to
estimate them. These definitions will be given in terms of local conditional
independence tests while making minimal assumptions about the prediction
functions, as well as extensions to semantically important concepts. Second,
this project will propose and analyze algorithms to certify the stability of
predictive models locally on manifolds, as well as guarantee the stability and
robustness of model interpretations. The methods derived from this project will
be evaluated on a series of medical imaging problems that include chest X-rays
and computed tomography. In addition, this project will carry out a holistic
educational and outreach program dedicated to increasing the representation of
minority students in STEM, including K-12 and community outreach through the
Johns Hopkins Center for Educational Outreach, strategic undergraduate and
graduate research projects, and broad dissemination to both the scientific
community and the general public, among other
initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.