* 2239567
* CAREER: Uncovering new rules of multicellular life using synthetic microbial communities
* BIO,MCB
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2028
* Arthur Prindle, Northwestern University at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 01/31/2028
* USD 224,580.00

The cell is the basic building block of life. However, cells in nature rarely
live alone, but instead reside in communities such as tissues or microbial
communities known as biofilms. A compelling biological problem is the
determination of what rules of life govern the transition from a collection of
individual cells to a multicellular community. Biofilms are used as a model to
address this problem since they are structured communities composed of millions
of single-celled bacteria that exhibit emergent coordination and dynamic cell-
to-cell signaling reminiscent of multicellular organisms. The overarching goal
is to understand the emergent coordinated group behaviors in bacterial biofilm
communities that arise from cell-to-cell signaling mechanisms, and how these
emergent behaviors impart functional community-level benefits. The project uses
synthetic microbial communities to systematically construct mixed biofilms that
can be quantified with single-cell resolution using microfluidics. Aided by a
mathematical model, acetylcholine signaling dynamics is mapped to changes in
membrane voltage for a set of mixed biofilm populations. Understanding how
bacterial communities are coordinated to respond to their environments could
provide an untapped source of new biology that could be harnessed for both basic
science and biomedical applications. This new understanding could be applied to
a range of circumstances from overcoming biofilm antibiotic resistance to
developing in vivo microbial diagnostics using synthetic biology. This
multidisciplinary research project also provides fertile ground for quantitative
training opportunities for students in systems and synthetic biology and
attracts students into pursuing new areas of scientific inquiry using the latest
research on microbial communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While microbiologists
have long studied gene regulation and metabolism in solitary bacterial cultures
and have begun to describe biofilm-level morphology and pattern formation,
integrating these two scales has been challenging. Here, using recently
developed fluorescent protein biosensors, the PI has uncovered coordinated
spatiotemporal oscillations in novel metabolites that spontaneously emerge
during biofilm development. Since many of these metabolites lack known
functional roles in bacteria, this discovery provides a model phenomenon to
interrogate how previously unexplored cell-to-cell signaling mechanisms give
rise to coordinated group behavior in biofilms. Specifically, the PI is using
synthetic microbial communities to systematically construct mixed biofilms that
are quantified with single-cell resolution using microfluidics. Aided by a
mathematical model, spatiotemporal metabolic dynamics are mapped to changes in
membrane voltage for each mixed biofilm population. These measurements are used
to decipher the mechanistic basis for how these metabolites interface with
electrochemical signaling to increase biofilm fitness. By combining quantitative
measurement techniques and a tractable model system for multicellular dynamics,
this research is poised to uncover new rules of multicellular
life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.