* 2239563
* CAREER: Additive Manufacturing of Polymer Composites via in-situ Polymerization
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Mostafa Yourdkhani, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Linkan Bian
* 04/30/2028
* USD 665,499.00

Traditional manufacturing of fiber-reinforced polymer composites is slow,
energy-inefficient, and labor-intensive. It requires using expensive molds that
severely limit the flexibility in the design and fabrication of complex
composite structures. Additive manufacturing provides a promising alternative
for rapidly creating desired composite structures without needing molds;
however, additive manufacturing of high-quality fiber-reinforced composites is
challenging, mainly because it is difficult to mix the matrix polymer with solid
fiber reinforcements uniformly prior to deposition and then rigidize them in
place along the desired print path. This Faculty Early Career Development
(CAREER) award will support fundamental research that will enable additive
manufacturing of composites containing a high concentration of carbon fibers by
instantaneously rigidizing the composite material during the printing process.
If successful, this project will lay a theoretical foundation for rapid
manufacturing of composites without molds or even in midair. This project will
provide hands-on activities to encourage Colorado’s middle and high school
students, particularly women and Hispanic/Latinx students, in STEM education.
New courses and experiential activities will be developed to train the next
generation of composites workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current approaches for
the additive manufacturing of continuous fiber-reinforced polymer composites are
mainly focused on using thermoplastic polymers or photocurable resins as the
matrix polymer of composites, which typically have poor mechanical properties
and/or are hard to process with a high volume-fraction of fibers. This project
will investigate the manufacturing science of a new composite additive
manufacturing method based on in-situ thermal polymerization of the matrix resin
of composites. Central to this project is a new composite manufacturing platform
that uses a remote stimulus to locally heat the thermo-responsive liquid resin
of the composite filament to instantaneously polymerize and rigidize the printed
composite. This project will elucidate the intrinsic interplay between process
parameters, spatiotemporal variations in material composition and properties,
and multiscale performance of printed composites. The proposed research is
expected to uncover the mechanisms of interface formation and bonding control
between adjacent layers. Experimental and numerical studies will be used to
understand the viscoelastic deformation behavior and fiber distribution within
filaments along multilayered, curvilinear paths during the manufacturing
process. Finally, a new sensing and control framework will be developed to
determine multiscale physical and thermochemical properties of materials during
the manufacturing process and update the processing parameters on the fly to
manufacture high-quality complex composite structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.