* 2239080
* CAREER: Collective Hydrodynamics of Robotic Swimmers and Surfers at High Reynolds Numbers
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2027
* Hassan Masoud, Michigan Technological University
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 11/30/2027
* USD 409,777.00

Robotic swarms have attracted much attention in recent years due to their vast
potential applications. In particular, there has been a growing interest in
aquatic robots, either swimming underwater or surfing at the air-water
interface. By using large numbers of individuals working in tandem through local
communication, a swarm of underwater swimmers or interfacial surfers can augment
their collective intelligence while maintaining relatively simplistic designs.
Harnessing this unique, joint ability leads to achieving superior
functionalities, which makes aquatic robots very appealing for a myriad of
practical applications, including surveillance, monitoring of invasive species,
tracking weather and sea conditions, pollution management, etc. The principal
objective of this project is to examine the hydrodynamics of aquatic robots
locomoting in orderly ensembles and to identify the collective behaviors that
emerge from the flow-mediated interactions among the robots in those formations.
The planned research studies in this project are coupled with a range of
educational activities that involve outreach to middle and high school students,
engagement with the general public, mentorship of community college and graduate
students, and curriculum development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
obtain an in-depth understanding of many-body hydrodynamic interactions in the
collective motion of robotic swimmers and surfers at high Reynolds numbers. The
design of robots chosen for the studies is motivated by species in nature that
have mastered their respective terrains. The swimmers mimic the general form of
a fish, with the tail flapping providing the thrust, while the surfers take
inspiration from water-walking insects. The investigations will be conducted
using a synergistic application of high-fidelity numerical simulations and
laboratory experiments. Validated simulations allow for exploring an extensive
range of flow regimes and combinations of relative positions between the robots.
Coupled with reinforcement learning algorithms, they also enable searching for
optimal strategies for collective locomotion. The unsteady flows generated by
the motion of robots in the experiments will be captured via time-resolved,
volumetric particle tracking velocimetry. The fundamental knowledge gained
during this project is expected to directly contribute to the design and
implementation of future aquatic robots capable of functioning alongside each
other with a high degree of coordination, similar to the behaviors exhibited by
fish in schools and birds in flocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.