* 2239020
* CAREER: Near-Memory Datacenter Network
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Mohammad Alian, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 04/30/2028
* USD 311,224.00

Datacenters are the backbone of today’s digital world that power all daily cloud
services. Over the past decade, the exponential increase in the data volumes
resulted in computing specialization and over a 100x increase in datacenter
network bandwidth utilization. Nevertheless, the network data delivery path to
the compute nodes remained unchanged. As such, the current datacenter network
suffers from the overhead of the multi-layered software stack, complex network
protocol processing, frequent data movement, and network device management. The
project novelty is to leverage hardware specialization and near-data processing
to re-architect a datacenter’s network. The project's educational plans include
organizing yearly outreach workshops to educate K-12 teachers on computing
fundamentals, involving underrepresented, undergraduate, and low-income students
in research, and integrating research into the higher-education curriculum. Such
activities boost student enrollment in higher-educational institutions, train
diverse students who deeply understand computer architecture and systems
fundamentals, and can innovate across architecture, networking, and operating
systems fields. The project’s impacts are to shape the future of datacenter
networking and educate a high-quality workforce to supply the needs of the US IT
industry and academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to design,
implement, and evaluate a network data plane that delivers data directly from
top-of-rack switch ports to the server’s Central Processing Unit (CPU) caches
and memory modules, leveraging an optical interconnection network. The
investigator extends the CPU Instruction Set Architecture (ISA) with several
network access instructions that enable a process to access the network with
minimal software activity. The memory access instructions offload the
notification between the CPU and the network interfaces to the hardware. The
investigator develops libraries and transport protocols that utilize the
proposed network data and control plane to provide robust connectivity between
processes running on different servers. Lastly, the project explores the design
space of domain-specific near-memory accelerators for network protocol
acceleration. The potentially transformative network architecture will enable
compute nodes to efficiently sustain tera-bit-per-second connectivity with bare
metal network latency numbers. The investigator uses the research findings and
evaluation infrastructure to boost the home institution's computer architecture
and systems pedagogy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Software and Hardware Foundations (SHF) core research program in the Computing
and Communication Foundations (CCF) Division and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.