* 2239540
* CAREER: Context-Aware Task-Oriented Dexterous Robotic Manipulation
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Hongsheng He, Wichita State University
* Continuing Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 04/30/2028
* USD 474,638.00

With the advancement of modern industries, effective manipulation of unfamiliar
objects in an assortment of dimensions, shapes, or materials becomes the
bottleneck problem in the automation of manufacturing, services, and retail
trade. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project will build
innovative technologies to enable a robot to manipulate unfamiliar objects for
difficult tasks, e.g., goods packing, drilling, waste sorting, and small part
assembly. The advantage of the technologies is the capability of manipulating an
object in accordance with the task requirements and the perceived object
properties including shapes and materials. This project has great potential to
benefit numerous industries by improving productivity, deskilling robot
programming, simplifying robot planning, and lowering the technical boundaries.
This project will support the national strategy in bringing manufacturing back
to the US while benefiting many industries and increasing their economic
competitiveness. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will establish a holistic
framework of Context-Aware Task-Oriented Manipulation (CATOM) to address three
cornerstone challenges in dexterous manipulation: object affordance perception,
dexterity modeling, and manipulation planning and learning. An object affordance
refers to actions that match with the physical properties of an object, such as
shapes, mass, and friction. The object affordances are obtained from object
characteristics measured by multimodal sensors. For this purpose, a knowledge-
driven model will be designed, which fuses heterogenous sensing and incorporates
human experience. The object affordances will be represented by potential
contacts under each grasp taxonomy. A topology-based modeling method will be
used to align potential hand postures with the contacts for a proper grasp. With
the topology-based modeling, a complex task will be represented as a spatial-
temporal sequence of hand topologies and operations. A hybrid learning and
planning mechanism will be implemented to deploy hand topologies and perform
actions under contextual constraints. The research of these perception,
planning, and learning methodologies will advance the knowledge in dexterous
robotic manipulation for complex tasks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.