* 2239412
* CAREER: High-level control of low-level circuits in the mammalian motor system
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Michael Economo, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 03/31/2028
* USD 700,000.00

All behavior – everything that an animal does – is defined by their movements.
As a result, the control of flexible, dexterous, goal-directed movements is one
of the most important functions of the nervous system. Motor circuits in the
vertebrate brain are arranged hierarchically. Low-level circuits in the
brainstem and spinal cord – such as the central pattern generators that control
breathing and locomotion – can autonomously produce basic motor patterns. High-
level motor circuits allow animals to learn and adapt movements, detect and
correct errors, predict the cost and benefits of actions, and assemble movements
into complex sequences to attain behavioral goals over long time scales. High-
level circuits do not generally control movements directly, but, instead, engage
and modify the basic motor programs produced by low-level circuits. Low-level
circuits in turn integrate an array of inputs from many high-level areas to
synthesize the motor commands that drive motor neurons and muscles. Little is
currently known about how a multitude of high-level motor centers together
control low-level circuits in a coordinated fashion, despite the centrality of
this process to all flexible behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The overarching
goal of this project is to identify how high-level regions of the mouse motor
system turn on, turn off, and modify the motor patterns produced by low-level
circuits. Critically, tackling this problem will differentiate between two
competing models of hierarchical control that may be utilized in the mammalian
brain. In the Cooperative model, there exists a ‘division of labor’ between
high-level motor centers with different circuits responsible for different
computational processes – any or all of which may be invoked simultaneously
according to behavioral demands. Alternatively, the Parallel model predicts that
many high-level brain regions are equally capable of commanding movements in
their entirety, with different regions subsuming control in the behavioral
context for which they are specialized. This project leverages a cutting-edge
experimental toolkit in mice for manipulating neural activity and tracking the
signals communicated between them with cell-type specificity. This project
focuses on control of a well-defined central pattern generator responsible for
controlling tongue movements in mice to leverage a novel paradigm in which mice
perform the same tongue movements in contexts associated with different high-
level control processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.