* 2239931
* CAREER: Towards Reliable and Quantum-resistant Connected Vehicle Security
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Hanif Rahbari, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 02/29/2028
* USD 103,363.00

The number of people who die in motor vehicle accidents unfortunately increases
every year with human error as a primary cause of serious crashes. To enhance
roadway safety and efficiency through driver-assistance and automated-driving
systems, cellular vehicle-to-everything (C-V2X) is the globally preeminent
technology to support connected vehicle services, including vehicle-to-vehicle
(V2V) communications, and is set for expansion toward 6G cellular technology. In
particular, V2V communication that allows vehicles to directly exchange messages
beyond the perception range of on-board sensors has many tangible benefits to
society with the potential to prevent a significant percentage of crashes,
increase transportation system efficiency (reducing travel time, pollution,
etc.), and enhance mobility for disadvantaged communities. Despite long-standing
classical security protocols designed for C-V2X, however, this technology is
vulnerable to imminent quantum attacks from emerging quantum computers
threatening the “integrity” of safety-critical messages, and to denial-of-
service attacks at the currently unprepared communication protocols hindering
possible mitigations for those quantum attacks. Countering these attacks,
separately or jointly, is challenging, a significant risk to the safety of the
growing connected vehicle services and future autonomous ones, especially as
current hardware (with 12-15 year life expectancy on vehicles) is inefficient at
running post-quantum algorithms fast enough.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER
project refines and refocuses existing V2V communication and security protocols,
without an overhaul, to support post-quantum algorithms, given the hardware and
other practical limitations in the automotive industry. With novel security
protocols and backward-compatible communication techniques to prevent, mitigate,
and evaluate quantum attacks, this project transforms the current C-V2X
ecosystem to become crypto-agile for a staged transition over the next two
decades into a quantum-resistant one. The research and education agenda is
framed around three thrusts: (1) Establishing a roadmap and a transition plan in
designing specific interim security protocols for different stages of the
transition (e.g., before and after compatible hardware is available); (2)
Supporting post-quantum algorithms by optimizing the resource scheduling
techniques at the MAC layer to accommodate more messages, and developing novel
message sieving techniques at the physical layer to reduce the integrity
verification loads on the security modules; and (3) Developing a unique
prototype of a digital twin infused with software-defined radios by converting
an open-source V2V security testbed to an interactive platform with interfaces
to large-scale (NSF-funded) testbeds. As an integral part of this project, a
digital twin will be used (instead of costly urban experiments) for
comprehensive evaluation of the proposed techniques and development of a novel
game for gamifying connected vehicle security education. It cultivates new
interdisciplinary research among game design, wireless security, and the
automotive industry, providing for synergistic research and education outcomes,
and will also help broaden the impacts through inclusive mobility initiatives
for disadvantaged (deaf and hard-of-hearing) communities and innovative
educational pathways to train next generation of under-represented cybersecurity
experts. The PI will disseminate new course modules, hands-on labs, and the new
games through open-access lectures, academic/public exhibits, and various
collegiate and K-12 competitions. The research outcomes will be shared with
stakeholders for supporting safe innovations, standardization bodies (NIST,
IEEE) for security standards, and 3GPP and automotive industry for 6G C-V2X
specifications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.