* 2239350
* CAREER: Statistical Models and Parallel-computing Methods for Analyzing Sparse and Large Single-cell Chromatin Interaction Datasets
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* YONG CHEN, Rowan University
* Continuing Grant
* Jean Gao
* 04/30/2028
* USD 136,535.00

The 3D organization of nuclear chromatin plays a critical role in maintaining
normal cellular functions. Recent development of single-cell Hi-C (scHi-C)
technologies allows researchers to delineate the genome-wide chromatin
interactions in individual cells and answer fundamental biological questions.
However, computational methods for analyzing scHi-C data are largely lagging
behind because of data sparsity, high diversity and complicated hierarchy of
chromosomal organization. This project will address these challenges by building
a suite of models and parallel tools for both experimental and computational
biologists to analyze sparse and large scHi-C datasets, which will help them
understand 3D chromatin interactions and gain deep insights into functional
outcomes. The saturation model produced by this project will lead to a major
improvement in experimental quality, enhanced data analysis, and reduced
experimental costs. The integrated research and educational activities include
diverse students training and curriculum development for both undergraduate and
graduate courses in interdisciplinary subjects spanning computer science,
statistics, bioinformatics and biology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of
this project are to study the cell-specific chromatin organization at different
scales by using stochastic theory, wavelet transform, and parallel-computing
techniques. First, a stochastic model will be established to understand the
saturation status of scHi-C data by evaluating the major protocol steps and
sequencing depth. Second, multiscale-based methods will be designed for
detecting topologically associated domains and protein-mediated loops, cell
clustering, and comparative analysis. Third, all models and tools will be fully
parallelized for processing large datasets. The high performance and running
speed of these methods will help researchers achieve biological discoveries in a
one-stop service, and save time and money for experiments and computational
analysis. The software pipelines will be implemented by Python/R languages and
publicly accessible through the GitHub repository
https://github.com/chenyongrowan and a webserver at Rowan
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.