* 2239484
* CAREER: Automated Verification of Loops in Systems Code
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Ronghui Gu, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 01/31/2028
* USD 201,101.00

System software such as operating systems and hypervisors forms the software
foundations of our computing infrastructure. Formally verifying the correctness
and security of system software is highly demanding but comes at a considerable
cost especially when there are many loops. Complex system software typically
requires months of verification effort into loops alone. This project is
designing, implementing, and evaluating Ashera, a data-driven framework for
automatically verifying loops in systems code. The projectâ€™s novelties are the
introduction of a new learning architecture, Recursive Continuous Logic Networks
(R-CLNs), for learning loop invariants using system execution traces. This
project, for the first time, enables automated verification for complex loops in
real-world systems code and will be a crucial step to scale formal verification
techniques for building modern resilient system software so that everyone can
have access to trustworthy computing environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ashera
verifies loops by inferring and validating loop invariants, which capture the
effect of the loop on the program state irrespective of the actual number of
loop iterations. These invariants for systems code usually contain quantifiers
and recursive functions over iterative data structures, which are difficult and
time-consuming to manually infer and prove, even for verification experts. To
tackle these challenges, Ashera introduces R-CLN, a neural architecture
specialized for learning quantified and recursive loop invariants using novel
training data collected from execution traces of the target program, such as
sliding windows and randomized history windows. Ashera incorporates a Dafny-
based validation scheme and translators for C, Go, and Coq proof assistant, such
that a system designer only needs to provide pre- and post-conditions of the
loop in order for the learning framework to sample, infer, and validate an
invariant. This project will use Ashera to conduct end-to-end, automated
verification for loops in all major verified systems and several real systems,
including KVM, the Linux Buddy system, and the Linux page fault handler, which
was previously considered intractable, demonstrating that Ashera is capable of
scaling verification for system software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.