* 2239425
* CAREER: Species Interactions of Coral Reef Benthic Cyanobacterial Mats: Within-Mat Diversity Promotes Both Facilitation and Top-Down Control
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2027
* Sophie McCoy, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 12/31/2027
* USD 502,996.00

Nuisance algal blooms are a massive conservation challenge to global ecosystems.
Benthic cyanobacterial mats (BCMs) can be persistent in time and spatially
expansive on coral reefs, posing additional environmental threats through
physical smothering of and chemical interactions with other reef organisms,
including corals. This research seeks to understand processes that lead to bloom
longevity, such as metabolic cooperation between microbial species, and to study
natural mechanisms of bloom control, such as the combination of large-bodied
predators, reef fish, and viruses. The research team leverages research results
towards coral reef management to develop globally-applicable SCUBA diver
interventions to control cyanobacterial blooms and develops training materials
and lead workshops for the Caribbean dive and snorkel tourism industries to
scale up the use of diver interventions over the 5-year project. The education
plan focuses on high-investment training of undergraduate research interns from
UNCâ€™s transfer student population together with training opportunities for
postdoctoral researchers, graduate, undergraduate, and high school students,
generates data to be integrated into publicly available undergraduate-level
bioinformatics case studies, and develops K-12 educational materials through the
International Microbiology Literacy
Initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding ecological processes that lead to
prolonged blooms are a major research gap addressed by this research, which
focuses on metabolic facilitation and top-down controls on BCMs. The research
makes three major contributions to our knowledge of the functional ecology of
marine cyanobacterial mats via (1) mechanistic characterization of within-mat
metabolic handoffs, (2) identification of viral-driven changes to within-mat
metabolic cooperation, and (3) description of interactions between micro-
(viral) and macro-scale (fish) predation. Regardless of whether specific
hypotheses are supported, the data generated by this research greatly advance
the field of viral trophic ecology by testing ecological theory using a
mechanistic hypothesis to understand biogeochemical outcomes of functional
mosaics between density-dependent lysis-lysogeny switches. This project is
expected to produce evidence for the roles of cooperative interactions among
mat-building bacteria and bloom control by multiple predators including reef
fish and viruses. Viral ecology is difficult to study in natural microbial
systems, and thus this project contributes to our knowledge about the ecological
roles of viruses in natural contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
supported by the Biological Oceanography and Ocean Education
Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.