* 2239327
* CAREER: Ultrafast Quantum Networks: Pushing the Limits of Photon Production
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Simeon Bogdanov, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew McCune
* 04/30/2028
* USD 395,691.00

Quantum networks relying on single photons to carry information are poised to
enable a new generation of secure communication, efficient computing, and high-
precision sensing technologies. However, transmitting each quantum bit requires
generating many single photons. As a result, the current quantum bitrates in
long-range networks are often in the kHz range and below, which is insufficient
for most practical applications. This project will explore the physical limits
to the speed of single-photon generation by coupling quantum emitters in
nanometer-sized diamond particles to metallic structures much smaller than the
wavelength of light. It will create the basic knowledge allowing quantum optical
circuits to operate at practical MHz- and GHz-scale quantum bitrates and at non-
cryogenic temperatures, with applications extending into classical optical
communication links. The project includes a plan for developing educational
modules to teach high-school and undergraduate students about quantum mechanics
and the nascent quantum technology. Furthermore, the outreach activity for low-
income middle-school students will increase their access to STEM content and
scientific careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research project will
investigate the fundamental speed and efficiency limits of plasmon-enhanced
spontaneous emission. By coupling group-IV color centers in nanodiamonds to
hybrid-mode plasmonic nanostructures made from low-loss crystalline metals, the
project targets three major challenges. First, coherent spontaneous emission
will be achieved on the sub-picosecond timescale. Second, the hybridization of
dissimilar modes in nanostructures will unlock a giant field enhancement and
near-unity radiative efficiency. Third, the project will achieve on-demand
emission of indistinguishable photons into on-chip waveguide modes at near-THz
repetition rates and at non-cryogenic temperatures. The proposed research will
transform how future quantum photonic circuits operate. By increasing the light-
matter interaction rates to the THz range, the project aims to outpace GHz-scale
quantum dephasing and inhomogeneous broadening. The project will address the
long-standing trade-off between electromagnetic field confinement and ohmic
losses in plasmonic nanostructures and unlock the potential for high-bandwidth
optical communication links. The project will create basic knowledge enabling
practical MHz- and GHz-scale quantum bitrates, operation at non-cryogenic
temperatures, and multipartite interaction of quantum dipoles for future quantum
networks. The PI will develop education modules for middle-school and high-
school students and provide research opportunities for at least two
undergraduate researchers per semester.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.