* 2239629
* CAREER: Nanoscale Interactions of Stimuli-responsive Nanoparticles with Enzymes
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Mohiuddin Quadir, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Ashley Pierce
* 04/30/2028
* USD 676,969.00

Living cells use enzymes to perform numerous biological functions. These enzymes
work on cellular targets which are extremely small in size, oftentimes measured
at the nanometer (one billionth of a meter) length scale. This CAREER project
aims to understand the fundamental mechanisms of how enzyme-sensitive, nanoscale
materials interact with an enzyme. This goal will be realized by developing
nanoparticles, which respond to a particular class of enzymes by changing
particle size and function. Further, these particles will mimic the function of
a naturally occurring, enzyme-sensitive protein – histone – that is found in
cells. The developed platform will therefore answer several fundamental
questions related to enzyme actions at the nanoscale, such as (1) How
nanoparticles selectively interact with a target enzyme and reject interactions
with other macromolecules in the complex biological environment ? and (2) How to
regulate the rate and extent of enzyme responsivity of nanoscale materials via
engineering their size, shape, surface properties, and chemical composition? An
in-depth understanding of the structure and function of enzyme-sensitive
nanoparticles will open the gateway to designing smart nanomaterials capable of
selectively recognizing a specific enzyme. These nano-platforms would then
provide tools and techniques to prepare cancer drug delivery systems, diagnostic
agents for neurodegenerative diseases, biosensing technologies, and mechanisms
for pollution control. The educational goal of the CAREER project has three-
pronged approaches centered on Tribal Colleges and Primary Undergraduate
Institutes across North Dakota. The approach is aimed to increase inclusivity
and minimize the loss of Native American students in higher education. The
educational activity will include (1) peer-to-peer collaboration with at least
eight Tribal College and Primarily Undergraduate Institution mentors over the
project period to revitalize the learning resources of these institutes for STEM
education, (2) curriculum development for the North Dakota State University
engineering graduate program, and (3) increased research involvement of
undergraduates from underprivileged areas across North Dakota. The research
activity delineated in this project will thus expand the scope of training in
nanoscale interactions and contribute to a robust supply of professionals needed
in STEM research at the national
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this
CAREER project is to deconvolute and understand the events occurring when an
enzyme interacts with an Enzyme-Responsive Polymersome. Polymersomes are
nanoscale, membrane-bound vesicles formed via the self-assembly of amphiphilic
block copolymers that constitutes their membranes. Using a model enzyme with
epigenetic activity, histone deacetylase, the principal investigator aims to
study the effect of chemical composition and nanoscale features of polymersomes
that are capable of recognizing target enzymes and rejecting interactions with
off-target biomacromolecules. Developing platforms to study enzyme interactions
with dynamically-responsive nanosystems is challenging because (1) accessibility
of an enzyme to its nanoparticle-bound substrates depends not only on the
particle size and charge but also on molecular crowding and conformation; (2)
the mechanism of enzyme interactions with substrates at the nanoscale is
transient downstream of specific environmental cues, and (3) extracting
molecular level structure/dynamics information at the nano-bio interface under
the interference of surrounding molecules is non-trivial. Given the increasing
need for biomolecular delivery platforms for therapeutics, agrochemicals,
environmental remediation, and synthetic materials that mimic cellular
organelles, there is a critical need to overcome these challenges. Three
strategies will be realized to achieve the goal of this CAREER project: first,
the PI will mimic the enzyme-responsivity pattern of a histone — an acetylated
lysine-bearing natural protein of well-defined size and structure, found in
living cells that interacts with different epigenetic enzymes, such as histone
deacetylase; second, the mechanism of the enzyme interactions on this histone-
mimetic nanoplatform, mediated by deacetylation reaction (removal of acetyl
groups from primary amines of lysine residues) will be structurally followed and
established. third, synthetic and experimental techniques capable of
orthogonally detecting molecular-level interactions will be used to dissect the
interactions of nanoparticles with enzymes in contact with each other. The
central hypothesis of this research activity is that structural and functional
changes of enzyme-responsive polymersomes in response to epigenetic enzymes are
mediated mechanistically via the inversion of solubility of the hydrophobic and
hydrophilic segment of the amphiphilic block copolymers in water and governed by
the enzyme accessibility to its substrate located within the nanostructure. The
main teaching philosophy of PI’s educational plan involves connecting with
mentors serving tribal colleges and primary undergraduate institutes across the
state of North Dakota via an immersive ‘Mentor- to-Mentor” program for the
continuation and reinforcement of STEM training in these institutes. Further,
the research elements of nanoparticle-enzyme interactions will be bridged with
engineering graduate curriculum development in the PI’s home institute that will
be harnessed to improve enrollments of under-represented minorities in 4-year
graduate schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.