* 2239630
* CAREER: Shales as Barriers for Fluid Flow in Geoenergy Projects
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Roman Makhnenko, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Giovanna Biscontin
* 06/30/2028
* USD 581,383.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will blend methods from
rock mechanics, soil mechanics, geology, and materials science to tackle the
challenges in characterization of shales’ behavior from laboratory to field
scales. Shale formations are abundant in the subsurface and are key for
successfully reaching the net-zero emission target to mitigate climate change by
storing heat, CO2, and H2 deep underground. The large sensitivity of these low-
permeable nanoporous clay-rich materials to changes in degree of saturation,
mechanical loading, pore pressure, and temperature, convert shale
characterization into a very challenging task. Overcoming this challenge is a
required step to reliably predict and model the short- and long-term response of
shales in assessing the safety of low-carbon geoenergy projects. The research
developments will be integrated in the educational program by training
engineering students on approaching the design of energy geotechnics projects,
guiding students to apply their knowledge to create video education modules and
engage them in public deliberation, contributing to the nation’s effort to
increase diversity in the STEM workforce and worldwide effort to mitigate
climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to
substantially advance the understanding and measurement of the physical
processes governing the response of partially or fully saturated shale-like
materials subjected to thermo-hydro-mechanical (THM) loading. Despite the long
duration of the characterization of coupled processes in shales (weeks to months
at the laboratory scale and months to years at the field scale), this project
will undertake these tasks enabling the development of realistic models to
obtain accurate predictions for geoenergy projects. Experimental methods and
standards will be developed to characterize the short- and long-term effect of
THM loading on shales and control their degree of saturation. These deliverables
will bring first-ever measurements of the poromechanical and two-phase flow
parameters associated with the controlled partially saturated response of stiff
clay-rich rock and provide data to benchmark material models. Field experiments
will involve monitoring a long-term cool fluid injection in a shale formation
and a geothermal field to evaluate the upscaling of laboratory data to the field
scale achieved by a combination of high-performance finite element modeling and
machine learning. The developed experimental and numerical tools will allow for
prediction of long-term mechanical and transport response of shale-like
materials and evaluation of subsurface projects within them, making designs
feasible and safe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.