* 2239757
* CAREER: Colony: A Framework for Bespoke Virtual Execution Contexts
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Kyle Hale, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Karen Karavanic
* 04/30/2028
* USD 214,158.00

Vulnerabilities present in software running on shared computing infrastructure
(e.g., cloud datacenters) can result in significant economic losses, compromised
user data, and weakened national security when such infrastructure does not
properly separate programs from one another in secure, isolated compartments.
While techniques do exist to ensure such isolation, they typically increase the
engineering burden on programmers or trade off performance for security,
limiting their effectiveness and reach. Today, programmers are deploying code on
shared computing infrastructure in increasingly fine-grained units (e.g.,
serverless computing), making this trade off more severe over time. The off-the-
shelf technologies, such as containers that isolation frameworks are often built
on, were not designed for this fine-grained use case. This project thus aims to
ensure both performance and security for code running on cloud infrastructure by
designing new isolation mechanisms from the ground up using novel operating
system, compiler, programming language, and virtualization technologies. The
project will help produce more robust cloud computing infrastructure that is
less susceptible to attack, less likely to leak sensitive user data, and more
productive for programmers. If successful, potential impacts include reduced
economic losses from compromised infrastructure, strengthened national security,
and increased privacy for the broader public using cloud services. The project
will also make contributions in education and broadening participation in the
computing profession by enhancing educational content, injecting industry-
relevant and applied content into the curriculum, increasing the representation
of people from diverse backgrounds in computer systems research, revitalizing
the computer systems curriculum at the PIâ€™s institution, and fostering
undergraduate research engagement. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes
Colony, a new software framework for lightweight, bespoke, virtualized execution
contexts. Colony leverages novel execution abstractions customized for
individual applications and designed for both performance and isolation. Colony
contexts are synthesized using compiler analyses, and are exposed through a rich
set of programming abstractions and programming language extensions. Colony
builds on a new abstraction for isolated function execution, the virtualized
subroutine, or virtine, along with an embeddable hypervisor. The goal of the
Colony project is to achieve both high performance and strong isolation for
individually isolated function contexts in a variety of applications. The
project will explore various mechanisms to enable bespoke contexts, including
virtualization mechanisms enhanced for optimized start-up performance, and
programming models with novel language/compiler support. These bespoke contexts
can be used for lighter-weight isolation than managed languages, giving them
broad applicability to areas such as OS kernel drivers, third-party libraries,
and database user-defined functions, as well as the more nascent serverless
computing paradigm. The proposed work has potential to open up new lines of
research in operating systems, virtualization, compilers, and system
security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.