* 2239070
* CAREER: Mechanisms and consequences of Genotype by Environment interaction in a model grass
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* David Des Marais, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 05/31/2028
* USD 250,000.00

Solar energy captured by plants is the central currency of life on Earth.
Through a set of elegant chemical reactions, plants use solar energy to power
the conversion of atmospheric carbon dioxide into stable sugars. These organic
compounds, in turn, are used by the plant for growth and reproduction. Plant
growth and reproductive output feed the world, and plant metabolism is a key
determinant of atmospheric composition. Understanding how these three
fundamental activities – growth, metabolism, and reproduction -- are controlled
by genes and the environment is a fundamental challenge for science to ensure
the resilience of ecological and agricultural systems. This project uses a model
grass species, Brachypodium distachyon, to disentangle the complex interactions
between plant genetics and environment. There are three broad aims. First, to
study the genetic basis of plant response to several environmental stressors to
ask whether certain combinations of plant traits might be difficult to achieve
over evolutionary time scales, or during breeding for crops. Second, to use
genomics to identify specific genes – and interactions among genes – which
control plant response to environmental stress. Finally, to study whether and
how plants buffer the potentially destabilizing effects of environmental stress
on their growth. These research aims will be complemented and expanded by
developing a new undergraduate laboratory class, representing the first
dedicated plant biology class at MIT. In this class, students will design and
perform experiments exploring plant biochemistry, development, and responses to
climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates the molecular,
physiological, and developmental basis of genotype by environment interaction,
GxE. GxE is the observation that genetically distinct individuals respond to
environmental cues in different ways. The project leverages the considerable
genetic and genomic resources in the model grass species Brachypodium distachyon
towards three specific aims. First, to ask how allelic function in one
environment relates to functions in a second environment and whether genetic
correlations between two environments might constrain organismal response to
novel or challenging environments. These experiments use quantitative genetic
approaches to understand the genetic architecture of environmentally responsive
traits. Next, to investigate how interactions among genes at the molecular level
shapes GxE, asking whether GxE in the transcript abundance of individual genes
drives GxE in gene regulatory networks. Finally, to decompose the drivers of
Relative Growth Rate to ask how genetic and environmental perturbations in key
traits are (or are not) buffered to maintain stable RGR. These research aims
will be complemented and extended by two educational aims. To develop the first
stand-alone plant science class at MIT and introduce students to data generation
and analysis in plants. This course specifically asks students to describe now
genetics and the environment interact to produce phenotypic diversity, and the
data generated will be used directly in the research aims of this project. In
the second education aim, a field-based learning experience in Boston’s Arnold
Arboretum will be developed for students to observe and interpret trait
diversity in plants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by the Plant
Genome Research Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.