* 2239030
* CAREER: Multifunctional Soft Neural Probes for Elucidating Spinal Cord Injury Pathophysiology
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Siyuan Rao, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 06/30/2028
* USD 432,936.00

Spinal cord injury (SCI) is one of the leading causes of paralysis in the US.
Over 1.4 million people live with SCI-related disabilities, which leads to lower
participation and gives rise to substantial individual and societal costs. Most
of the current neurotechnology for the spinal cord system relies on directly
injecting electricity into the tissues. However, this type of electrical
approach is inadequate to find out which type of cells contributes to injury
recovery because electricity affects all the neurons in certain areas without
selection. To overcome such limitations, this CAREER project seeks to develop a
new soft device technology to study the spinal cord system using light,
electricity, drug, and virus gene carriers. The development of this
neurotechnology requires knowledge from multiple disciplines. Therefore, this
project opens various educational opportunities for students with a broad
interest in STEM. The investigator aims to launch an interdisciplinary
neuroengineering program across the engineering and neuroscience departments at
UMass Amherst. This program will combine research and educational activities
through the development of a curriculum inclusively designed for students with
disabilities, an interactive online hub, and a series of student-centered
neurotechnology-themed outreach activities for K-12 students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator’s long-term career goal is to establish
engineering platform methodologies to investigate the nervous system and
ultimately develop therapeutics for nervous system dysfunction. Using the
knowledge of materials engineering and neuroscience, the investigator
hypothesizes that the development of a new multifunctional soft neural probe
technology can advance a holistic understanding of neural pathophysiology in
SCI. The research goals will be accomplished through four specific tasks: (1)
Developing a new multifunctional soft neural probe technology with polymer
engineering approaches. The optical and mechanical properties of hydrogel
materials can be fine-tuned by tweaking their underlying nano- and micro-scale
structures. Optimizing the material properties of the hydrogel component allows
the probe to transmit light to the spinal cord target areas for optical neural
modulation and recording, and to adapt to the spinal cord tissue movement in
vivo. (2) Testing the multifunctionality and long-term viability of the soft
neural probes in vivo. The soft neural probes are designed to allow optical
stimulation and photometric recording, electrical recording, drug infusion, and
virus delivery within miniaturized devices without constraining natural
movement.(3) Investigating spinal locomotor circuits with soft neural probes
using a series of locomotor behavioral tests to assess SCI functional recovery.
(4) Applying the soft neural probes for genetic and pharmacological
interventions to promote functional recovery in SCI mouse
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.