* 2239511
* CAREER: Antiquity-Inspired Novel Stratlingite-Based Cementitious Binder (StraCem): A Lesson from Ancient and Modern Civilizations
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Monday Okoronkwo, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 04/30/2028
* USD 674,756.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will advance the
fundamental understanding of the kinetics and thermodynamics of stratlingite
precipitation and its interaction with calcium silicate hydrate phases, to
enable the design of a new eco-efficient stratlingite-based cementitious binder
(StraCem) that mimics the chemistry and mineralogy of ancient Roman concretes,
while integrating the benefits of modern concrete designs. Many ancient
structures have withstood aggressive seawater environments for over 2000 years
testifying to their high durability and resilience, while most modern structures
tend to deteriorate slowly under similar environments. However, modern concrete
technology enables the design of concretes for specific applications with
impressive properties that were not possible in the ancient era. The performance
and durability of concretes are known to be strongly linked to the chemistry and
microstructure of the hardened matrix, and recent studies have disclosed the
mineral phase assemblage and microstructure of existing Roman structures,
wherein the distribution of tobermorite-like calcium silicate hydrate and
stratlingite phases are postulated to be contributory to their durability and
resilience. This project will harness the chemistries of ancient concretes and
modern ones to facilitate the design of StraCem that features at least 50% lower
carbon footprint than Portland cement, while ensuring superior performance,
chemical resilience, and durability in land and marine environments. The lower
carbon footprint of the materials contributes to the mitigation of climate
change. The program integrates educational activities to help inspire, train,
and equip future cement material scientists and engineers through local K-12
outreach activities, provision of experiential learning opportunities for
underrepresented minority undergraduate and graduate students, and the outcome
of the study will enrich new and existing courses on the chemistry of cement-
based materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific research goal of this
project is to investigate the pathways and energetics of stratlingite nucleation
and growth together with tobermorite-like calcium silicate hydrate gels in
cementitious systems. The effort will unlock the compositional drivers,
including aqueous pore solution chemistries, and the energy landscapes to
facilitate rapid coprecipitation of stable stratlingite and Al-tobermorite-like
calcium silicate hydrate gels. The study will be curated with relevant
nucleation and growth theories, and the insight thereof will be applied to
design a novel low-carbon StraCem clinker that will yield an optimum balance of
stratlingite and calcium silicate hydrate gel during hydration, mimicking
reported beneficial mineralogy of ancient Roman concretes, while minimizing less
beneficial hydrate phases. The performance and durability of the designed
StraCem-based pastes, mortars, and concretes will be investigated in air and
simulated marine conditions. It is hypothesized that StraCem will feature
superior performance and durability than Portland cement under terrestrial and
marine environments, due to the space-filing properties of str√§tlingite and
binding ability of calcium silicate hydrate gel. Also, the new cement will
present significantly lower CO2 emissions due to its lower calcareous content
and clinkering temperature than Portland cement. To actualize the objectives, a
combination of wet chemistry, solid-state chemistry, in-situ and ex-situ
multiscale characterization, and thermodynamic computation will be employed.
This project will establish multi-disciplinary research and mentorship at the
intersection of chemistry, chemical engineering, materials science, and civil
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.