* 2239685
* CAREER: Functional and evolutionary analysis of transposon-encoded, RNA-guided nucleases across the three domains
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Samuel Sternberg, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Clifford Weil
* 06/30/2028
* USD 385,645.00

This project will investigate abundant genetic elements known as transposons, or
‘jumping genes,’ and will specifically examine a primordial family of
transposon-encoded enzymes that use guide RNAs to target and cut matching DNA
sequences. These enzymes are directly related to CRISPR-Cas9 and CRISPR-Cas12,
which similarly rely on guide RNAs for targeted DNA cleavage, and which have
revolutionized scientists’ ability to perform precise genetic modifications in
plants, animals, and humans. By exploring what may be the evolutionary ancestors
of these enzymes, this project has the potential to uncover new tools for genome
engineering and new knowledge about diverse biological pathways where RNA-guided
DNA targeting offers an advantage to host cells and genetic parasites. CRISPR-
based tools continue to disrupt biotechnology sectors, posing urgent new
questions about how to best harness these developments for societal benefit.
Promoting broader public knowledge about CRISPR, genetics, and precision
medicine will be of central importance in making informed decisions about how we
shepherd CRISPR technology in the future. The broader impacts of this project
include a commitment to educating middle- and high-school students from
traditionally underrepresented groups in STEM on these topics, thereby inspiring
the next generation of young thinkers to pursue careers in science and
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TnpB-family enzymes were recently shown to use
transposon-encoded guide RNAs to direct cleavage of complementary DNA target
sequences, but the biological and functional importance of this biochemical
activity remains unclear. Even more mysteriously, TnpB-family genes are present
across all three domains of life in diverse genetic contexts, and in association
with distinct families of transposases. This project will investigate the
hypothesis that that RNA-guided nucleases play a fundamental role in promoting
transposon survival and proliferation, explaining their widespread conservation
in bacteria, archaea, and eukarya. This problem will be studied across three
major experimental aims, including the determination of how transposases and
nucleases coordinate their enzymatic activities; the exploration of RNA-guided
nucleases encoded by diverse bacterial transposons; and the discovery of novel
nucleases encoded within archaeal and eukaryotic transposable elements. These
aims will employ a multidisciplinary approach blending phylogenetics,
biochemistry, genetics, and high-throughput sequencing. By elucidating the
molecular origins of CRISPR RNA-guided nucleases, this project will
fundamentally transform our knowledge and appreciation of transposon
domestication during the evolution of host immune systems, and will offer new
opportunities to develop next-generation genome editing
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.