* 2239840
* CAREER: Structure-Preserving Multimodal Alignment between Vision and Language
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Humphrey Shi, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 06/30/2028
* USD 120,993.00

A grand challenge in artificial intelligence (AI) is to be able to process
multimodal vision and language data, while preserving relationships across such
modalities so that the linkages between the different modalities is sustained.
Current machine learning systems do not fully grasp the structures and
relationships that exist within human vision and language, and thus have
difficulties producing the desired outcomes in terms of interpretability,
efficiency, measurability, and causality. This project tackles the fundamental
multimodal alignment problem in machine learning and will advance research in
both computer vision and natural language processing, especially in the
disruptive innovation areas of multimodal vision-language generation and
understanding. It will lead to breakthroughs in both theoretical understanding
as well as practical applications of vision and language. The techniques
developed under this project could similarly be used to connect different types
of latent structures across modalities and are not limited to vision and
language. This would be extremely beneficial for responsible AI applications in
the sciences, where people not only want to understand the relationship in data,
but the structure and causal explanations. Such an understanding is also
critical for reducing demographic biases that machine learning models exhibit.
Through education, open-sourcing and outreach activities, this project will
train and educate students of all levels - from K-12 to graduate - in AI,
advance theoretical vision and language courses, reduce bias, and further
democratize AI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preserving structure is an essential
component of understanding how to make machine learning models better and more
reliable. This project aims to create novel and signiﬁcant scientific advances
in multimodal vision and language modeling with structure-preserving latent
space alignment to build a bridge between vision and language. The project aims
to increase the structural preserving nature for linguistic and visual
embeddings and develop a map between the two latent representations that
preserves the underlying structures. In particular, the project will achieve
these goals through four thrusts: (I) Developing structure-preserving latent
representations and mapping between vision and language; (II) Improving learning
and data efficiency through latent structures; (III) Develop novel evaluation
metrics through structural information to improve measurability; (IV) Develop a
causal representation and interpretation framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.