* 2239216
* CAREER: Developing Quantum Algorithms for High-Entropy Alloy Discovery
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Houlong Zhuang, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 12/31/2027
* USD 196,640.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports theoretical
and computational research that adopts quantum computers in the noisy
intermediate-scale quantum era to discover novel alloys known as high-entropy
alloys (HEAs), which refer to alloys consisting of multiple elements with the
same or nearly the same concentration. A typical HEA adopts a single-phase solid
solution structure, where atoms of the constituent elements are located at
random sites of a fixed crystal lattice. HEAs made of certain combinations of
elements possess unique properties, such as balanced ductility and strength,
that are absent in the conventional alloys, where the content of one element
dominates the overall concentration. Discovering HEAs is a complex combinatorial
problem, where an optimal selection of elements and their corresponding molar
ratios significantly affect the resulting materials' properties. This project
tackles this problem to search for the "Materials Genome" of HEAs via developing
quantum algorithms and implementing them on near-term quantum
computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also supports the PI’s educational
and outreach activities that aim to prepare for upcoming revolutions in
artificial intelligence and quantum computing. The PI will (i) train quantum
workforce by providing an integrated training platform through existing Quantum
Collaborative at Arizona State University (ASU) for practitioners and a
diversified student body through education and research opportunities, course
and thesis projects, and summer internships, (ii) train graduate students and
mentor underrepresented high school students based upon the existing outreach
programs such as the "Science and Engineering Experience" program at ASU, (iii)
organize symposia in the annual meetings of main research societies such as the
American Physical Society, (iv) organize a special journal issue to collect
contributions reporting the frontier of HEA research, and (v) participate in
various activities organized by the U.S.-Africa Initiative in Electronic
Structure to enhance collaborations between African and U.S.
physicists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER award supports theoretical and computational research with an aim to
elucidate the underlying physics and mechanisms associated with the materials
discovery of high entropy alloys (HEAs). The PI will (i) develop quantum
encoding algorithms to convert classical HEA data to quantum data, which will
facilitate subsequent quantum search, learning, and exploring and help
understand the effects of constituent elements and concentrations of HEAs on the
entropy-stabilized phases, (ii) develop quantum search algorithms that use the
encoded quantum states as inputs to achieve reduced time complexity in searching
a HEA database comparing with classical search, (iii) perform quantum machine
learning computations to determine the phase selection of HEAs and achieve a
prediction accuracy level that is comparable to classical machine learning
models, and (iv) develop quantum walk algorithms to explore the high-dimensional
compositional space to achieve rapid explorations of structure-property
relationships to discover new HEAs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award also
supports the PI’s educational and outreach activities that aim to prepare for
upcoming revolutions in artificial intelligence and quantum computing. The PI
will (i) train quantum workforce by providing an integrated training platform
through existing Quantum Collaborative at Arizona State University (ASU) for
practitioners and a diversified student body through education and research
opportunities, course and thesis projects, and summer internships, (ii) train
graduate students and mentor underrepresented high school students based upon
the existing outreach programs such as the "Science and Engineering Experience"
program at ASU, (iii) organize symposia in the annual meetings of main research
societies such as the American Physical Society, (iv) organize a special journal
issue to collect contributions reporting the frontier of HEA research, and (v)
participate in various activities organized by the U.S.-Africa Initiative in
Electronic Structure to enhance collaborations between African and U.S.
physicists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.