* 2239566
* CAREER: Learning for Generalization in Large-Scale Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Cathy Wu, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* John Taylor
* 08/31/2028
* USD 110,000.00

The adoption of cyber-physical systems (CPS) is growing at an accelerated rate,
giving rise to large-scale CPS––for example, comprised of large numbers of
robots in a warehouse, turbines on a wind farm, or vehicles and traffic signals
in a city. If intelligently coordinated, these systems will unlock
transformative societal benefits across broad economic sectors. They also
promise to contribute to the most pressing challenge of the century––climate
change––by substantially utilizing resources more effectively, such as from
supply chains, energy systems, and urban systems. Unfortunately, effective
coordination schemes have been elusive due to the sheer scale and diversity of
scenarios that these systems encounter. To advance robust coordination in large-
scale CPS, this project investigates the generalization of learning-enabled
methods as a key solution concept, in light of their potential to translate
coordination schemes across disparate scenarios. The project's impact will be
enhanced through the dissemination of open-source research and teaching
material, and via experiments derived from large-scale CPS applications in
collaboration with public sector, industry, and academic partners. The project
also boosts K-12, undergraduate, graduate, and professional education, by
supporting and actively engaging students in research activities, promoting the
translation of research to practice, and through outreach efforts targeting
middle school students from underrepresented and underserved
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NSF CAREER project focuses on an enabling
methodology for large-scale CPS: understanding generalization of learning-
enabled methods, and further applying it to reduce the complexity of system
design and analysis. Recent evidence shows that controllers trained using
machine learning sometimes have the remarkable ability to generalize to other
scenarios, such as to different problem sizes or between simulated and physical
robotic systems. However, generalization is currently more of an art than a
science; the conditions under which generalization is successful are not well
understood. At the same time, large-scale CPS often induce parameterized
families of scenarios; for example, traffic control must consider different
weather conditions, sensing modalities, and numbers and types of agents. This
family of related CPS scenarios thus provides a platform for carefully examining
generalization across scenarios. The project will: 1) advance learning
algorithms for large-scale CPS by designing coordination-aware model-based
reinforcement learning methods for multi-agent systems; 2) leverage the
algorithms to understand generalization by formalizing, measuring, and
characterizing generalization with respect to deviations in CPS scenarios; and
then 3) harness generalization for robust coordination, by efficiently solving
large families of scenarios necessary to provide high performance and
assurances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.