* 2239880
* CAREER: Artificial Intelligence for Polarimetric Radar Remote Sensing of Precipitation
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Haonan Chen, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 06/30/2028
* USD 242,089.00

Polarimetric Doppler radars have been the most important remote sensing
instrument for observing clouds and precipitation, serving as cornerstones of
the national severe weather monitoring and forecast infrastructure. However,
state-of-the-art approaches have only been able to extract part of the
precipitation information from the multi-dimensional polarimetric radar data.
This research will open new horizons for radar remote sensing of precipitation
through developing explainable artificial intelligence (AI) techniques which can
extract the rich information from radar data to improve the understanding of
complex precipitation processes and atmospheric dynamics in different
precipitation environments. The AI methods developed from this project can
potentially be applied to the nationwide operational weather radars and many
research radars in the United States and worldwide, thus can advance weather,
water, and climate science and service. In addition to the training of
undergraduate and graduate students, the planned educational activities are
spread across multiple high schools in Northern Colorado, with instruction and
field trips aimed at introducing high school students to weather observations
and AI applications and instilling a desire to pursue STEM careers. The
integration of research and educational activities can foster the next
generation of scientists who will be familiar with both AI and meteorology
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the scientific goals, this project
focuses on: 1) investigating physics-guided AI models for hydrometeor
identification and precipitation microphysics retrievals from polarimetric radar
observations; 2) designing a dense convolutional neural network framework that
has high generalization capability for radar-based quantitative precipitation
estimation; 3) developing an interpretable AI model for precipitation nowcasting
and investigating the controlling factors on storm initiation, growth and decay,
which are poorly understood. This research will be accomplished through field
data collection, model- and data-centric deep learning, and interpretation of
the deep learning results. This research will enhance the ability to estimate
and predict severe storms, which will lead to improved situational awareness of
extreme weather events, improved decision making, and better public
safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the Directorate for
Geosciences to support AI/ML advancement in the
geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.