* 2239621
* CAREER: Re-engineering Agricultural Drainage Infrastructure: Upscaling In-field Conservations for Regional Sustainability
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2028
* Ruijie Zeng, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 03/31/2028
* USD 421,337.00

Agricultural drainage systems (ADS) are networks of engineered channels and
ditches that have been widely implemented in low relief terrain, such as the
Midwest, to manage water, remove excess soil moisture, and increase food and
biofuel production. However, ADS also efficiently divert excess water and
agricultural wastes from fields into natural river networks, causing adverse
environmental impacts including streamflow regime change, water quality
deterioration, and aquatic habitat degradation. Understanding and managing
regional scale hydrologic and environmental impacts influenced by field scale
agricultural drainage systems has remained elusive. The overarching goals of
this CAREER project are to 1) identify the coupled natural and engineered
drainage networks (CNEDN) including natural rivers and agricultural drainage
channels, and 2) investigate the role of CNEDN in upscaling field-scale
agricultural water management practices to enhance regional water
sustainability. The successful completion of this project will benefit society
by advancing the fundamental understanding, prediction, and management of
coupled natural river and engineered drainage networks with the goal of
enhancing regional agriculture and water sustainability. Additional benefits to
society will be achieved through student education and training including the
mentoring of one graduate student at Arizona State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Agriculture in the Midwest is experiencing
rapid changes including the switching from food production to biofuel
production, expansion of irrigation to mitigate drought impacts, and adoption of
resource recovery techniques including nitrogen and phosphorus recovery.
However, there are critical knowledge gaps in identifying and characterizing the
agricultural drainage systems thereby hindering understanding of hydrologic
impacts from farm scale to regional scale and limiting the capability of re-
engineering the agricultural infrastructure for environmental sustainability
under changing climate and socioeconomic drivers. This CAREER project will
address these knowledge gaps. The specific objectives of the research are to (1)
delineate agricultural drainage networks by developing efficient and validated
algorithms to capture drainage channel features from high resolution terrain
data, (2) improve the capability of hydrologic models to simulate the hydrologic
effects of agricultural drainage by incorporating engineered drainage channels
into natural river networks, and 3) assess the local and regional hydrologic
variability and water resource reliability under re-engineering strategies of
agricultural drainage infrastructure. The successful completion of this project
has the potential for transformative impact through the generation of new models
and fundamental knowledge of hydrologic dynamics of coupled natural river and
engineered drainage networks to enhance the prediction capability for hydrologic
processes under human interferences. To advance the educational goals of this
CAREER project, the Principal Investigator (PI) proposes to develop and
implement project-based education modules for the undergraduate/graduate
curricula at Arizona State University to educate the next-generation of
engineers about the impacts of increasing human interferences on the hydrologic
cycle. In addition, the PI plans to develop a toolbox for engineered channel
delineation and modeling with user-friendly interfaces to encourage adoption by
water resources practitioners. The toolbox and other project outcomes will be
disseminated through online platforms as well as in-person workshops to engage
local collaborators and stakeholders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.