* 2239163
* CAREER: Protecting Critical Infrastructure Against Wireless Attacks
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Aaron Schulman, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Squicciarini
* 02/29/2028
* USD 143,850.00

Wireless communication has transformed the safe and efficient operation of
modern critical infrastructure. Across the nation today, it is common to find
many dozens of pervasive yet undocumented wireless devices controlling
everything from circuit breakers on the power grid to aviation fuel trucks, city
water valves, and even configurable speed signs. Operators wirelessly connect to
infrastructure to remotely monitor and control it, a task that previously was
hazardous and time consuming because it required physically accessing the
infrastructure. Unfortunately, wireless access has created a new vector for
attackers to gain access to critical infrastructure while evading all existing
cyber and physical defenses. This project introduces new methodologies, tools,
and education programs, seeding the growth of a new class of wireless cyber-
defenses that can protect widely distributed wireless infrastructure. The
projectâ€™s education efforts will accelerate the growth of wireless
infrastructure security through outreach efforts to critical infrastructure
operators, and hands-on computer security research training for underrepresented
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to develop
generalized wireless security principles for distributed and diverse deployments
of wireless devices. (1) The project will result in a universal mobile wireless
scanning methodology that can rapidly find devices across all frequencies and
protocols and identify wireless devices used in critical infrastructure across
large areas in a short time. (2) In addition, project activities include large-
scale measurements and the development of new wireless fingerprinting
methodologies to produce the first taxonomy of vulnerabilities in wirelessly
controlled critical infrastructure. (3) The research plan also includes
development of defenses for the two primary weaknesses in distributed wireless
deployments: discovery and authentication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.