* 2239441
* CAREER: CAS: Chemical Pathways for the Synthesis of Dilute Metal Alloy and Multimetallic Complex Solid Solution Nanocrystals
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Xingchen Ye, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Suk-Wah Tam-Chang
* 01/31/2028
* USD 291,131.00

With the support of the Macromolecular, Supramolecular and Nanochemistry Program
in the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Xingchen Ye of Indiana University Bloomington
will develop new ways of making nanoscale metal alloys. In addition to
potentially exhibiting unique chemical and physical properties, these
nanoparticles contain earth-abundant, non-precious elements making them less
expensive and more sustainable than the commonly used noble metal nanoparticles.
These nanoparticles have the potential to enable new technologies in clean
energy, photonics, pharmaceutical industry applications and more. The broader
impacts of this project include educational and outreach initiatives that aim to
increase interest in science among K-12 students and to improve undergraduate
students’ readiness for graduate study in STEM fields. Specifically, Dr. Ye will
develop a classroom teaching module called “Colloids-Microscopy-Data” to expose
high school students to modern aspects of colloidal chemistry and microscopy
imaging. In addition, an 8-week summer program will be created to engage
undergraduate students, particularly those from underrepresented groups, in
materials chemistry research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ye research group aims
to establish chemical pathways for the synthesis of dilute metal alloy and
complex multimetallic nanocrystals with well-defined shape and composition. In
Aim 1, a library of dilute metal alloy nanocrystals will be synthesized and
characterized, with the emphasis on non-precious yet chemically more challenging
base metal systems. The catalytic and plasmonic properties of these nanocrystals
will be evaluated to understand structure-property relationships. In Aim 2, a
novel catalytic growth mechanism will be studied, which could provide access to
diverse metal nanocrystals not yet available using existing synthetic methods.
Finally, in Aim 3, the mechanisms and pathways for the formation of
multimetallic nanocrystals consisting of five or more elements will be examined.
An important goal of this research is to gain a better fundamental understanding
of the factors that control the structures and compositions of these classes of
nanoparticles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.