* 2239927
* CAREER: Modular Protein Origami to Build Genetically Programmable Biomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Won Min Park, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 12/31/2027
* USD 106,875.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Nature builds biological materials at
the scale of nanometers that perform essential functions for life. Like the
paper-folding artwork known as origami, biological molecules such as proteins
fold and assemble into small-scale materials in various shapes. The evolution of
life for billions of years has developed this sophisticated method to build
remarkably precise and tiny materials in every living system. However,
understanding natureâ€™s way and exploiting it to build artificial materials that
can program various biological functionalities is not yet close to realization.
This project aims to understand how a class of short, modular helical protein
tools, called coiled-coils, fold and interact with each other and make molecular
origami using the protein tools to create nanometer-scale biomaterials. The
principal investigator integrates research and education efforts to study the
interactions between the coiled-coil proteins and their folding into origami
shapes. Protein origami can be used to develop biomaterials with programmable
complex functionalities, which can enable unprecedented technologies to solve
problems in biology and medicine and contribute to the advancement in
biomanufacturing and healthcare. Genetic manipulations of microorganisms are
utilized to generate protein origami materials, followed by revealing their
shapes and functions using biophysical characterization and computational tools.
Education modules and outreach activities, in partnership with university
workshops, are created to generate interest in protein materials and engage
students of all levels, with a focus on how to design and make protein origami.
Research integration activities provide lab experiences to assist the training
of undergraduate and graduate students, including women in engineering and
historically underrepresented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to understand the programmable protein
assembly in complex systems, termed modular protein origami, and to build a
robust framework for the design of biological nanomaterials with customizable
sizes, shapes, and genetically programmable functionalities. Coiled-coil protein
motifs that serve as versatile and modular toolkits with specific, controllable,
and orthogonal protein-protein interactions are used to create well-defined
protein origami nanostructures that perform biological functions. The principal
investigator integrates research and education efforts to gain a comprehensive
understanding of (i) the interaction modularity of coiled-coil proteins arranged
in complex origami topologies, (ii) how the protein origami is controlled and
used to program functionalities in cells, and (iii) genetic programmability of
microbial assembly through modular protein origami on cell surfaces. To
accomplish the objectives, experimental techniques for recombinant protein
synthesis as well as protein characterization tools such as small-angle
scattering and fluorescent microscopy are utilized in combination with
computational structure modeling techniques. The outcome fills the critical
knowledge gap in designing biofunctional protein nanomaterials using the coiled-
coil protein motifs for technology development in fields ranging from synthetic
biology to medicine. The education modules and outreach activities offer
students in chemical engineering exposure to the basics of protein material
design and engineering as well as techniques for protein synthesis, modeling,
and characterization. The activities engage underrepresented engineering
students and K-12 students in the neighboring community with a focus on hands-on
experiences in protein origami design and fabrication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.