* 2239841
* CAREER: Reconfigurable Dynamic Metamaterials Interacting with Flowing Fluids
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Eleonora Tubaldi, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Eva Kanso
* 06/30/2028
* USD 702,211.00

The ability to engineer reconfigurable metamaterials that efficiently interact
with flowing fluids can revolutionize the design and operation of a wide range
of medical and robotic devices, from self-reconfigurable cardiovascular
prostheses, to passively controlled soft valves and deformable soft robots.
These devices often operate in high-energy content environments, with unsteady
flowing fluids, but no technology exists to enable them to harvest and redirect
this energy to perform distributed actuation efficiently and autonomously,
without relying on external sources of energy. A compelling paradigm for
achieving such vision is to use multistable metamaterials that store and
selectively release energy through nonlinear transition waves -- these large
amplitude waves sequentially switch elements from one stable state to another.
This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will support research to
build the analytical and experimental foundations for flow-responsive
multistable metamaterials that manifest tunable dynamic properties and perform
desirable tasks by harnessing fluid-structure interactions. These metamaterials
will form building blocks for designing dynamic systems that sustain targeted
functionalities under fluidic stimuli. This CAREER project will carry out an
ambitious plan for integrating research and education and for developing
innovative strategies for public outreach that showcase the societal benefits of
the field of dynamic metamaterials and spark interest among high school
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By combining mechanical metamaterials and fluid
flow environments, this research will show how fluid-structure interactions and
transition waves can be leveraged to efficiently achieve desired dynamic
behaviors in both dynamic systems and flow fields. With a combination of
analytical, numerical, and experimental methods, fluid-metastructure
interactions will be used as a twofold “dynamic knob” to (1) manipulate shape
reconfigurations in multistable metamaterials for actuation purposes and to (2)
control fluid fluxes through transition wavefronts in metamaterials.
Reprogrammable dynamic properties and self-regulating flow capabilities will be
coupled to passively obtain rigidity on demand and distributed actuation. This
research will represent a milestone towards the development of future engineered
structures with unprecedented tunable dynamic properties and flow-induced shape
transformations. The resulting adaptive metastructures will significantly
enhance the field of self-actuating metamaterials with distributed intelligent
capabilities. The results of this research will be a leap forward in the design
of self-reconfigurable cardiovascular implants, swimming meta-robots, and
passive flow-rate control systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.