* 2239595
* CAREER: Experimental manipulation of host-microbe associations to reveal key features promoting symbiosis
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Kevin Vogel, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 02/29/2028
* USD 190,053.00

Many animals rely on microbial symbionts to help them gain sufficient nutrients,
provide protection from predators and pathogens, or allow them to live in
otherwise inhospitable environments. Studying these relationships can be
difficult as it is often impossible to separate the microbes from their host. As
a result, understanding of the mechanisms that underly these relationships has
been limited by the inability to manipulate both host and symbiont
independently. Kissing bugs are insects that feed exclusively on vertebrate
blood and serve as host to symbiotic bacteria, that help them successfully
develop and reproduce. These bacteria also can be cleared from the kissing bugs
and infected with new bacteria. The symbiont bacteria can also be grown outside
of the insect and can be genetically altered. This system, thus, provides a
unique opportunity to experimentally manipulate the host and symbiont, to
identify and characterize factors that support the symbiosis. The research will
focus on genes involved in symbiont colonization of the host, host and symbiont
genes involved in the exchange of nutrients, and interactions of the host immune
system and the symbiont. Given the ubiquity of animal-microbe symbioses, this
research will illuminate mechanisms that may govern host-microbe interactions in
other less-tractable systems. Along with the proposed research, this project
will also provide research experience and training to high school teachers. This
experience will be paired with curriculum development to incorporate host-
microbe interactions into the teachers’ classrooms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Experimental manipulation of host-microbe systems has been
limited by inability to separate highly integrated partners or difficulties
disentangling the effects of individual members in highly complex communities.
Triatomine kissing bugs harbor essential symbionts in their gut which are
environmentally acquired each generation, allowing for generation of bacteria-
free, axenic insects, which can then be experimentally inoculated with bacteria.
This work leverages the unique features of this system – ability to generate
axenic and gnotobiotic insects, low-complexity microbiomes, and molecular tools
– to delineate the mechanistic basis of symbiosis. Transposon mutagenesis will
be used to identify genes in the symbiont Rhodococcus rhodnii that are essential
for symbiosis followed by generation of knockout strains of R. rhodnii lacking
symbiosis-promoting genes. Knockout strains will be used for bioassays to
characterize the role of the gene-of-interest in the relationship. The role of
the host immune system in regulating bacterial abundance will be assessed,
examining both humoral and cellular immune responses to symbionts. Lipid
metabolism genes including fatty acid synthases and fatty acid CoA reductases
have been identified as differentially expressed in axenic and gnotobiotic
insects. Liquid chromatography and mass spectroscopy will be applied to
understand how symbiotic bacteria shape the lipidome of kissing bugs while
silencing of specific lipid genes will reveal the role of these genes in lipid
metabolism and host fitness. The proposed work will shed new light on the
evolution of host-symbiont interactions and serve as a framework for exploring
systems which are less amenable to experimental
manipulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.