* 2239824
* CAREER: Advancing Equity in Selection Problems Through Bias-Aware Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Swati Gupta, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Reha Uzsoy
* 05/31/2028
* USD 531,915.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) grant will contribute to
the advancement of national health, prosperity, and welfare by developing
systematic approaches to reducing workforce inequality due to implicit bias.
Widely used automated applicant screening technologies bring high risk of
systematically screening-out STARS (skilled workers trained by alternate
routes), while imposing quotas on the selection of candidates from different
backgrounds can violate anti-discrimination laws. This award supports the
development of fundamental methodologies for transparently handling contextual
biases in candidate evaluation data without resorting to quotas or fairness
constraints (due to legal requirements). This interdisciplinary research will
provide tools for practitioners and policymakers to understand the
inefficiencies in the system, leading to a synergistic design of policies for
hiring and college admissions. The accompanying educational plan aims to develop
STEAM (STEM+art) workshops for high school students to understand biases in data
through a “hiring manager” simulation game, a workshop geared towards policy and
law professionals, the design of courses in Ethical OR, and the continued
mentorship of students with a focus on STEM
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will develop fundamental
methodologies to model variability in data due to its context, by using
counterfactual and causal analysis to construct cardinal and ordinal variability
sets for candidates’ evaluation data, yielding bilinear optimization problems
and ordinal combinatorial optimization respectively. The research will develop
new techniques to address these challenging problem classes using parametric
optimization and order theory as a start and find tractable solutions. This work
will provide a fundamental shift in how we process contextual data, while
advancing the theories of ordinal, robust, parametric, and general discrete
optimization. The work will address important policy-design questions related to
equity-efficiency trade-offs, e.g., the impact of bias-aware techniques on
equity, diversity, and fairness when data is contextual, the impact of changing
"risk" parameters in the construction of variability sets on candidate selection
and highlight ways to use limited resources to reduce
variability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.