* 2239945
* CAREER: SHF: Chimp: Algorithm-Hardware-Automation Co-Design Exploration of Real-Time Energy-Efficient Motion Planning
* CSE,CCF
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Bo Yuan, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 12/31/2027
* USD 96,629.00

As the fundamental and critical robotic task for planning and deciding the
actions of robots, motion planning is widely desired in many real-world
applications, such as autonomous driving, in-warehouse package handling,
assisted surgery etc. To date, there exists an increasing performance gap
between the intensive computation of modern motion planning workloads and the
insufficient support from general-purpose hardware, calling for efficient
hardware acceleration to realize real-time energy-efficient high-quality
planning. This project proposes Chimp, a cross-layer co-design framework for
highly efficient motion planning processor. Chimp aims to develop a new design
paradigm that can efficiently integrate domain expertise into learning-based
motion planning, improving the planning reliability and performance. This
project will significantly promote the intelligence and durability of modern
autonomous systems, enhancing the economic opportunities in many fields such as
autonomous driving, smart manufacturing, and intelligent healthcare. This
project will enrich the curriculum of the university and promote the involvement
of students from underrepresented minority groups, undergraduates and K-12
students in the STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to perform
algorithm-hardware-automation co-exploration to simultaneously enable high
planning performance and high hardware performance. It delivers innovations at
three levels: (1) it develops key design principles that can guide the efficient
integration of domain expertise to the construction of high-performance
learning-based motion planners in complex physical-world settings and resource-
constrained scenarios; (2) it builds new hardware primitives that specifically
support the unique computing patterns in motion planning. It also proposes a
series of optimization techniques for dataflow and microarchitecture, improving
hardware efficiency and system utilization; and (3) it offers automatic design,
mapping and evaluation of the motion planning model and hardware with different
algorithmic, architectural and application constraints and budgets, enabling the
improved efficiency of design flow and better exploration of design space. Both
software and hardware implementation and evaluation will be performed on robotic
simulators, Field-programmable gate array boards and real-world robots in
different working environments. The research outcomes of this project will
advance various technical fields, such as computing hardware, robotics and
machine learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.