* 2239483
* CAREER: Tropical to temperate forest dynamics and their potential influences on plant performance strategies, a theory-data fusion approach
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Caroline Farrior, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 05/31/2028
* USD 859,653.00

Forests are made up of individual trees whose growth, death, and reproduction
are influenced by things like rainfall, temperature, wind disturbances, and the
shading by neighboring trees. Despite this diversity of traits and interactions,
forests within specific biomes or habitat types (i.e., tropical rainforests,
temperate forests), show striking similarities in forest structure across the
globe. It is likely that these similarities are due to the commonalities of the
importance of access to light for individual trees and the ubiquity of
competition among trees for that light. In this project, researchers leverage
the Smithsonian’s Forest Global Earth Observatory (ForestGEO), from the tropics
to the temperate zone, to develop models and test hypotheses regarding the
drivers of forest structure within and across biomes. As models are refined, the
researchers will incorporate different plant strategies and explore the
implications for biome-specific outcomes. The results of this work will be
incorporated into the earth system models used to predict carbon sequestration
and thus the role of forests in slowing or accelerating climate change. The
project also offers training opportunities for early career scientists to
develop and implement new tools for integrating empirical data and theory.
&lt;br/&gt;The structure and dynamics of tropical and temperate forest biomes
differ, but the causes and consequences of these differences are not well
characterized. Recently, the researchers found that a simple model of tree
competition for light that includes stochastic stand-level disturbances nicely
captures qualitative and quantitative features of the tropical forest of Barro
Colorado Island, Panama. The model, however, requires the addition of decreased
performance of the largest trees to capture the structure of the temperate
forest of Wind River, WA. This research will scale up, using an extensive global
ForestGEO dataset, to test the generality of the differences between tropical
and temperate forests. Moreover, this project will identify the likely causal
differences in forest dynamics between these two biomes. With the refined model,
the researchers aim to contribute new insights into how dynamic interactions
among trees within forests will better predict stand structure over time, and
how these models can improve earth system models. Further, the researchers will
then draw new hypotheses about the commonalities and differences of selective
pressures on key plant strategies and the potential for these differences in
forest dynamics to result in differing opportunities for generating and/or
maintaining species coexistence. As the integration of theory with data is
critical to this research, the education plan of this CAREER project focuses on
the integration of theory training into standard undergraduate and graduate
coursework. Further, the inclusive teaching methodologies will be used to foster
further integration of theory and empirical work within the early career
community of ForestGEO researchers through a training and collaboration
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.