* 2239410
* CAREER: Evolutionary Games in Dynamic and Networked Environments for Modeling and Controlling Large-Scale Multi-agent Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Ceyhun Eksin, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Continuing Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 08/31/2028
* USD 409,128.00

Classical game theory addresses how individuals make decisions given suitable
incentives, for example, whether to use resources rapaciously or with restraint.
However, game theory does not typically address the consequences of the actions
that reshape the resources over the long term. Indeed, individuals' actions
often subsequently modify the commons (environment) and associated payoffs. In
this project, we propose a unified mathematical framework to model and analyze
the coupled evolution of individuals' incentives, opinions, and the environment
using tools from game theory, network science, and nonlinear dynamic systems.
Based on the mathematical framework, the proposed project is organized to study
fundamental issues relating to (a) when and how desirable behavior, e.g.,
cooperative behavior, arise in the populations, and (b) whether tragedies of the
commons can be averted in complex systems, e.g., during a pandemic. Scientific
contributions of this project will have the potential to have a transformational
impact on our understanding of the emergence of cooperation and environmental
collapse in public health systems where individuals' actions affect the
resources, and in engineered multi-agent systems, e.g., autonomous or energy
systems, that involve self-interested entities. The overarching goals of the
project are rooted in an educational agenda with initiatives, e.g., a summer
residential research experience for educators, designed to expose the broader
public to central concepts in game theory and nonlinear systems, and push for a
systems-thinking perspective on societal problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
premise of this project is that individual behavior is dynamic, i.e., evolves
according to selection or learning, and such learning behavior has subsequent
effects on the environment, and thus on the future incentives for learning. The
proposed research is a concerted effort to develop a mathematical framework for
studying population behavior when the populationâ€™s well-being depends on the
environment that the behavior is affecting. The proposed research aims to
achieve the following scientific contributions: 1) novel models of strategic
learning dynamics in feedback-evolving games with relevance to socio-biological
and -technological systems including epidemics and autonomous systems; 2)
decentralized algorithms for tracking rational behavior in dynamic network
games; 3) a framework for dynamic intervention mechanisms to induce desirable
system-level behavior in such settings; 4) design and analysis of experiments to
uncover the role of peer effects and ambiguity on perceived risks on
cooperation. This effort will lead to novel analysis, and scalable decentralized
algorithms applicable to addressing real-world problems in social and
technological multi-agent systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.