* 2239859
* CAREER: Building long-term climate resilience in 21st-century regional urban land systems through integrated data-driven research and education
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Jing Gao, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* May Yuan
* 05/31/2028
* USD 471,334.00

Increasing environmental variability and urban expansion during the 21st century
have the potential to exacerbate the impacts of climate extremes on future
generations. Understanding the long-term, large-scale effects of human-
environment interactions is necessary for building urban climate resilience.
Conventional human-environment research on urban climate resilience is often
limited to short time horizons and/or highly localized geographic scope. This
Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project investigates the dynamic
interactions among demographic patters, urban land use, and climate variability
across the continental U.S. By 2100, many new urban centers will have been
built, and existing ones renovated. Actionable scientific knowledge that informs
policies to embed long-term climate resilience in strategic urban land planning
can help moderate, or at least not significantly amplify, future population
exposures to climate extremes. This project develops machine-intelligence models
for the actionable science and establishes educational activities to promote
multidisciplinary approaches to thinking and communicating long-term, large-
scale urban climate challenges through workforce development (college education
and postgraduate training) and public engagement (science
communication).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project (a) identifies regional-scale
spatial characteristics of urban land that can moderate future U.S. population
exposures to 21st-century climate extremes, (b) establishes a model-aided
framework for designing regional urban land systems with embedded long-term
climate resilience, and (c) develops FAIR cyberinfrastructures (data and codes)
for long-term large-scale spatiotemporal modeling of socioeconomic processes as
well as integrative analyses of social, human-built, and the earth systems.
Leveraging knowledge from and integrating methods from human dimensions, climate
and data science, this project contributes new insights, cyberinfrastructure,
and learning opportunities about long-term, large-scale challenges to current
and future urban communities. Findings can inform decision-makers on land use
policy interventions to minimize future population exposures to climate
extremes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by Human-
Environment and Geographic Sciences (HEGS), the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure (OAC),
Humans, Disasters, and the Built Environment (HDBE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.