* 2239977
* CAREER: Deep Neural Networks That Can See Shape From Images: Models, Algorithms, and Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Miaomiao Zhang, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* James Fowler
* 05/31/2028
* USD 228,592.00

The past decade has witnessed the success of deep learning in image processing
and computer vision. However, increasing evidence has shown that deep neural
networks are strongly biased towards seeing image textures rather than geometric
shapes. The goal of this project is to create a new family of deep networks that
can analyze shapes from images and leverage this perspective to advance image
analysis and machine learning with mathematical tools from geometry, statistics,
and optimization. The technical component of this research will merge the
largely disconnected scientific areas of geometric shape modeling, machine
learning, and image analysis. The applied components of this research will have
an immediate and long-lasting impact on a wide range of real-world applications,
including quantitative analysis of magnetic resonance imaging for early
neurodegenerative disease detection, computed tomography for anatomic pathology
tracking, and satellite images for environmental monitoring. Moreover, the
multidisciplinary nature of this research will provide unique opportunities to
engage students and researchers from diverse backgrounds broadly across
engineering, mathematics, and medicine. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current deep
neural networks are incapable of quantifying and analyzing shapes presented in
images, and their performances are limited by the high dimensionality of the
training data. This research develops new algorithmic foundations that (i) equip
deep neural networks with the functionality of learning shape representations
and quantifying shape changes to best support image analysis; (ii) enable end-
to-end approaches to transform raw image data into spaces of shape features that
are easily and reliably compared across individuals, groups, or time sequences;
and (iii) provide robust, scalable, and efficient inferences for training large-
scale and high-dimensional image datasets. This research will not only expand
the frontier of deep-learning-based image technologies but also profoundly
inspire broader academic communities beyond image analysis and computer vision,
such as computational anatomy and graphics. Results and tools produced in this
research will be tightly integrated into educational activities and will be
disseminated to general communities through open-source repositories, as well as
tutorials in conjunction with conferences, seminars, workshops, and invited
talks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.