* 2239897
* CAREER: Structural and Accountable Behavior Understandings and Human-centered AI Designs with Naturalistic Micromobility Riding Data
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Suining He, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Todd Leen
* 04/30/2028
* USD 196,635.00

Micromobility systems are small, lightweight vehicles that usually operate below
15 mph. Examples include regular and electric bicycles, stand-up electric
scooters, and 3-wheeled scooters equipped with seats. Understanding how
micromobility riders should behave to minimize conflicts with other constituents
of urban traffic is essential. Using this understanding in the design of
micromobility platforms and their interactions with the rider will improve
safety and comfort in urban transportation and enhance public acceptance. Rider
behavior is structured, consisting of maneuvers such as acceleration, turns, and
dismounts and macroscopic behaviors such as the selection of locations to visit
and paths to take. Building structured models of rider behavior is necessary as
the existing models are difficult to use for interpreting rider accountability,
and whether behaviors are acceptable to the public. To address these challenges,
this project proposes to design a novel Structural and Accountable micromobility
Rider Behavior Understanding System (SARBUS). SARBUS will provide the
micromobility rider behavior modeling through human-centered artificial
intelligence. For concrete insights and prototype development, the project will
focus on the increasingly popular stand-up electric scooters (e-scooters). The
model development will use data from continuous multi-modal sensors collected
during real-world riding scenarios. The principal investigator will recruit and
train students from under-represented groups in research, and will use the
project research to promote teaching and training through student mentoring, new
course development, and outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will be composed of two interleaved modeling thrusts. Thrust A will develop a
reinforcement learning technique that interactively learns and captures the
rider's macroscopic location visit and paths (through GPS logs) and microscopic
maneuvering behaviors (through accelerometers and gyroscopes), as well as their
structural inter-dependencies. This thrust will derive a graph representation
that will be used by SARBUS to illuminate and explain the riders' decision-
making process. Thrust B will build models from the motion sensor readings of
the maneuver behaviors (accelerometers and gyroscopes), recorded (on-board)
riding videos and the human textual annotations of those videos. These data will
capture the interactions of the riders with other road users and the
environment. This thrust will quantify the relationships across these modalities
through graph learning, and the resulting models will reveal when rider
behaviors create conflicts with other traffic elements, and identify rider
accountability. The principal investigator will further conduct e-scooter rider
case studies with SARBUS to understand how the structural rider behavior
modeling and accountability interpretation can together benefit the riders in
route selection and riding behavior with enhanced travel efficiency and fewer
conflicts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.