* 2239214
* CAREER: Advancing Proximity Labeling Mass Spectrometry to Characterize Neuronal Mitochondrial Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Ling Hao, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 06/30/2028
* USD 456,815.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes program in the Division of
Chemistry, Ling Hao from George Washington University is developing novel
bioanalytical chemistry methods to study mitochondrial dynamics in human
neurons. Mitochondria are the powerhouses of the cell; they produce ATP and
function as hubs for many metabolic pathways. Neurons in the brain rely heavily
on mitochondrial functions because have extremely high energy demands to support
synaptic activities. However, the specific molecular microenvironment of
neuronal mitochondria is not fully understood, partly due to technological
limitations. This project will develop mass spectrometry (MS)-based techniques
to characterize the dynamic mitochondrial activities and interactions at the
molecular level in human, stem cell-derived neurons. Through partnership with
local chemistry instrument companies and MS discussion group, a summer MS
workshop will be organized to bring together students from different levels as
well as scientists from local academic, industry, and government institutions. A
set of research, education and outreach activities will be integrated to enhance
student learning and training experiences at the university and regional levels
and to promote accessibility and diversity in STEM (science, technology,
engineering and mathematics). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research aims
to address major technical challenges and knowledge gaps to study molecular
networks and the subcellular microenvironment in human neurons using mass
spectrometry (MS) techniques. Despite the advancements in understanding
mitochondrial functions, it is technically challenging to capture the dynamic
mitochondrial microenvironment, particularly in neurons with highly polarized
structures. A set of MS-based proximity labeling strategies will be developed to
study mitochondrial activities, functions, metabolic regulations, and membrane
dynamics in human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs)-derived neurons. This
research program will provide widely applicable chemistry tools to study sub-
cellular biological microenvironment as well as provide new insights into
mitochondrial dynamics and neurobiology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.