* 2239244
* CAREER: Laser-Induced Graphene with On-Demand Morphology and Chemistry Control for Scalable Flexible Device Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Mostafa Bedewy, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Wells
* 05/31/2028
* USD 604,734.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award aims at transforming
flexible device manufacturing and promoting education in underserved communities
through two specific goals: (1) to overcome current challenges and limitations
in fabricating functional three-dimensional graphene directly on flexible
polymers, and (2) to leverage virtual reality (VR) for enhancing American STEM
education and advanced manufacturing training for scalable workforce development
in resource-limited environments. The flexible electronics market was estimated
to exceed $41 billion in 2020 and is expected to approximately double in the
next decade. Hence, the scientific insights gained from this project will be
immediately relevant to a number of fast-growing industries. In particular,
biosensors is the application area with a high potential to be disrupted by this
emerging fabrication approach and constitutes one of the three largest sectors
of the flexile electronics market. Rapid growth is also projected for flexible
batteries and stretchable electronics, both of which can also be transformed by
laser-induced graphene. American competitiveness will depend on scientific
studies to develop new manufacturing approaches to ensure that the future of
flexible electronics within the domestic manufacturing base. The VR-based
approach to create educational modules is a scalable approach that will
positively impact education in underserved neighborhoods nation-wide. The
modules created in this project will be available online and can be repurposed
for other training programs at schools, community centers, and/or colleges,
especially with the recent rise of remote learning programs spurred by
COVID-19-imposed restrictions on in-person activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
scientific goal of this project is to test the central research hypothesis that
combining polymer chemistry with spatiotemporal mapping of fluence and real-time
acoustic emissions during laser-induced nanocarbon (LINC) uniquely enables
controlling the thermochemical transitions in molecularly engineered polyimides
to form sp2-hybridized carbon with tailored chemistry, tunable morphology, and
spatially varying properties. Accordingly, the research objectives are (1) to
pattern functionally graded porous graphene electrodes directly on flexible
polyimides with spatiotemporal control of morphology and conductivity, (2) to
leverage real-time acoustic emission measurements and machine learning for
establishing a fundamental understanding of the dynamics underlying the
formation of hierarchical nanoscale-to-mesoscale morphology of LINC, (3) to
fabricate doped graphene microelectrodes with spatially varying chemistry via
molecular engineering of polyamic acid precursors, and (4) to create complex 3D
architectures of miniaturized graphene patterns on both top and bottom sides of
a polymer film in one-step via printing of optical initiators. The education
objectives are (1) to create VR-based immersive outreach workshops targeting
middle- and high-school students from underserved neighborhoods; (2) to build a
set of VR modules to supplement existing public tours of the PI’s lab as part of
underrepresented student recruitment at the PI’s school; (3) to combine VR with
hands-on experimentation for science training of high school students during a
summer research experience program in the PI’s school, and (4) to leverage VR
for enhancing teaching effectiveness in lab sessions for both undergraduate and
graduate courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.