* 2239687
* CAREER: Generative Physical Modeling for Computational Imaging Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Jonathan Tamir, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* James Fowler
* 08/31/2028
* USD 189,392.00

Imaging devices, from microscopes to medical-imaging scanners, have transformed
science and diagnostic medicine by providing safe and noninvasive techniques for
observing the environment and seeing inside the body. However, imaging-system
design choices are often based on idealized operating conditions, resulting in
highly promising "benchtop demonstrations" that quickly degrade when deployed
outside of a controlled laboratory environment. This project aims to develop a
framework for robust computational-imaging system design, where the data
acquisition and data processing are jointly designed in tandem to address the
mismatch between the idealized performance of physical systems and their real-
world behavior. The research aims to enable reliable imaging in dynamically
evolving clinical and scientific-research settings, for example by reducing
acquisition times, imaging moving objects, and compensating for system
imperfections. The project also involves the dissemination of results through
tutorials, webinars, and reproducible code, as well as community-outreach
initiatives based on hands-on interactive demos of computational-imaging systems
with the goal of broadening participation in engineering and science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to develop a machine-
learning framework for robust computational-imaging system design with
principled methods and theoretical performance guarantees. Central to the
approach is the separation between modeling the physical system, which is
governed by established imaging physics, and modeling the statistical prior
knowledge, which is learned from imaging data. The project involves four
research thrusts, each intended to tackle a specific problem foundational to
computational-imaging system robustness and reliability: 1) adapting to
dynamically changing operating conditions; 2) accounting for motion during image
acquisition; 3) learning directly from noisy, sub-sampled measurements; and 4)
improving resiliency to system imperfections. The project is founded on a
fruitful synthesis between imaging physics, signal processing, optimization, and
machine learning. Image acquisition and recovery will be formalized using newly
developed deep generative physical models instead of poorly understood and non-
generalizable black-box deep-learning methods. In addition to impacting
applications including microscopic, medical, and automotive imaging, the work
will also inform the design of non-imaging systems, such as in wireless
communications, where similar challenges exist surrounding the deployment of
deep-learning-based algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.