* 2239867
* CAREER: Reaction-Diffusion Kinetics with Tensor Networks
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Todd Gingrich, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 08/31/2028
* USD 650,000.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models, and Computational Methods Program
in the Division of Chemistry Todd Gingrich of Northwestern University will
develop and assess algorithms for simulating reaction-diffusion kinetics. Many
self-assembly and signal transduction processes in both biological and synthetic
systems are implemented through the reaction and diffusion of molecules. For
example, proteins collude together in signaling cascades to detect stimuli and
transduce that detection into a desired response. While there has been great
progress both in understanding natural systems and in engineering synthetic
ones, chemical reaction networks (CRNs) continue to pose a challenge,
particularly when accounting for random fluctuations characteristic to the
molecular scale. Currently, repeated noisy simulations can be combined to assess
how fast-timescale events (individual reactions and diffusive steps) build
together to generate slow-timescale responses. Dr. Gingrich and his research
group will utilize a mathematical construction called a tensor network (TN) to
pursue computational approaches that yield novel methods to analyze CRNs without
the need for many repeated simulations. The work will result in disseminated
computer code, which will also form the basis for two educational web-based
simulation modules about fluctuations in chemical
kinetics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Connecting microscopic interactions with emergent
macroscopic phenomena is a central challenge of statistical mechanics. In
chemical kinetics, this challenge manifests in the nonequilibrium spatio-
temporal patterns which emerge from a balance between chemical reactions and
diffusion. Subtle changes in the kinetic interactions between species in CRNs
can sensitively impact the patterns that emerge, e.g., oscillatory chemical
clocks, Turing patterns, and cellular signal transduction. The Gingrich team
will develop, characterize, optimize, and ultimately apply a new computational
method to study the sensitivity of patterns to the microscopic kinetic model.
The research program will combine analytical techniques known as the Doi-Peliti
(DP) framework with mature computational methods for TN many-body problems to
offer an alternative perspective to kinetics problems which are routinely
attacked through Monte Carlo sampling alone. An accompanying educational plan
will use web simulations to teach aspects of stochastic kinetics, with one
module targeting undergraduates and another targeting graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.