* 2239475
* CAREER: Modulating cell signaling and migration by targeted small-molecule binding to a key regulator of protein degradation
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2028
* Jacqueline Smith, Bowie State University
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 03/31/2028
* USD 237,150.00

Controlled cell death is key to the removal of unheathy cells but new proteins
are being discovered that contribute to the survival of unhealthy cells. The
Smith Lab has designed small molecules that bind to a key protein involved in
cell survival known as valosin-containing protein (VCP). This project seeks to
modulate the function of VCP with small molecules to provide a fundamental
understanding of the etiology of different diseases and provide clues to their
future treatment. This project will be incorporated into a summer bridge program
aimed at introducing incoming freshmen to research at Bowie State University, a
Historically Black College &amp; University (HCBU). During the summer students
will participate in lab rotations in the Smith and other collaborating labs in
the Department of Natural Sciences at Bowie State. These research experiences
will demonstrate the importance of structure-function in small molecule-protein
interactions through chemical synthesis, bioinformatics, biochemistry, and
molecular biology projects. In addition to research, the summer bridge program
will introduce students to college-level biology, chemistry, bioinformatics, and
physics. Given the robust research proposed and the nurturing environment of
HBCUs, students participating in this program will have the skills and
confidence to succeed in STEM. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Valosin-containing protein
is a hexameric ATPase which is key to protein degradation due to its role in the
ubiquitin-proteasome system. Many downstream effects of VCP modulation have been
identified including cell migration. However current small molecules that target
the ATPase activity of VCP are unselective. Allosteric binders have shown
promise as alternatives to ATPase binders, however acquired resistance has been
observed. The Smith Lab has identified small molecules which bind to VCP through
molecular docking. These molecules have the potential to be tools to understand
how VCP binding effects downstream processes such as cell migration through
regulation of p53 and NF-KB. Ultimately this study will give new insight into
the role of VCP in cellular malignancy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.