* 2239299
* CAREER: Understanding of Biomass-derived Deep Eutectic Solvents for Sustainable Biorefinery Strategies
* ENG,CBET
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Chang Geun Yoo, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Continuing Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 12/31/2027
* USD 467,552.00

The need for sustainable supplies of clean energy and organic chemical
feedstocks, together with the negative impact on the Earth’s climate by current
manufacturing methods, constitute some of the most pressing problems faced by
the world’s population. Biomass is a promising renewable alternative /
supplement to fossil-based resources for transportation fuels, chemical
products, and biodegradable materials. To extract the maximum fraction of useful
biochemical components from chemically complicated biomass streams, effective
separation (fractionation) of the major biomass components, including cellulose,
hemicelluloses, and lignin, is essential. Unfortunately, current biorefinery
technologies capable of carrying out this fractionation process consume
significant amounts of non-renewable chemicals, energy, and capital, limiting
the economic feasibility and sustainability of biomass utilization. In this
program, the research team will pursue a completely new approach to producing a
green biomass fractionation process based on deep eutectic solvents (non-
volatile liquid mixtures produced from components that are otherwise solid)
derived from the biomass itself. This unique approach will produce biomass-
derived chemical products using a process that does not introduce non-bioderived
processing agents. Education and outreach programs will integrate technical
knowledge generated by this research with the goal of increasing the number and
diversity of future technical leaders in sustainable chemical manufacturing
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biomass-derived solvents have the potential to
play a key role in developing sustainable biorefining operations. The properties
of biomass-derived deep eutectic solvents (DES) have been investigated using a
range of experimental and computational methods; these studies, however, have
examined a limited number of DES combinations and have not studied the
mechanisms and kinetics of the reaction processes governing the conversion of
biomass to DES. Intermolecular hydrogen bonding between the hydrogen bond donor
(HBD) and hydrogen bond acceptor (HBA) species in a DES plays a primary role in
the formation of the solvent and determining its physicochemical and thermal
properties. The proposed research program will (a) pursue a mechanistic
understanding of DES formation over a range of HBD and HBA structures by
experimental and computational methods, (b) determine correlations between DES
composition and the solvation, thermal transport, and rheological properties of
the solvent by a comprehensive program of experimental characterization and
machine learning-based modeling, and (c) elucidate the reaction mechanisms and
kinetics of biomass-derived DES with biomass model components and natural
biomass. The formation mechanism of DES will be investigated with diverse HBA
and HBD pairs from biomass-derivable components and elucidated by nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR). The characteristics of the synthesized DES will be
analyzed by differential scanning calorimetry, rheometry, and ion conductivity
measurements. These experimental results will be used to develop a prediction
model for the properties of DES by training an artificial neural network (ANN)
model and validating its predictions. The chemical interactions of DES with
biomass also will be investigated in reaction kinetic studies of the synthesized
model compounds and real biomass using density functional theory (DFT)
calculations. These findings will not only advance scientific knowledge in the
fractionation properties of biomass-derived DES but also can be expanded to a
wider range of sustainable, eco-friendly, and tunable industrial solvents for
biorefining processes. Informed by the proposed research, an interdisciplinary
curriculum for biorefining will be created to train the next generation of
engineers and scientists in biorefining technologies. The research team plans to
reach out to high school students through an annual summer workshop consisting
of hybrid lectures and hands-on experiments to enhance participants’
understanding of sustainable biorefinery operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.