* 2239356
* Time-Locked Psychophysics: Speeded Responses to Visual Stimuli
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Rhea Eskew, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 06/30/2026
* USD 476,113.00

Color is central to human experience, influencing our moods, our choices of
foods, clothes, and indeed all our visual behavior. But much about how humans
process color is still a mystery. A better understanding of human color vision
has many practical applications in imaging, materials and textiles, architecture
and lighting design. Many of these models are only loosely tied to basic human
color mechanisms, in part because of a lack of good models of fundamental color
processes. The human brain contains millions of nerve cells that respond when an
event occurs in the environment. For visual stimuli, the neural responses start
in the retina of the eye and are transmitted to the brain where they create our
conscious awareness of the world around us. Among other things, the neural
activity signals the color of the light. This process is fast, but not
instantaneous. This project uses novel procedures to measure behavioral
responses that are triggered by color in the very first fraction of a second of
nerve activity in the eye and study how those responses change over time over a
range of colors, contrasts, and adapting backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
research uses innovative psychophysical methods to explore how light adaptation
and the bifurcation of neural visual signals underlie chromatic detection and
color categorization. One goal is to explore whether the fastest behavioral
responses are triggered by the very early activity in the light-sensitive cells
of the retina of the eye. A second goal rests on the hypothesis that neural
responses to the start and end of a stimulus are carried in two different nerve
pathways to the brain (the ON and OFF pathways). The aim is to test whether the
ON and OFF responses can be measured and studied separately, by determining
whether responses triggered by the start and end of a stimulus can have
different colors even though the physical stimulus is the same for both. Results
from all experiments will be analyzed using advanced computational methods and
compared with the known properties of nerve cells in the
eye.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.