* 2239307
* CAREER: Manufacturing USA: Deep Learning to Understand Fatigue Performance and Processing Relationship of Complex Parts by Additive Manufacturing for High-consequence Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Jia Liu, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 03/31/2028
* USD 500,000.00

Metal additive manufacturing (AM) such as laser powder-bed fusion (LPBF) has
been increasingly explored not only for product innovation, but also shop-floor
production, demonstrated by growing success from a variety of industries.
However, the lack of knowledge in both fatigue failure and the performance
uncertainty of LPBF parts poses a significant challenge and undermines the
potential of deploying LPBF for high-consequence applications. This Faculty
Early Career Development (CAREER) award supports fundamental research to
understand the effects of LPBF processing on defects and subsequent fatigue
behavior, advance the knowledge of fatigue scattering of LPBF parts that are
complex in geometry and subject to multiaxial loading. The effort will establish
a physics-centric, machine learning framework for fatigue life predictions,
serving as a technological foundation for future metal AM production of dynamic
load-bearing applications, and thus, enhance the competitiveness of U.S.
industry. This CAREER project will also integrate education and outreach
programs designed to broaden the participation from underrepresented groups
through actively engaging K-12 students for STEM education and recruiting women
and minorities into research, priming future generations of diverse engineers
with the knowledge and skills indispensable in the age of manufacturing
innovation and big data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ultimate goal of this early
career effort is to understand fatigue failures of complex LPBF parts under
multiaxial loading for data-driven fatigue life predictions. The research will
investigate the nature of fatigue failures from plastic deformation and crack
initiation at the highest stress concentrations and translate fatigue life
predictions into evaluating the crack growth at the vulnerable zones using a
multiscale approach. On the micro-scale, critical defects with crack-initiating
features (by x-ray computed tomography or optical profilometry) will be
identified based on the correlation with fatigue failures; both the effects of
critical defects and their spatial interactions on crack growth will be examined
using fracture mechanics and data-intense statistics. On the part scale, the
weak regions of the highest stress concentrations will be examined by finite
element modeling of stress and strain behaviors through decoupling multiaxial
loading. The effects of critical defects and the principal stresses at
vulnerable localities will then be incorporated into a hierarchical graph
convolutional network of deep learning to model their synergistic impacts on
crack growth and calculate the fatigue life of LPBF parts with advanced data
analytics. The findings are expected to generate new knowledge of defect
formation relevant to fatigue performance of LPBF parts, uncover the synergistic
impacts of multiscale factors on fatigue fractures, and further LPBF adoption
for high-consequence applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.