* 2239160
* CAREER: New Challenges in Analysis of Boolean Functions
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Dor Minzer, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tracy Kimbrel
* 02/29/2028
* USD 247,011.00

Many areas in computer science deal with large objects that exhibit good local
consistency properties. Consider, for example, that an encoded message has been
passed through an imperfect communication channel and, as a result, was slightly
corrupted. Can it be efficiently corrected? Often, looking at small windows –
namely small chunks of consecutive letters in the encoded message— makes
complete sense, and they can be decoded (as the channel did not corrupt them),
except for a few windows in which some letter has been corrupted. Despite
affecting only a small number of windows, these corruptions may lead to a
complete misinterpretation of the intention of the message: imagine a sentence
in the English language, and compare it with the same sentence in which the word
"yes" has been replaced with the word "no". To handle such cases, one would like
to find ways to ensure that a perfect, efficient recovery of the uncorrupted
message is possible. Is there a way to use the strong local consistencies in the
good windows and the overall global structure of the encoded message to allow
such recovery in an efficient way? To further the research's impact through
education, the project includes activities such as the publication of expository
materials and an educational program at a research institute involving several
bootcamps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Designing objects with this type of "local
recovery property," which often goes by the name "local to global phenomenon",
is one of the prime objectives of theoretical computer science. The field of
Analysis of Boolean functions (also known as discrete Fourier analysis) is often
a vital tool in establishing such results in areas including complexity theory,
learning theory, error correcting codes, and property testing. In these
contexts, of particular interest are notions known as expansion, small-set
expansion, and hypercontractivity, asserting that the object in hand is very
well connected so that "unfixable corruptions" in it can never be contained in
"small windows." Indeed, expansion, small set expansion, and hypercontractivity
have been used to prove a large number of important results in theoretical
computer science in the areas mentioned above and more. There are significant
applications, however, that require working with objects that do not possess
such strong expansion properties. This project aims to extend the theory to deal
with these more challenging objects and to use it to make progress in crucial
questions in complexity theory, error-correcting codes, probabilistically
checkable proofs, and more.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.