* 2239106
* CAREER: New Directions in Foliation Theory and Diffeomorphism Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Sam Nariman, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Eriko Hironaka
* 05/31/2028
* USD 74,964.00

The global structure of foliations has been studied in diverse fields within
mathematics including differential topology, differential geometry, dynamical
system, and non-commutative geometry. Since the 1970s, it has been known that
there is a deep relationship between foliations and diffeomorphism groups (or
symmetry groups of manifolds), and algebraic properties of these groups have
been used to study foliations. This project aims to use foliation theory to
extract information about these symmetry groups and to apply recently developed
techniques around the study of diffeomorphism groups to generate new results on
the structure of foliations. The project will also support educational
initiatives, including a biweekly program for high school students to introduce
them to mathematical thinking and the use of math in the daily world around
them. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will apply a bundle theoretic point of
view to a conjecture of Haefliger and Thurston on the cohomology of
diffeomorphism groups. The results will in turn lead to a multitude of research
directions around the invariance of flat bundles. In previous work, the PI
provided evidence that in the piecewise linear (PL) category this conjecture is
related to the algebraic K-theory of real numbers and proved the conjecture for
codimension 2 PL foliations. With Monod, the PI developed techniques to compute
the bounded cohomology of certain diffeomorphism groups leading to boundedness
results for certain invariants of flat bundles. The project aims to further
develop these techniques to compute the bounded and continuous cohomology of
diffeomorphism groups with the goal of better understanding the group cohomology
of diffeomorphism groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.