* 2239408
* CAREER: Manufacturing of Mesoporous Carbons by Direct Pyrolysis of Plastic Waste for Water Remediation
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Zhe Qiang, University of Southern Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 02/29/2028
* USD 639,637.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant focuses on developing a
direct pyrolysis approach for scalable manufacturing of ordered mesoporous
carbons and unlocking their potential for water remediation. Ordered mesoporous
carbons are a result of advancements in nanotechnology and nanomanufacturing.
However, their conventional manufacturing involves several bottlenecks toward
scale-up, such as, solvent consumption, limited attainable pore sizes and high
cost. This research employs low-cost and widely available thermoplastic
elastomers as the starting materials and develops an efficient crosslinking
method, allowing their direct conversion through pyrolysis to ordered mesoporous
carbons. With large consumption and broad use of thermoplastic elastomers in
various applications, their end-of-life represents a growing environmental
concern. This project addresses the thermoplastic elastomer wastes problem by
upcycling them to functional ordered mesoporous carbons. Moreover, the ability
of thermoplastic elastomer-derived ordered mesoporous carbons for water
remediation is developed, particularly associated with the removal of aggregated
micropollutants, a pressing need for the sustainable development of the
environment and society. This research is supported and complemented by a
cohesive educational program, including curriculum development, hands-on
activities for high school and community college students, science after school
programs, community outreach to underserved areas, and annual regional soft
matter symposia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of this research is to
pioneer and establish the use of thermoplastic elastomer-based block copolymers
for fabricating ordered mesoporous carbons through a simple and scalable
sulfonation-enabled crosslinking method, followed by direct pyrolysis. The
fundamental relations of precursor chemistry, manufacturing process, and final
material microstructure and properties are elucidated, informing rational system
design to attain tailored pore structures, textures, doped carbon framework, and
material functionalities. A technology transformation pathway towards the
production of ordered mesoporous carbons is developed and informed by techno-
economic analysis and life cycle assessment. This research also aims to enable
the application of thermoplastic elastomer-derived ordered mesoporous carbons
for removing micropollutant aggregates from polluted water, particularly
concerning per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS). This is accomplished by
systematically understanding the sorption mechanisms of ordered mesoporous
carbons against model contaminants, paired with elucidating sorbate
nanostructures via advanced neutron scattering measurements. This research
determines how pore structure, texture and framework chemistry of ordered
mesoporous carbons dictate their water remediation performance. Collectively,
this project establishes an industrially feasible route toward scalable
manufacturing of functional ordered mesoporous carbons through direct pyrolysis
of crosslinked sulphonated thermoplastic elastomers, in conjunction with
demonstrating and understanding their robust use for water
remediation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Advanced
Manufacturing (AM) Program, the CMMI Division, and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.