* 2239642
* CAREER: With Age Comes Wisdom: Leveraging Older Adults' Crystallized Decision-Making Abilities to Develop Adaptive Human-Automation Interfaces for Dynamic Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Brandon Pitts, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2028
* USD 258,089.00

Adults 65 years and older are now the fastest-growing age group worldwide. At
the same time, artificial intelligence (AI) and automation continue to penetrate
every aspect of human life. Yet despite decades of advances, current
technologies in complex transportation, work, and healthcare environments fail
to account for the wealth of knowledge that older adults accumulate through
their life experiences, which often shapes how they interact with AI and
automation. This research aims to overcome this challenge by employing a novel
perspective that focuses on the cognitive abilities that improve with age as
opposed to those that decline. Specifically, the project will build a framework
to: (1) evaluate how older adults apply their crystallized knowledge to decide
whether and when to use automation in safety-critical, dynamic settings; and,
(2) develop customized decision support techniques that intelligently tailor
information to this population's specific needs. Project outcomes will help to
change the narrative on older populations from incapable to empowered, inform
the design and capabilities of AI to better align with older adults’ mental
models, promote increased technology usage, extend older individuals’ ability to
safely and independently collaborate with sophisticated technologies in work,
transportation, and leisure settings, and reduce overall technology training
needs. A tightly integrated research and education program will engage and
empower older adults as well as undergraduate, graduate, and underrepresented
students through the development of an interactive online learning community and
technology platform, community-based ‘design for aging’ research projects, and
annual ‘digital design for aging’ competitions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the
next several decades, the presence of autonomous systems will become even more
widespread across many environments. This research will provide a fundamental
understanding of how older adults’ prior knowledge and experiences shape their
(intended) interactions with automation and incorporate this understanding into
the design of emerging intelligent systems. The project has two major research
thrusts: (1) identify demographic, behavioral, and performance indicators of
application of crystallized knowledge that can predict automation use/disuse
decisions in uncertain situations, and (2) develop an adaptive multimodal
decision support system that provides older adults with real-time guidance on
when to use automation to maximize safety and performance. A series of human-
subject experiments will be conducted in driving, a complex task that older
adults have years of experience performing and for which AI and automation
promise to extend their ability to perform. Participatory design methods will be
used, and data will be collected from younger and older age groups to examine
how use of prior knowledge and decision-making strategies change as a function
of age. Computational models will be constructed to predict automation use
decisions and trigger customized feedback. This work will contribute to
advancing theories, frameworks, and methods in several areas including aging,
human-automation interaction, multimodal information presentation, and decision
support systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.