* 2239551
* CAREER: Chiral active nematic liquid crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Shuang Zhou, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Mann
* 01/31/2028
* USD 218,024.00

Nontechnical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;The biological world we are living in is
chiral: we have left and right hands, shells of beetles are layers of fibers
with a rotating orientation, and DNA forms helices. Basic motions in the living
word are also chiral: bacteria swing their flagella like a boat propeller, and
the microtubules in cells are rotating while sliding apart. A fundamental
question to ask is how chiral activity in a chiral world produces a large range
of interesting structures, dynamics, and mechanics of the biological world. To
answer this question, the research team will develop and systematically
investigate a new model system called chiral living liquid crystals. The system
is composed of biocompatible liquid crystals and bacteria swimmers that self-
propel through helical motion, allowing a wide range of experiments to be done
in a controlled way. The project aims to reveal the underlying mechanisms of a
hierarchy of dynamics, ranging from how individual bacteria motion is affected
by chiral environments, to how chiral systems respond to chiral stresses. The
research aspects of the project are accompanied by an extensive scope of
educational and outreach activities, including educating schoolteachers with
optics experiments, helping them setting up new STEM demos for K-12 students,
improving undergraduate studentsâ€™ problem-solving skills with course-based
research experiences, preparing advanced undergraduates for summer research with
mini-courses, and mentoring graduate students from a diverse background and
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;This study aims to understand the multi-level dynamics in active
matter with chiral nematic order. Active matter is far from thermodynamic
equilibrium by constant energy consumption at the level of individual
constituent particles that drives their locomotion. Many of them form
orientationally ordered nematic liquid crystals, but most experimental studies
so far focus on achiral nematics. In this proposal, the team will investigate a
new symmetry, the chiral active nematic, using the chiral living liquid crystal
as a model system. The system is a mixture of chiral liquid crystals with
swimming bacteria. By independently controlling the key physical parameters such
as chirality of the host, the activity of the bacteria, and boundary condition
of the confinement using standard liquid crystals and biological techniques, the
team will investigate and understand dynamics at multiple levels, from
individual motion of a chiral swimmer navigating through chiral environments, to
global patterns and macroscopic properties generated by collective injection of
chiral and achiral stress. The team will also further study the effect of
confinement and understand how geometric and topological constraints further
shape the dynamics of the chiral active nematics.&lt;br/&gt;Completion of the
project will not only answer a cascade of questions in biology across scales,
but also enable new design mechanisms of autonomous materials, such as new bio-
mechanical hybrids that harness active particles for useful functions. The
educational efforts supported by this grant, such as optics workshops for K-12
teachers and the following up STEM demo developments, the new research elements
in undergraduate courses, the mini-courses for summer research students, and the
inclusive mentoring for graduate students from a diverse and underrepresented
background will enhance STEM education and equality at multiple
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.