* 2239492
* CAREER: The molecular interplay between integrin adhesion, allostery and shape-shifting
* BIO,MCB
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Mehmet Sen, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 12/31/2027
* USD 255,770.00

Adhesion molecules are proteins on cell surfaces that facilitate cellular
adhesion, migration, and interactions with the external environment. These
adhesion molecules, specifically called integrins, share an almost identical
topology and are highly proficient, precise, and specific at ambient conditions.
Moreover, they are highly evolvable and easily adapt to new mechanisms. Integrin
α/β heterodimers are expressed in all animals (from sponges to vertebrates),
bind different ligands, and at least one integrin is expressed in each human
cell type. Exactly how each integrin has been diverged to play a particular role
is largely unknown due to the lack of quantitative studies characterizing their
structural changes and adhesion properties on cell surfaces. This research will
focus on defining the structural and adhesive properties of a white blood cell-
specific integrin receptor, which is only present in vertebrate animals. This
research will employ biophysics, biochemistry, structural biology, and chemistry
approaches to relate the changes in this leukocyte integrin’s conformation and
adhesion. The biotechnology summer workshop, designed for K–12 STEM students and
undergraduates who are training to be future STEM teachers, will provide insight
into the fundamental understanding of biomolecular structures and how
alterations in these structures are related to protein function.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leukocyte integrins allosterically communicate mechanical
and biochemical information and regulate many cellular events that involve
leukocyte migration, diapedesis towards the site of tissue damage or infection,
and phagocytosis. How do leukocyte integrins achieve such diverse functions
while allosterically regulating their affinities and structures? The overarching
objective of this proposal is to quantify its conformational kinetics that are
thermodynamically equilibrated between different integrin conformations, measure
the occupancy and intrinsic affinities, and determine cryo-EM structures of each
leukocyte integrin conformational state. Quantitative characterization of the
integrin dynamic allostery events would greatly advance our understanding of
integrin biology, open new doors to elaborate integrin evolutionary adaptations
to different functions and would be powerful in enabling both more efficient
protein engineering with multiple functional outputs and effector design. This
project is funded by the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the Division of
Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.