* 2239668
* CAREER: Improving Estimates of Changing Firn Meltwater Storage and Flux in Temperate Glacier Systems
* GEO,OPP
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Seth Campbell, University of Maine
* Continuing Grant
* Marc Stieglitz
* 05/31/2028
* USD 623,881.00

Glaciers are created from annual snowfall which does not entirely melt during
summer months. Over time, this accumulated snow condenses to form glacier ice.
Firn is a highly porous middle stage between snow and ice which often stores
surface meltwater in its pore space. Unfortunately, we donâ€™t have a good
estimate of how much meltwater is stored in firn, how this water storage varies
from glacier to glacier, or how this storage amount is changing due to climate
change. This project will determine several firn properties such as firn
thicknesses, pore volume, water storage, and changes in water storage over time
across the Juneau Icefield located in Southeast Alaska. We will use field
observations and modeling to answer these questions and to estimate firn
properties more broadly across Alaska and Canada. This is important because
Alaska and Canada glaciers are retreating (melting) faster than any other
glacier system on Earth. Therefore, we expect changes in meltwater storage to
occur. Meltwater stored in firn has the potential to raise sea level by a
significant amount and impact other Earth systems such as ocean microscopic life
forms and fisheries if it is rapidly released from glaciers. We will use results
from this project in an interactive educational video game we build for
classrooms and the Mendenhall Glacier Visitors Center which receives over
600,000 visitors per year. We will train hundreds of students to use the game
and help with further game development. Lastly, this project will partially
support an annual Culture Camp with indigenous communities in Alaska and
Northwestern Canada where strategies for reducing impacts from environmental
changes will be developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will quantify
spatial and temporal variations in firn thickness, density, porosity, water
content, and volume change, across the Juneau Icefield (JIF) in Southeast Alaska
and Northwest Canada. We will use a range of observations acquired during this
project, previously acquired data, data assimilation, and modeling, to
understand the impacts of firn volume change on meltwater storage, meltwater
flux, and down-glacier impacts from changing meltwater processes. We have
selected the JIF for this study because it is an appropriate analog to thousands
of temperate glaciers across the globe experiencing firn loss and thinning. This
research will characterize spatial and temporal variability of meltwater and
meltwater movement within firn over hourly-to-yearly timescales and cm-to-km
spatial scales, resolutions rarely achieved across any glacier system. Temperate
firn is poorly constrained and densification models of firn do not yet
incorporate empirical observations of melt. Additionally, spatial data on firn
thickness, changes to firn volume due to glacier retreat, and the associated
changes to firn meltwater storage and down-glacier meltwater flux (thereby
influencing down-glacier ecosystems), are largely unknown. This proposal will
help tackle these challenges. This is important because Alaskan and Canadian
glaciers are retreating faster than any other glacier system on Earth, so we
expect changes in firn meltwater storage to occur. Meltwater stored in firn has
the potential to raise sea level by a significant amount and impact down-glacier
terrestrial and marine ecosystems due to climate change. As part of this
project, we will build an interactive educational video game for use in
classrooms and the Mendenhall Glacier Visitors Center (&gt;600,000 annual
visitors). We will also train over 500 students to use the game and help with
further game development. Lastly, this project will partially support an annual
Culture Camp with indigenous communities in Alaska and Northwestern Canada to
brainstorm collaborative strategies for reducing impacts from environmental
changes being observed in these regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.