* 2239618
* CAREER: Stretchable Light-Emitting Polymers with Thermally Activated Delayed Fluorescence
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Sihong Wang, University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 01/31/2028
* USD 125,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;For human-integrated
wearable and implantable electronics, light-emitting devices (such as organic
light-emitting diodes, OLEDs) play important roles for applications such as
displays, light-based vital-sign monitoring and disease therapy, bio-imaging,
and optical bio-stimulation of cell activities. For these devices to have
conformable skin/tissue contacts and long-term compatibility, one of the key
requirements is to have tissue-like mechanical stretchability. However, all the
high-performance light-emitting inorganic and organic materials available so far
are relatively rigid and brittle. This research will develop and study a new
class of polymers that combines high-efficiency light-emitting mechanisms with
rubber-like mechanical properties. These new polymers will be created through
both the chemical synthesis of new structures and the physical engineering of
existing chemical structures. Through fundamental studies on the influence of
different rubbery designs on light-emitting performance, this research will
provide design principles for this new class of polymers for achieving both high
efficiency in light-emitting devices and high stretchability. Enabled by this
research, the stretchable light-emitting technology could impact the emerging
areas of precision healthcare, human-machine interactions, and artificial
intelligence. This research will enrich the education and training for graduate
and undergraduate students, as well as promote the participation of
underrepresented minority (URM) students in STEM research through partnerships
with high schools and the Museum of Science and Industry in Chicago's South
Side. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Stretchable light-emitting devices represent an important component
in the emerging area of human-integrated electronics that are desired to achieve
skin/tissue-like mechanical properties and biocompatibility. However, for
electroluminescent properties, the realization and understanding of the impacts
of incorporating mechanically stretchable molecular designs on photophysical
behaviors remain rare. This research aims to create a set of material design
principles for integrating strain-dissipation mechanisms into a state-of-the-art
category of light-emitting materials, that is "thermally activated delayed
fluorescence" (TADF) polymers, so as to combine skin-like stretchability with
high electroluminescence efficiencies. Specifically, this research will explore
and study four general approaches for imparting stretchability onto TADF
polymers: 1) chemically modulating the flexibility of polymer backbones; 2)
chemically building flexibility onto polymer side chains; 3) physically
loosening the interchain packing and interaction; 4) imparting stretchability
onto “host” polymers for TADF emitters. Enabled by the new polymer designs from
these four approaches, this research will carry out fundamental studies on the
structure-property relationships that combine thermodynamic, mechanical, and
electroluminescent aspects for TADF polymers by combining multi-aspect
experimental characterizations and theoretical simulations. This research will
also develop the future workforce at both undergraduate and graduate levels,
with special relevance to for the emerging wearable and implantable electronics
industry. The PI will also develop a new program for bringing STEM research to
high school students in Chicago's South Side which have a high proportion of
underrepresented minorities, as well as the development of scientific exhibits
and public lectures for the “Museum of Science and Industry,
Chicago”.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.