* 2239647
* CAREER: Harnessing Dynamic Cell-Scaffold Interactions to Develop Adaptive Biohybrid Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Herdeline Ann Ardona, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 12/31/2027
* USD 121,463.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;In the human body, we have cells in our muscle
tissues that perpetually contract to allow us to move, breathe, and have a
functional heart. For cardiac tissues, the contractile behavior of
cardiomyocytes as their main cellular component serves as an important indicator
whether these tissues are healthy or diseased. Here, the PI proposes to develop
a class of materials that can be interfaced with cardiomyocytes and also have a
capability to report real-time changes in cardiac contractility through read-
outs based on changes in their optical properties. Specifically, these materials
will be made possible by using polymeric components that are force-sensitive or
“mechanoresponsive” due to molecular-level rearrangements that they can afford
in response to external mechanical stimuli such as cardiac contractions. These
force-induced molecular bond transformations are proposed to lead to changes in
the way that these soft materials absorb or emit light, therefore, serving as
optical read-outs for biological force sensing. These materials will also be
designed to bear cell-adhering peptides that improve the sensing of contractile
stress at the interface of cells and the proposed biomaterial. In addition to
understanding how cellular contractions can cause molecular transformations that
may lead to instantaneous changes in their optical properties, this project aims
to use the proposed materials for assessing the long-term effects of contractile
cells on the bulk properties of materials that serve as their scaffolds in
vitro. By developing a contractile cell-interfaceable biomaterial with force-
sensing capability, the PI sets the stage for quantitatively visualizing
biological forces in real-time and being able to directly assess how
environmental parameters affect cardiac function through contractility. In the
future, this class of adaptive materials could be adopted for model platforms
used in screening drug cardiotoxicity and investigating mechanisms of
debilitating cardiac diseases. The proposed research will be integrated with
educational objectives that aims to help with the recruitment, retention, and
promotion of biomaterials researchers at multiple career stages, particularly
those from historically underrepresented backgrounds.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Cell-generated forces play a
crucial role in regulating several biological processes—from tissue
morphogenesis to disease pathophysiology. Currently available measurement
techniques enable multi-scale force quantification, but these often involve
approaches that are destructive, focuses on 2D traction forces, and do not offer
real-time measurements. In this CAREER proposal, the PI proposes to develop a
class of adaptive peptide biomaterials that exhibit reversible, quantifiable
changes in optical properties in response to mechanobiological forces. This
class of mechanochromic material will be engineered as hydrogel networks bearing
force-responsive, π-conjugated chromophores and have covalent linkages that can
autonomously rearrange in response to cardiac contractions. The proposed
adaptive biohybrid system can thus allow for in situ visualization of
contractile forces that are directly correlated with cell/tissue health and
function, and a platform to evaluate the dynamic mechanical interaction at
biotic-abiotic interfaces. This sensory capability adds more functionality to
conventional peptide bioscaffolds, and therefore, offers a transformative
advance to bioscaffolds for tissue engineering applications that are only
traditionally designed to recapitulate the composition, mechanical properties,
and topography of native extracellular matrix (ECM) environments. These efforts
serve as a foundational pillar towards the PI’s long-term career goal, which is
to leverage designer biomaterials that uniquely transduce optical or electronic
phenomena at the cellular interface to control or probe biological processes at
multiple spatiotemporal scales. Together with our proposed research activities
on developing an adaptive biomaterial technology, we will implement educational
activities such as summer workshops, mentorship activities, and public seminars
that aims to strengthen the interdisciplinary training pipeline for the current
and next generation of diverse biomaterials
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.