* 2239922
* CAREER: Understanding the Effects of Mechanical Dosing on Mesenchymal Stem Cell Identity
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Sebastian Vega, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 03/31/2028
* USD 528,890.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant will study how the
“identity” of stem cells can be preserved by the mechanical properties of the
materials that surround them. Stem cell identity is defined by their ability to
divide, adapt, and differentiate. This work will focus on mesenchymal stem
cells, which are adult stem cells typically sourced from bone marrow and
expanded with tissue culture techniques. Controlling mesenchymal stem cell
identity is important for cell manufacturing and regenerative medicine. The
research goal of this project is to overcome current limitations in the cell
culture environment of mesenchymal stem cells by developing materials with
independently controllable properties of stiffness, adhesion, and cell-cell
signaling. The educational goal of this project is to integrate research with
ongoing educational activities to increase scientific literacy and equity. The
work will involve programs for underrepresented high school and undergraduate
students to conduct in-person summer research and attend virtual interactive
modules designed to instill a passion for cell biology and materials
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central hypothesis of this research is that
mechanical dosing strategies can be leveraged to control mesenchymal stem cell
proliferation, adaptation to dynamic materials, and differentiation within 3D
hydrogels. This hypothesis will be tested by: (i) determining the significance
of matrix mechanosensing during in vitro expansion on mesenchymal stem cell
proliferation and stemness, (ii) elucidating the role of adhesive and cell-cell
mimetic peptides on mesenchymal stem cell mechanical adaptation, and (iii)
identifying mechanical dosing parameters that increase the differentiation
potential of mesenchymal stem cells in 3D injectable hydrogels. The fundamental
knowledge gained from these studies is expected to lead to a paradigm shift in
current mesenchymal stem cell culture environments and result in significant
advances in cell manufacturing, stem cell mechanobiology, and regenerative
medicine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.