* 2239039
* CAREER: Inverse Mechanics in Self-Sensing Materials: Basic Knowledge, Education, and Service
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2028
* Tyler Tallman, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 07/31/2028
* USD 509,958.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) supports research on inverting
electro-mechanical coupling in self-sensing materials. Mechanical self-sensing
concepts have been widely studied in diverse applications including robotics,
structural sensing, healthcare and rehabilitation. Even though electro-
mechanical coupling in these materials is well known, potential consumers of
self-sensing materials are generally not interested in electrical properties.
They would much rather know the mechanical deformation and damage that gives
rise to an observed electrical change. By inverting the relationship between
electrical changes and mechanical loading in these materials, it is possible to
know the full-field mechanics from only a small number of electrical
measurements. This research will discover the basic nature of this inverse
problem, which will lead to more accurate, more robust, and faster solutions. A
self-sensing mechanics education and outreach ecosystem will also be created at
Purdue University. The work will leverage connections with the Society of Women
Engineers and the Women in Engineering Program to integrate self-sensing
mechanics into outreach activities serving the greater Lafayette/West Lafayette
area. A Vertically Integrated Projects program will also be created based on the
technical work. This program will positively impact a diverse cohort of
undergraduate students by providing research opportunities and a mentoring
network. Participants in this program will receive service-learning experience
by contributing to the planned outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
date, methods for inverting electro-mechanical coupling have been largely
unstudied. Prior work has shown that recovering full-field mechanics from
electrical data is an ill-posed inverse problem, but basic mechanics have not
yet been incorporated into the inverse problem. This work seeks to make the
mechanical self-sensing inverse problem stable and well-posed through the
inclusion of novel mechanics-based constraints, advanced regularization and
structural priors, and sensor data fusion concepts. If successful, this research
will create the first intellectual pathway to in-situ quantitative full-field
mechanics imaging via simple, benign, and easily multiplexed electrical
measurements. Because many materials, both naturally occurring and engineered,
exhibit self-sensing properties, this basic knowledge can positively affect
broad areas of human health, societal prosperity, and national security.
Examples include shape awareness in soft robots and morphing structures,
visualization of ultra-fast loading in energetic materials, damage mapping in
aging infrastructure, and, among others, tissue stiffness mapping for disease
detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.