* 2239500
* CAREER: Dissecting Phase Behavior of Pioneer Transcription Factor Condensates and Their Role in Gene Regulation
* BIO,MCB
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2027
* Priya Banerjee, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Ishita Mukerji
* 12/31/2027
* USD 341,994.00

DNA molecules which pack together to form chromosomes, store the information for
life, like a computer hard drive. Genes are the bits of information, which are
generally turned ‘off’ until the information is needed. A special protein called
a transcription factor (TF) turns a gene ‘on,’ ultimately leading to protein
production and cellular function. Deciphering how TFs regulate gene expression
is of fundamental importance to understanding their function in the development
of a multicellular organism. This project will test the hypothesis that, much
like dew drops on a spider web, the TFs form liquid-like droplets on the DNA
where each droplet may provide a special environment that regulates gene
expression. This project will provide key new knowledge in the field of gene
regulation. The education plan of the project aims to train the next generation
of biophysicists by broadening the scope of underrepresented student
participation in cross-disciplinary education and research, inspiring high-need
urban high-school students from the Buffalo Public School District in STEM
career options through accessible science and promoting biophysics literacy
among lay audiences through local and global art
exhibitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gene expression is crucial for determining a
cell’s fate even though many genes that need to be expressed are rendered
inaccessible by compaction into dense chromatin. Pioneer Transcription Factors
(PTFs) can initiate chromatin remodeling into an accessible state. We
hypothesize that this activity is facilitated by the formation of phase-
separated hubs containing TFs, RNA polymerases, and protein complexes
responsible for nucleosome remodeling. This project aims to determine the
physical principles that govern the phase separation of PTFs and how the co-
condensation of PTFs with DNA and other requisite cofactors regulates their
activity. The proposed studies are expected to provide new insights into (a) the
role of phase separation in genome organization, and (b) the mechanism of gene
regulation by pioneer transcription factors. Synergistic educational, outreach
and training activities complement the research and include engagement with
undergraduate students, high school students and the lay public. Completing the
project goals will directly contribute to the PI’s long-term research objective
to uncover molecular mechanisms of genome organization via biomolecular phase
transitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Molecular Biophysics and Genetic Mechanisms programs of the Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences Division in the Biological Sciences
Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.