* 2239915
* CAREER: Distributed, Wirelessly Powered, Implantable, Opto-Electro Neural Interface
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Yaoyao Jia, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Jenshan Lin
* 07/31/2028
* USD 392,217.00

Recent research has revealed that the complex functionality of the brain arises
from the intricate interactions of a vast network of neurons spanning across
interconnected regions of the brain. Therefore, future neural recording and
modulation techniques require simultaneously interfacing with multiple neural
sites that are distributed over a large brain area. However, current neural
interface devices typically consist of a single, centralized structure with
transcutaneous connections to electrode/LED arrays, leading to scalability
issues. A small number of recording/stimulation channels limits spatial
coverage, whereas a large number of channels results in bulky device size,
concentrated heat generation, and a high risk of wire connection failure. The
goal of this CAREER project is to explore a novel scaling solution involving a
distributed untethered network of mm-scale, wirelessly powered, free-floating
neural interface implants that enable optical stimulation and
electrocorticography (ECoG) recording of large-scale neuronal ensembles over a
large brain area. The proposed distributed neural interface system in this
CAREER project will advance neuroscience studies and enhance the foundational
understanding of the brain. Additionally, this project will expand the utility
and capabilities of the rapidly growing field of optogenetics, contributing to
the development of new neural prostheses and neuromodulation therapies that can
supplement current medication-based treatments for neurological disorders. The
education plan of this project will make a significant impact on STEM
engagement. The plan involves developing multidisciplinary courses that can be
cross-listed with related majors such as biomedical engineering, neural
engineering, and neural science, providing research opportunities for students
from underrepresented minority groups in STEM, and offering mentorship to female
students for their career development. Outreach activities will also be
organized to facilitate the sharing of resources, tools, and knowledge with
teachers and students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The motivation of this CAREER
project is to drive progress in the field of neural interfaces by enabling
precise neural recording and targeted neuromodulation across a large brain area
while minimizing invasiveness. Building upon this motivation, the primary goal
is to create an innovative distributed untethered framework that consists of an
array of untethered mm-scale wirelessly powered implantable opto-electro
stimulation (WIOES) devices. Each WIOES device will incorporate a flexible
polyimide board that houses four planar recording electrodes and one LED along
with an application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC) via a passive carrier
chip, all packed in a compact (smaller than one mm cube) and lightweight
package. These WIOES devices placed on the brain surface will record
electrocorticography (ECoG) and apply energy-efficient optical stimulation while
being wirelessly powered and monitored by an external controller via a dual-band
resonance-based inductive wireless link. Three research thrusts (RTs) are
proposed to achieve the research goal. RT1 will be dedicated to developing the
first compact neural implant smaller than one mm cube that has both optical
stimulation and neural recording modalities. RT2 focuses on the development of a
wireless and untethered neural interface system that relies on an innovative
dual-band resonance-based inductive wireless link and an energy-efficient data
communication protocol for wireless power and data transmission with the array
of WIOES implants. RT3 aims to assess the functionality and reliability of the
proposed distributed WIOES implants through a series of in vitro and in vivo
tests. The successful completion of this CAREER project will establish a new
paradigm for neural interfaces, offering unique features such as wireless and
untethered operation, wide spatial coverage, and minimal invasiveness. This new
paradigm will create new opportunities for neuroscience research and enable a
deeper understanding of the brain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.