* 2239834
* CAREER: CAS-Climate: Neighborhood-scale Assessment of the Air Quality Co-Benefits and Tradeoffs of Transportation Electrification
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Daniel Horton, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 06/30/2028
* USD 457,459.00

In the face of climate change, one target is to transition combustion-powered
sectors (such as internal combustion vehicles) into technologies powered by
electricity. The strategy is that the electric grid – currently comprised of a
mix of combustion, renewable, and nuclear generation units – will become cleaner
and greener over time. Studies indicate that electrification will reduce
greenhouse gas emissions regardless of the grid’s composition, however related
air quality benefits remain poorly understood, particularly at impact- and
equity-relevant neighborhood-scales. This project will develop and validate a
fine-scale (~1 km) climate and air quality analysis framework that can assess
the co-benefits and tradeoffs of electrified transportation options at
neighborhood scales. The project will (i) create emission scenarios that account
for increased grid demand and uncertainties in grid evolution, (ii) simulate the
interaction of meteorological and chemical processes, (iii) characterize changes
in GHGs and air pollutants, (iv) assess economic, social, and public health
implications at equity-relevant neighborhood-scales, and (v) educate and inspire
the next-generation of scientists and students with climate solution-focused
curriculum development and mentorship opportunities. Research themes, methods,
and products will be integrated into middle school curriculum via co-development
of Next Generation Science Standards content and shared in an after-school
mentorship programs serving under-represented student populations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will combine a fine-scale climate and chemical
transport model along with air quality sensor monitoring data and a regulatory-
grade modeling framework (WRF- CMAQ-SMOKE-MOVES) to bring focus to electric
vehicle (EV) impacts at equity-relevant scales. Neighborhood-scale simulations
are critical because air pollution and remediation efforts often have local
impacts and effects – features vital for engendering support of policy makers
and environmental justice supporters. Additionally, public discussions of
climate solutions have traditionally been framed around their carbon emission
reduction potential. However, benefits from concomitant reductions in air
pollutants may exceed GHG abatement costs. Economic, social, and public health
analyses of emergent technologies, if co-beneficial, could provide the impetus
for consumer purchases and/or development of adoption incentive policies.
Educational objectives of the project seek to simultaneously address multiple
related challenges within the Earth &amp; Environmental sciences, including the
limited Earth &amp; Environmental science content in school curricula and the
lack of diversity in these fields. By partnering with a Northwestern University
outreach organization to develop sustainability-based content as part of the on-
going implementation of Next Generation Science Standards, the investigator will
introduce the project's research to a diverse population of students and help to
bridge in-school and out-of-school STEM-focused educational activities while
facilitating potentially transformative learning experiences. Meaningful and
sustained contact with these students is intended to promote their college
readiness and STEM interest, as well as provide teaching and outreach
opportunities for the investigator's trainees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.