* 2239755
* CAREER: CAS-Climate: Sustainable Design Principles for Emerging Photovoltaics
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* ilke celik, South Dakota School of Mines and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 05/31/2028
* USD 424,851.00

The overarching goal of this project is to identify the most environmentally
sustainable and economically feasible schemes to prepare emerging photovoltaic
(EPV) technologies for the energy market as truly sustainable solar technology.
This goal will be pursued by synergistically integrating research and education-
associated tasks within three objectives: (1) identifying sustainable design
principles for EPVs based on circular end-of-life (EoL) options and advancing
sustainability education with EoL-related concepts; (2) analyzing the use and
EoL phase-related environmental impacts and cost dimension of EPVs and advancing
solar energy education in higher education in South Dakota, and; (3) assessing
enviro-economic models for novel application of EPVs, creating decision support
tools (EPV-Life tool), and disseminating the research results by offering
workshops. Considering that EPVs can create an important market for the solar
energy industry, enviro-economic models of EPVs and their novel applications are
essential to inform PV stakeholders regarding the pathways for environmentally,
economically, and socially sustainable solar energy. As a result, the societal
benefits of this project include methods for offsetting greenhouse gases and
facilitating an effective education mechanism for EPVs
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator will design the EPV
architectures following refurbish, remanufacture, and recycle (triple-r)
principles while this technology is still partially in the R&amp;D stage. The
focal point of design for triple-r is to determine device architecture that
allows environmentally friendly and economically feasible EoL management
schemes. The investigator will assess the life cycle toxic impacts from the use
and EoL phase of EPVs due to a catastrophic event and/or breakage or improper
disposal. As a result, the use phase-related environmental impacts of PV
projects installed on paved (i.e., rooftops) and unpaved (i.e., ground-mounted)
surfaces and long-term impacts related to improper dumping will be better
understood, and strategies to prevent these from happening can be formulated.
The investigator will design all processes involved in the entire life cycle of
EPVs using the levelized cost of electricity (LCOE) metric, with explicit focus
on assessing the net cost of triple-r options that minimize the net cost of
electricity from EPVs. Integration of EoL to the LCOE metric will allow for
comprehensive development of EPVs with a closed-loop approach. All processes
involved in the entire life cycle of EPVs and their novel application fields
will be designed using enviro-economic tradeoffs analyzed in this project. A
primary focus will be on assessing bifacial systems used in urban/ sub-urban
deployment and EPV coupled battery systems in rural/remote applications. The
research and educational goals of this project are integrated by focusing on
five broader impacts activities: 1) Training graduate and undergraduate
students, 2) working closely with Youth &amp; Family Services to outreach to
K-12 students, including minority students from the underserved, economically
disadvantaged, and underrepresented (e.g., Native American) in western South
Dakota, 3) working with Rapid City’s Sustainability Committee to outreach local
communities to promote sustainable solar energy and inform them about
residential solar deployment’s benefits, 4) partnering with the solar industry
and research centers to enhance the infrastructure for research and education,
and 5) disseminating research results broader communities with peer-reviewed
publications, national and international presentations, and EPV- Life tool, and
the team’s Twitter account and YouTube videos.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is jointly funded by the ENG/CBET Environmental Sustainability program and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.