* 2239077
* CAREER: Digital Twins of Surgical Environments for Situational Awareness and Immersive Simulation
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Mathias Unberath, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 06/30/2028
* USD 128,423.00

Developing new tools and procedures for robot-assisted surgery is difficult and
expensive. This is because of the need for special-purpose tools and
environments for building and testing prototype surgical robots, even before
clinical testing can begin. This project seeks to address these problems through
developing “digital twins” of image-guided surgery. The high level idea is to
develop virtual reality simulations and computational models that closely mimic
real patients, surgical tools, and operating environments. These simulations
will help designers correct possible problems with robot and procedure designs
early on; this in turn will allow faster, cheaper design cycles that will make
robot-assisted surgery design more practical and widely available. The
simulations can also be used to support real operations; room-scale models of
the operating environment will support algorithms to monitor the robotic systems
for safer surgeries, as well as provide new opportunities for educating both
surgeons and the general public about ways technology is used to advance
surgery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical aims of this project are divided
into two thrusts: In the first thrust, the team will develop innovative methods
that enable the creation of virtual immersive and interactive simulation
environments that precisely recreate scenarios of the real world. To build these
so-called digital twins, the team will create computer vision and machine
learning techniques to create, update, and leverage digital twins of the
surgical environment from multi-modal measurements. The second thrust will use
digital twin models of unstructured, human-in-the-loop environments to explore
how these immersive simulation models may be used to accelerate the design of
intelligent surgical systems and provide complementary situational awareness to
enhance decision making.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.