* 2239152
* CAREER: Creatively Reimagining Engagements with Data in Biology Learning Environments
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Joshua Rosenberg, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Asli Sezen-Barrie
* 07/31/2028
* USD 329,588.00

There have been prominent and widespread calls for high school science students
to work with data in more complex ways that better align with and support the
work of professional scientists and engineers. However, high school students'
analysis and interpretation of scientific data is often limited in scope,
complexity, and authentic purpose. This project aims to support and advance
students' work with ecological data in high school biology classrooms by
embracing a new approach: Bayesian data analysis methods. Such methods involve
expressing initial ideas or beliefs and updating them quantitatively with data
that students access or record. This project will empower 20 high school
teachers and their approximately 1,200 students to make sense of data within and
beyond classroom contexts. It also will involve sharing research findings, an
educational technology tool for Bayesian data analysis, and curricular resources
in open and accessible ways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Teachers commonly desire to
plan and carry out more data-intensive classroom activities. However, there
needs to be more connection between students' work with data and the core
science ideas teachers want their students to understand. The result is that
students' work with data can be isolated from the sense-making students are
doing about science. Because of advances in cognitive science, data science and
Bayesian data analysis tools and methods, and science curricular standards,
there is an opportunity to provide science teachers with practical tools and
teaching strategies for students to use data in science classrooms more
ambitiously. This project involves designing and carrying out a multi-year
professional development program for 20 high school biology teachers focused on
ecosystems-related core science ideas and locally-relevant ecological phenomena
and questions. The program includes a collaboration with the Great Smoky
Mountains Institute at Tremont, an experiential and outdoor education center in
the nation's most biodiverse national park. The program focuses on strategies
and a specially designed and developed statistical software tool to make
Bayesian data analysis more accessible for high school learners. This study also
involves a field experiment that assesses several teacher and student outcomes
using quantitative and qualitative measures over multiple years of classroom
implementation. This project has the potential to provide a set of research
findings and strategies for making the science practice of analyzing and
interpreting data more empowering for both science teachers and
learners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CAREER award is funded by the Discovery
Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) which seeks to significantly enhance the
learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM)
by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.