* 2239418
* CAREER: How Does Core Scientific Knowledge Advance? Understanding Team Innovation at the Foundations of Sciences
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2028
* Lingfei Wu, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 02/29/2028
* USD 329,835.00

Science in the past century has been characterized by a dramatic increase in the
scale and complexity of research, growing specialization, and a transition from
individual innovation to collaborative discovery. This shift has been driven by
a high expectation for “team science,” that scientists in teams will achieve
breakthroughs otherwise difficult to attain through individual or additive
efforts. Yet, two problems at the foundation of team science call for a thorough
investigation lest this high expectation devolves into underdelivered promise.
First, the advance of basic, core scientific knowledge on fundamental questions
can be stifled or slowed despite the increased use of this knowledge in
responding to urgent questions raised by societal needs. For example, the fast
and successful development of the COVID-19 vaccine is conditional on decades of
basic research on mRNA mechanisms, but it is unclear how a flood of pandemic
funding has helped mRNA studies or other research of fundamental importance in
biology. The slow development of the knowledge core may restrain the expansion
of the research frontier that builds upon it and affect downstream educational
initiatives in the long run. Second, the roles and careers of young scientists
in the era of team science have become an overlooked topic against the rise of
large teams and a temporary scientific workforce. Indeed, while previous studies
emphasized the benefits of teams, recent studies have revealed the cost of teams
in constraining creative thinking, curtailing due credit, and undermining career
progression. Taken together, the increasing dominance of teams in knowledge
production presents an urgent need to understand how individual scientists can
learn, progress, and effectively innovate in teams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project has three primary objectives. First, I propose understanding the
evolution of core scientific knowledge over the past century by analyzing the
displacement between highly cited papers on the same topic, using newly
available datasets of 46 million papers and 7 million syllabi. Second, I will
investigate the psychological, communication, and financial conditions of team
innovation at the knowledge core, by analyzing the impact of age composition,
collaboration distance, and funding support on the innovative performance of 2
million name-disambiguated scientists collaborating across 3,500 cities around
the globe. Finally, I will investigate the career outcomes of team members who
contributed to core knowledge innovation, focusing on early-career women and
researchers from minoritized groups. Using machine learning models, I will
identify the distinct roles of authors across 16 million papers and associate
these roles with job outcomes revealed by millions of CVs. This research program
will contribute to several fields, including the science of science, science
communication, and public policy. The produced literature, metrics, databases,
and code will benefit practicing scientists, research and funding managers, and
policymakers on how to design, support, and evaluate research teams for
innovation at the foundations of sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.