* 2239727
* CAREER: Transforming Personal Informatics Systems to Support Routine Transitions in Healthy Eating
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Chia-Fang Chung, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 07/31/2028
* USD 235,880.00

Many people use personal informatics technology, such as smartwatches and mobile
tracking applications, to support and maintain their healthy eating goals.
However, disruptions and transitions of routines, such as moving, job changes,
or family illness, can interfere with their ability to stick to their goals.
When these transitions happen, they might influence how individuals access
healthy eating resources or create challenges for people to maintain their
healthy eating behavior outside their established routine. Transitions may also
create new needs or change people’s priorities around healthy eating. However,
current personal informatics technology is typically designed based on the
assumption that everyday behavior remains static. As a result, when transitions
happen in everyday life, existing technologies struggle to help people assess
and adapt to the changing needs, constraints, and priorities. Thus, this project
aims to examine how personal informatics systems can be designed to support
people in healthy eating when experiencing transitions in their routines,
individually and collaboratively. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The initial line of work
will be to systematically understand people’s needs and the challenges of
healthy eating when transitions in their routines occur. These findings will
help create design principles and theoretical foundations supporting technology
design around these transitions. The second line of work will iteratively design
and develop technologies that can support people to cope with transitions and
continue to eat healthily. Finally, the project team will conduct field studies
to evaluate the usefulness, usability, and engagement with these technologies
over time and in the context of transitions. The project will contribute
empirical knowledge, design guidelines, theoretical frameworks, and field-
evaluated technology to support healthy eating during transitions in routines.
It also includes integrated education and outreach activities for universities,
high schools, and local communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.