* 2239235
* CAREER: Metal-Free C-C Bond Formation and C-O Bond Cleavage Mediated by Electron-Donor-Acceptor Complexes of Arenes
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Sebastien Laulhe, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 03/31/2028
* USD 465,768.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Sébastien Laulhé of Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis is
studying new heavy metal-free processes designed to reduce the environmental
footprint of chemical manufacturing. Blue light is employed to activate so-
called 'electron-donor-acceptor complexes' enabling them to either mediate the
assembly of carbon-carbon bonds or else to break carbon-oxygen bonds. Processes
belonging to the first class are useful for the generation of pharmaceutical
agents, agrochemicals, and other societally important products, and the approach
being pursued may provide an alternative to current technologies reliant on the
use of rare and/or toxic metal species. The second type of processes will be
deployed to break down biomass-derived molecules, such as lignin, to turn what
are typically regarded as agricultural waste streams into renewable and valuable
sources of carbon, thereby potentially reducing dependence on fossil-based
carbon sources. The broader impacts of the award extend to the benefits accrued
to society as Dr. Laulhé and his team of coworkers pursue a range of activities,
including the provision of stimulating and educational research experiences, to
better prepare undergraduate students for careers in the STEM (science,
technology, engineering and mathematics) workforce. The funding secured will
also enable Dr. Laulhé to continue to develop an organic chemistry curriculum
for visually impaired students, the results of these efforts will be shared with
the higher education community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The formation of carbon-
carbon bonds through regioselective C(sp3)–H functionalization strategies in the
absence of transition-metals remains a challenge. The research being pursued
under this project will address this problem by utilizing aryl radical species
capable of effecting hydrogen-atom transfer that are released upon visible
light-mediated excitation of electron-donor-acceptor (EDA) complexes of readily
generated carbanions (e.g., aminoacetate enolates) and haloarenes. A major goal
of the research is to apply this principle to access non-canonical amino acid
derivatives via site-selective direct C-H functionalization and to render such
transformations diastereoselective by manipulation of the transition state for
the radical-radical coupling step using specific counter ions and/or the use of
chiral organocatalysts. The second part of the funded project will exploit EDA
complexes of solvent anions (e.g., dimsyl anion) and arene-containing ethers to
promote selective C–O bond cleavages upon irradiation with visible light. In
this case, it is expected that tuning of the electronic parameters between
electron-donors and electron-acceptors will enable selective debenzylation of
complex protected alcohols and depolymerization of lignocellulosic biomass. A
number of significant (and heavy metal-free) new methods for both the
functionalization of C–H bonds and the cleavage of C–O bonds, are likely emerge
from this research program and the pursuit of the aims described will further
fundamental knowledge of EDA complex photochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.