* 2239639
* CAREER: Molecular Dissection of Arabidopsis DNA Methylation Mechanism
* BIO,MCB
* 08/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Xuehua Zhong, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 11/30/2023
* USD 292,630.00

In complex genomes like those in plants and mammals, the DNA is selectively
modified by chemical addition of methyl groups. The goal of this research is to
understand how enzymes that methylate DNA locate the correct sites to modify.
This is an important question, because accurate methylation deposition is
critical for genome integrity and function, and alterations in methylation can
result in abnormal developmental and pathological states, including cancers. The
scientific outcome of this project could ultimately prove useful for developing
novel technologies to correct methylation defects and thereby to improve
agriculture and medicine. In addition, this project will provide many
educational benefits, such as multi-disciplinary research training for
undergraduate students, graduate students and postdocs, including those from
underrepresented groups. The project will also engage high school students in
research, with the aim of providing an enriching experience, particularly for
women, minorities, and those who would be the first in their families to attend
college. Another impact of the project will be the development of three learning
modules centered on various aspects of genetics: tabletop science station for
K-12 students, field trip module for middle school students, and summer science-
camp for rural Wisconsin high school students and science
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DNA methylation is not only prevalent in plants,
fungi, and some animals, but also plays critical roles in genome defense,
differentiation, development, disease, and environmental responses in these
organisms. Despite its importance, remarkably little is known about the actual
cue and the molecular mechanism that establish cell type- and locus-specific DNA
methylation. Understanding the diverse functions of DNA methylation requires
mechanistic knowledge of how DNA methyltransferase, the enzyme at the heart of
this modification, is targeted to specific genomic loci. This project focuses on
understanding the molecular actions of several new chromatin factors in
mediating the establishment and maintenance of genome-wide and locus-specific
DNA methylation patterns, using Arabidopsis thaliana as a powerful model. The
comprehensive genetic, biochemical, and genomic studies proposed in this project
will generate significant mechanistic insights into the specificity of DNA
methylation regulation at the whole genome levels as well as local DNA sequence
levels. Deep mechanistic knowledge of DNA methylation is crucial to
understanding the molecular processes that establish DNA methylation landscapes
under physiological and pathological conditions. This research will also have
substantial impacts on understanding how DNA methylation is coordinated with
other critical developmental, physiological, and environmental processes to
regulate genome function in other plant and animal species.