* 2239870
* CAREER: Practical algorithms and high dimensional statistical methods for multimodal haplotype modelling
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2028
* Derek Aguiar, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Sorin Draghici
* 06/30/2028
* USD 548,346.00

Massive and diverse datasets have been generated from human cells with the goal
of explaining the many ways cellular differences affect the observed differences
in traits between people. Mathematical models of the genetic differences between
people can be used to explain, for example, why some individuals are predisposed
to developing a particular disease. However, most mathematical models make
overly simplistic assumptions about how genetic differences interact to
influence an observed trait. This project addresses major challenges in
computational biology and applied machine learning by innovating new robust
mathematical models that make few assumptions and efficient training algorithms
to leverage massive and complex cellular data. Specifically, the project
considers: (a) methods for computing sequences of genetic differences by
integrating different types of data, machine learning, and algorithmic
techniques; (b) mathematical models for characterizing the genetic similarity
between people; and (c) efficient algorithms that scale to large datasets. The
results of this project include new methods that are broadly applicable to
clustering massive and diverse sequential data, and specifically helpful for
researchers trying to understand how genetic differences affect disease and
other traits. Furthermore, the research supports the math and science high
school and university communities by developing interactive learning modules and
networking resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops the statistical
and algorithmic foundations for sequences of multimodal variation (i.e.,
multiomic haplotypes) in two research directions. The first direction introduces
the multiomic haplotype data structure and develops new Bayesian nonparametric
models and fast inference algorithms for clustering multiomic haplotypes from
heterogeneous and high dimensional biomolecular data. Computational tractability
is achieved through novel and efficient inference algorithms that operate in
data-space (Bayesian coresets), model-space (deep approximations), and
algorithm-space (variational approximations). The second direction develops the
first model that unifies the combinatorial domain of haplotype assembly with the
probabilistic haplotype phasing domain to infer latent haplotypes. The
investigator will accomplish this unification goal by combining directed and
undirected graphical modeling techniques with efficient particle-based inference
algorithms. The completion of these research tasks will result in new methods
for developing deep approximations for high dimensional Bayesian nonparametric
models, models for multimodal sequential clustering, and methods to accelerate
the training of high dimensional statistical models. Additionally, the research
addresses (a) the longstanding open problem of haplotype assembly and haplotype
phasing unification; and (b) potential sources of missing heritability in
association studies: phase-dependent genetic and haplotype-epigenetic
interactions. Partnerships with the university and regional high school
communities will translate the research findings into educational modules and
resources to motivate, engage, and retain computer science students and
teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.