* 2239130
* CAREER: Manipulable Semantic Components in Data Visualization Design
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Zhicheng Liu, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 08/31/2028
* USD 599,518.00

Flexible manipulation of graphical objects is essential in tools like Microsoft
PowerPoint and Adobe Illustrator for vector-based design. Users can design
complex visuals by manipulating on-canvas objects to change their visual
properties, apply grouping and layouts, and define spatial relationships.
Ideally, this interaction would not only improve usability and reduce cognitive
load, but also serve as a cornerstone for seamless workflows and design life
cycles in a larger ecosystem. Multiple people could iterate on a design’s vector
representation collectively, and the graphical components could be repurposed
for new contexts with ease. Such an interaction paradigm, however, is largely
missing in today’s design practices for interactive data visualization.
Visualization creators mostly work with hardwired, inflexible templates, and
must be proficient in coding or navigating complex interfaces to produce custom
designs. Once a visualization is created, it is difficult to reuse it on a
different dataset or repurpose it for new contexts. This project investigates
how we can more effectively support data visualization design under a new
interaction paradigm: manipulable semantic components (MSC). Similar to
manipulable graphical objects in vector graphics design, manipulable semantic
components in interactive data visualization are graphical objects and
associated relationships that can be visually represented and manipulated at
design time (instead of run time). The project has the potential to democratize
visualization design and transform current practices in the authoring, reuse,
and collaborative design of data visualization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigator will conduct research on the theoretical frameworks, computational
techniques, and applications of manipulable semantic components (MSC). In the
first phase, the investigator will formulate an MSC framework for interactive
visualizations of multivariate tables, trees, and networks. The framework will
describe both the types of semantic components and operations to manipulate the
components. In the second phase, the project will investigate new algorithms and
techniques that compute component positions jointly determined by multiple
layout factors in real-time, and automatically deconstruct existing
visualizations for analysis and reuse. In the third phase, the theoretical
foundation and the computational techniques will power new interfaces and
interactive tools for flexible editing and transfer of components, tool-agnostic
example reuse, and synchronous collaborative design. To foster a tighter
integration between research and education, the investigator will use MSC to
innovate the teaching of design thinking with two education objectives:
exploration of design alternatives, and collaborative design feedback and
iterations. The investigator will focus on two activities, parallel prototyping,
and critique by redesign, in various educational contexts including new design
curricula in undergraduate and graduate classes, and outreach programs for
industry practitioners and students from other disciplines with visualization
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.