* 2239274
* CAREER: Unravelling the Strong Interaction with High-Energy Nuclear Scattering
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Wim Cosyn, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Bogdan Mihaila
* 07/31/2028
* USD 450,000.00

Atomic nuclei make up close to 100% of visible matter around us. Even though it
is known that nuclei are bound by the underlying fundamental theory of the
strong nuclear interaction, it is not yet understood how exactly they (and the
nucleons within them) emerge from it. This project studies and advances our
knowledge of the strong interaction through the theoretical modeling of high-
energy reactions with light nuclei. These reactions probe the quark and gluon
substructure of the light nuclei and give access to measurements (and
corresponding calculations) which are not possible on a free proton. Light
nuclei consist of only a few protons and neutrons, resulting in reactions with a
high degree of precision and control, combined with the ability to study the
effect of the nuclear medium on the quark and gluon structure. The PI mentors
graduate students working on the research at a minority serving institution and
engages in outreach activities involving high-school teachers and the local
science museum. In an effort to integrate education and research, the PI will
also develop nuclear physics-themed modules to be used at STEM summer camps for
local high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
advance our theoretical understanding of non-perturbative aspects of the strong
interaction, mainly through electron scattering off light nuclei. In high-energy
reactions, an electron probes the nucleus as if sitting on a wave front moving
at the speed of light. Hence the PI and his students will use the framework of
light-front quantum mechanics, which enables to cleanly separate the low-energy
nuclear structure of the light nucleus from the high-energy reaction dynamics.
Light nuclei offer unique features to probe the strong interaction: they can be
polarized, enabling spin-dependent studies; the initial nuclear state is
theoretically and experimentally well known and can be controlled in
measurements by detecting nuclear breakup. For this project, the team will
exploit these features in specific reactions on the deuteron and helium. For
polarized nuclei the team will study applications of a newly developed algorithm
which generalizes the spin-1/2 Dirac algebra to higher spin cases. These studies
are of importance for current and future measurements at US-based accelerator
facilities such as Jefferson Lab and the future electron-ion collider at
Brookhaven National Lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.