* 2239829
* CAREER: Designing Next-Generation Programmable Switches for Stateful In-Network Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Vishal Shrivastav, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Deepankar Medhi
* 02/29/2028
* USD 114,389.00

Stateful In-network computing (where users can run custom programs with custom
state in the network data plane) has been shown to improve the performance of a
wide-range of key applications from domains ranging from networking to
distributed systems to databases to machine learning. Unfortunately, the
enabling technology for stateful In-network computing, namely the programmable
switches, have fundamental design limitations that prevent them from scaling to
the growing demands of both the current and emerging In-network applications. In
particular, current generation of programmable switches cannot simultaneously
run large number of applications, cannot store large amounts of state needed for
state-intensive applications, and cannot scale to line rate processing for
certain stateful applications. This project will investigate the design of next-
generation programmable switches that could simultaneously run large number of
applications, store and process large amounts of state, while running at multi-
Tbps line rate, at the cost of only a nominal increase in chip area and power
consumption compared to current programmable switches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
limitations of current programmable switches were studied previously in the
context of microprocessor-based network processors from the early 2000s.
However, the fundamental difference in the processing architecture and line rate
of microprocessor-based network processors compared to current programmable
switches, has opened an opportunity to re-visit these problems in a completely
new light. In that regard, this project will make three key innovations. First,
the project will investigate new ways to store and access shared state across
multiple parallel switch pipelines for achieving line rate processing for
stateful applications. Second, the project will investigate ways to dynamically
allocate and share switch resources at line rate, providing an abstraction of a
"virtual" programmable switch to each application, in order to scale to large
number of applications. And finally, the project will investigate optimal cache
designs (between on-chip SRAM and off-chip DRAM) that allow visibility into
future requests at runtime through co-ordination between neighbor switches in
the network, to support state-intensive applications at line
rate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project also proposes several educational and
outreach initiatives that will be tightly integrated with the proposed research.
The systems and applications developed as part of this project will be
integrated into the curriculum of both the existing and new courses at Purdue,
including courses from non-networking domains, such as distributed systems and
computer architecture.&lt;br/&gt;As part of the K-12 and underrepresented
minority outreach, this project will organize an annual 1-week summer workshop
at Purdue targeting high-school and incoming undergraduate students belonging to
communities historically underrepresented in computer science and engineering,
to encourage them to pursue a career in science and engineering by giving them
hands-on experience with state-of-the-art networking technologies developed as
part of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All the results and artifacts from
this project, including the source code, will be made publicly and permanently
available at the URL https://github.com/vishal1303.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.