* 2239197
* CAREER: The effects of spatial structure and heterogeneity on local adaptation, diversification, and dispersal evolution: Experimental tests and statistical models
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Susan Bailey, Clarkson University
* Continuing Grant
* Paco Moore
* 04/30/2028
* USD 636,101.00

Most species live in complex and variable environments. Variation in within an
environment impacts where species live, how they move around, and how they
interact with each other. This, in turn, can influence how they evolve.
Understanding and predicting evolution in complex environments has many
important applications. These include the management of threatened species and
combating rapidly evolving pathogens such. This project uses mathematical models
and lab experiments with bacteria to explore how variation in an environment
impacts evolution. Results from this work will allow for a better understanding
of how and when evolution is predictable. The project also provides research
training for undergraduate and graduate students, expanded undergraduate
curriculum, as well as an enrichment course for rural high school students
emphasizing important connections between biology and math.&lt;br/&gt;In the
complex natural world, environmental variation and local interactions between
organisms have the potential to play a key role in evolutionary adaptation and
diversification. The goal of this project is to determine the effects of
spatially structured and variable environments on local adaptation, evolutionary
diversification, and dispersal using evolution experiments with populations of
the bacterium, Pseudomonas fluorescens. First, agent-based models will be
developed and used to build expectations for evolution of populations living in
different types of spatially heterogeneous environments. Then, using those
expectations as a guide, the effects of spatial heterogeneity on the evolution
of those bacterial populations will be tested using a unique semi-solid agar lab
environment. Genome sequence data will be collected and then be analyzed using
novel statistical models of molecular evolution. The population genome data
analysis will provide a unique first look at the details of molecular evolution
in spatially structured populations. Results from this research will lead to a
better understanding of the processes driving evolution in complex environments,
ultimately allowing for better predictive models of evolution in species of
economic, environmental, and human health importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.