* 2239710
* CAREER: Do microbes form caves? Sulfide oxidation and limestone corrosion in sulfuric acid caves
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2028
* Daniel Jones, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 05/31/2028
* USD 174,058.00

Some of the world’s largest and most spectacular limestone caves, including
Carlsbad Cavern and Lechuguilla Cave in New Mexico, were created by sulfuric
acid. These caves form where groundwaters carrying dissolved hydrogen sulfide
are exposed to oxygen, usually at or near the cave water table. Hydrogen sulfide
is unstable in the presence of oxygen, and it rapidly reacts to form sulfuric
acid and other sulfur compounds that dissolve limestone and precipitate new
minerals. And because of the abundant chemical energy from hydrogen sulfide,
chemosynthetic microorganisms thrive at the water table and speed up sulfide
oxidation, producing what might be the fastest known rates of cave enlargement.
This project will use an interdisciplinary combination of microbiology,
geochemistry, and modeling to determine where, how, and how fast limestone
dissolves in these caves, and how specifically microorganisms contribute to
bedrock corrosion. Results from this research will show us how microorganisms
form caves, but also how they contribute to similar carbonate weathering
processes that occur across other more widespread but less accessible subsurface
environments. Carbonate mineral weathering by strong acids is an important
source of carbon dioxide to the atmosphere, but sulfuric acid weathering is not
well understood in the terrestrial subsurface, especially in areas with
limestone and other carbonate bedrock. Sulfuric acid caves are windows through
which we can directly access and study these extensive but otherwise hidden
processes of subterranean carbonate weathering, gas flux, and mineral formation.
And, caves are exceptional platforms for science communication. This project
will take advantage of the excitement of caves to create new educational
opportunities through course-based research, K-12 teacher education, and science
communication activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In actively-forming sulfuric
acid caves, substantial limestone corrosion and void development can occur above
the water table, where springs and streams degas hydrogen sulfide to the cave
atmosphere. However, the overall impact of this degassing-driven processes is
not well understood, and we don’t know the contribution of vadose corrosion for
sulfuric acid cave formation, or how microorganisms affect karst development
above the water table. This project will therefore combine geochemical and
molecular analyses with speleogenetic modeling to address three questions: (1)
Do microorganisms speed up sulfide oxidation and limestone dissolution above the
water table, and can these rates explain observed cave morphologies? (2) How do
microorganisms affect subaerial carbonate dissolution, both during the active
phase of sulfuric acid corrosion but also throughout the long lifetime of the
caves? (3) What is the impact of gas emissions from sulfuric acid karst for
climate and carbon cycling? The team will address these questions by combining
direct measurements of limestone dissolution and biological sulfide oxidation
kinetics with metatranscriptomics and other community analyses to directly link
microbial activity with cave formation both close to and far from the sulfidic
aquifer. They will use air flow and speleogenetic modeling to relate these
measurements to cave morphologies and gas flux. And they will explore how these
processes change in ancient sulfuric acid caves that no longer have a sulfide
source. Parts of Questions 2 and 3 will be addressed through course-based
research that emphasizes biodiscovery, Earth systems, and science communication.
This CAREER award is co-funded by the Geobiology and Low-Temperature
Geochemistry Program and the Education and Human Resources Program in the NSF
Division of Earth Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.