* 2239308
* CAREER: A Modular, Embodied Control Strategy for Autonomous Soft Robots
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Jordan Raney, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 04/30/2028
* USD 595,319.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will establish a new
strategy for achieving autonomous behaviors in soft robots. Soft robots have
been of significant interest in recent years, with their compliance being ideal
for sensitive, unstructured, or dynamic applications, e.g., medical robotics,
assistive technologies, and manufacturing with fragile components. However,
sensing, control, and actuation can be difficult in soft robots, with their soft
bodies interfacing poorly with conventional, rigid electronics. Moreover,
traditional mechatronic systems are not well-suited for controlling the large
number of degrees of freedom of soft materials and may be incompatible with a
variety of applications, e.g., in vivo medical applications. In this work,
autonomous behaviors such as decisions about trajectory will be embodied in the
soft robot itself via stimuli-responsive control modules distributed throughout
the robot. The collective action of the control modules in response to the local
environment can produce large changes to the shape of the robotâ€™s body and its
actuation behavior, and thereby to the gait, trajectory, and function of the
robot. This award will also provide training in soft robotics and manufacturing
to Pennsylvania high school teachers from rural and urban school districts. The
integrated research and teaching plans will include practical strategies for
building autonomous soft robots with multimaterial 3D printing and broader
engagement of underrepresented and first-generation
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this work is to establish a
strategy for embodied sensing and control based on the use of control modules
that regulate the shape and/or pneumatic logic of soft robots. The activation
and deactivation of the modules will be autonomously regulated by stimuli-
responsive materials, such as liquid crystal elastomers and magnetoactive
composites, that are integrated with the robot via multimaterial 3D printing.
Modules could be moved, added, or removed to reprogram the distributed control
system and change the behavior of the robot. This work will use both numerical
simulations and experiments with two types of custom soft robots, a kirigami-
based robot and a modular rolling robot. The embodied control strategy will be
assessed as the robots autonomously navigate through the environment, changing
path, and function in response to multiple inputs (e.g., heat and
light).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the cross-directorate
Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed and funded by the
Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and Information Science and
Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.