* 2239284
* CAREER: High-Performance Ferroelectric Memory for In-Memory Computing
* ENG,ECCS
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Kai Ni, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 01/31/2028
* USD 436,730.00

With the wide deployment of smart devices, various forms of data, such as
photos, videos, and sensor data, are being generated at an unprecedented rate.
Extracting information from the data for intelligent decision making requires
enormous computing power. Following the Mooreâ€™s law, the computing power has
been steadily improved. However, technology gain is diminishing as it is
approaching the physical limits. In this regard, alternative computing paradigms
that can overcome the challenges of existing computing hardware are highly
desirable. In-memory computing (IMC) is one promising approach that shows high
performance and energy efficiency by performing computation directly inside the
memory without data transfer between the computing unit and memory, a key
bottleneck in conventional computers. However, to fully exploit the IMC, a
compact, energy-efficient, and high performance embedded nonvolatile memory
technology is critical. The proposed research aims to develop such a memory
technology by leveraging recently discovered ferroelectric
HfO2.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ferroelectric memory due to its electric field driven
write mechanism, exhibits superior energy efficiency. The proposed research aims
at addressing the remaining issues in ferroelectric memory. For capacitor-based
ferroelectric random access memory, device design that enables quasi-
nondestructive sensing of polarization are explored. For ferroelectric field
effect transistor, back-end-of-line compatible metal-oxide channel and dual-port
structure are adopted for excellent endurance, read disturb free feature, and
minimal charge trapping. In-memory computing applications of proposed devices
are also explored. Tightly coupled with the research efforts are 5-year
education activities. Through the lectures and hands-on experience offered to
K-12 and community college students and teachers, the goal is to promote
excitement and attract them into the talent pipeline for semiconductor industry.
The proposed research will involve undergraduate and graduate students,
especially those in under-represented groups. Course development that blurs the
boundaries between different disciplines is proposed for hardware development in
the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.