* 2239877
* CAREER: Land-Atmosphere Coupling and Feedback in the Context of Climate Change
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Darren Drewry, Ohio State University
* Continuing Grant
* Yu Gu
* 08/31/2028
* USD 219,543.00

The interactions between the terrestrial land surface and the atmosphere are
central to the Earthâ€™s surface water, energy and carbon budgets. These
interactions control a wide range of processes with a direct impact on humanity,
including near-surface climate variability, cloud formation and precipitation.
Land-atmosphere processes remain a significant challenge in large-scale weather
and climate prediction due to their inherent complexity and the trans-
disciplinary approach required to study them. Likewise, human activities that
shape terrestrial landscapes such as deforestation and agricultural production
directly impact the atmosphere in which they exist, resulting in the feedback of
land surface functioning onto the surface conditions that are experienced. These
interactions are rooted in the structure and function of the vegetation-soil
systems at the land surface, and the ecological responses of these systems to
atmospheric forcing. This project will integrate the development of novel high-
resolution computer modeling tools and data analytical approaches with the rich
information on plant responses to climate developed over decades of field system
manipulation experiments to advance our understanding of how land-atmosphere
interactions will evolve over the coming decades. This CAREER project will
contribute to the development of the next generation of scientists and engineers
who are technically equipped and motivated to study complex environmental
systems to enable a sustainable future. The broader impacts of this project
combine inter-disciplinary training of students at the undergraduate and
graduate level with outreach programs serving underrepresented groups in STEM at
the high school level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award will advance our
fundamental understanding of land-atmosphere interactions and feedback by: (1)
developing high-fidelity 3D modeling tools for high-spatial and temporal
resolution of land-atmosphere exchange processes and their consequent impacts on
atmospheric development and land surface response; (2) utilizing new analytical
approaches to diagnose land-atmosphere coupling and feedback in high resolution
simulation output; (3) applying this new simulation platform to climate change
scenarios across multiple vegetation and geographic domains. High resolution
simulations of recent land-atmosphere interaction field campaigns will allow for
validation of the simulation framework against observations of land-atmosphere
carbon, water, energy and momentum fluxes, near surface climate variation,
atmospheric boundary layer structure and cloud formation. Novel statistical
tools will be used to quantify information flow, directionality and explicitly
quantify feedback between surface and atmospheric states and fluxes. These tools
will be used to analyze a suite of simulations designed to quantify the relative
roles of vegetation structure, physiological and biochemical function,
atmospheric state and the structure of the lower atmosphere on emergent land-
atmosphere interactions and feedbacks. Overall this CAREER project will lead to
a better understanding of how and why land-atmosphere interactions will change
in the coming decades.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.