* 2239316
* CAREER: Reframing Students' Graph Literacy with a Focus on Students' Thinking
* EDU,DRL
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2028
* Hwa Young Lee, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Continuing Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 01/31/2028
* USD 374,191.00

Graph literacy, the ability to comprehend, interpret, and use graphical
representations, is critical for students to learn mathematics, to succeed in
STEM coursework and careers, and to engage in informed participation in society.
Undoubtedly, understanding and supporting students’ development of graph
literacy is an important task educators, researchers, and curricula developers
collectively share. Studies have documented secondary school students’
difficulties with graphical representations, yet, there is a need for theories
focused on students’ mathematical thinking that can be used by mathematics
teachers, teacher educators, and researchers to better support the development
of students’ graph literacy in various domains of mathematics (e.g., algebra,
statistics, geometry). This project examines middle school students’ graph
literacy from an asset-based perspective, documenting the ways in which students
think about graphs (i.e., their cognitive strategies and intuitive insights),
and the ways in which instruction can build upon that thinking in order to
support the development of graph literacy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drawing from
students’ graphical representations of real-life contexts (e.g., population
growth) that span various mathematical domains, this program of research will
develop a holistic theoretical framework that can inform mathematics instruction
in multiple content areas. The framework will model the cognitive strategies and
intuitive insights students build upon when reading and writing graphs, and map
how students’ graph literacy changes and develops across the middle grades.
Using a design-based methodology consisting of task-based clinical interviews
with middle school students, this work will also iteratively design, test, and
refine a set of empirically-tested graphing tasks for use by both teachers and
researchers, a library of videos illustrating student thinking as they engage in
graphing tasks, and publications and curricular materials for teachers and
teacher educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is funded in part by the
Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) which seeks to significantly enhance
the learning and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics
(STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of
innovative resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on
fundamental research in STEM education and prior research and development
efforts that provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects. The award is also funded in part by the EDU Core Research (ECR)
program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that
generates foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical
areas that are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.
The program supports the accumulation of robust evidence to inform efforts to
understand, build theory to explain, and suggest intervention and innovations to
address persistent challenges in education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.