* 2239624
* CAREER: Quantum-State Control on Multidimensional Potential Energy Surfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2028
* Nathanael Kidwell, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 01/31/2028
* USD 257,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Nathanael Kidwell of the College of
William and Mary will use advanced molecular spectroscopy and dynamics methods
to study the bimolecular reaction pathways of hydroxyl radicals (OH) with
several classes of hydrocarbons. There exists a knowledge gap arising from the
difficulty in identifying the reactive and nonreactive pathways for large
molecular systems. The goal of this project is to characterize how the
orientation and nuclear motions of the colliding molecules impact which pathway
is followed. The research seeks to understand the fundamental interactions and
outcomes from bimolecular collisions of OH radicals with hydrocarbons with
increasing chemical complexity. These studies will probe the interaction
potential between the collision partners without interference from other
molecules with the goal of better understanding the roles of OH radicals in
oxidation reactions in atmospheric and combustion chemistry. In addition to
training students in modern laser technology and analysis approaches, members of
the Kidwell research group will engage undergraduate and high school students in
vertical profiling of the atmosphere using drone-enabled Raspberry Pi
atmospheric sensors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will apply laser-based
spectroscopy and velocity map imaging techniques to obtain insights into the
intermolecular interactions between OH and hydrocarbon/atomic targets with
increasing chemical and multistate complexity. In addition to being important
chain carriers in oxidation reactions, OH radicals are pivotal reactive
intermediates in atmospheric and combustion chemistry modeling. Additionally,
hydrocarbons are central to both atmospheric chemistry and combustion chemistry,
and their oxidation initiated by OH radical collisions is a critical first step
in characterizing their removal. Under single-collision conditions, the targeted
molecular complexes will be characterized with isomer-specificity and activated
with mode-selectivity to reveal bimolecular collision outcomes. Objectives are
to study nonadiabatic effects and topological features on multidimensional
reactive and nonreactive potential energy surfaces. The project will provide
advanced training and learning opportunities for students to catalyze career
success and will foster outreach activities with near-peer
instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.