* 2239114
* CAREER: A comprehensive computational platform for detecting yet unseen microbial pathogens
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Todd Treangen, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Sorin Draghici
* 04/30/2028
* USD 130,879.00

We are in the golden age of our ability to read and write DNA. The sequencing of
genomic data found in nature is now democratized, opening the door to a digital
library of countless documents of evolutionary history. In parallel, the
synthesis of engineered DNA for widespread societal benefits is now automated
and affordable, showing incredible promise in recent years. Indeed, recent
advances in reading and writing DNA have the potential to resolve major global
challenges, such as boosting crop yield to address food shortages, mitigating
pollution through carbon capture, and improving pandemic response and
preparedness. While these remarkable technological advances can be used for
broad societal benefit, they are underutilized for tracking yet-unseen pathogens
that can result in widespread economic and public harm. Our ability to read and
write DNA at scale, especially with respect to uncovering yet-unseen pathogens
and intentionally or unintentionally enhancing existing pathogens, has far
outstripped computational tools capable of tracking and preventing misuse. To
address this critical gap, the research detailed in this proposal will focus on
developing computational tools to aid in detecting yet-unseen pathogens and
preventing intentional or unintentional misuse of synthetic DNA.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advocate for a novel paradigm of
pathogen detection and monitoring through the pursuit of innovative
computational methods and approaches. The research methodology will be motivated
by tried and tested approaches in biosurveillance while pursuing innovative
computational strategies. Specifically, this project will address four
fundamental computational research challenges: (1) yet-unseen pathogen
characterization -- contextualizing taxonomy-based approaches with functions of
concern to learn how to identify novel pathogens, (2) petabyte-scale cataloging
of microbial dark matter -- combining probabilistic algorithm development with
comparative genomic approaches for the query of known and rare microbial genes,
(3) genetic engineering detection -- discerning engineered DNA from naturally
occurring DNA through the development of graph-based pan genomes combined with
codon usage bias models, and (4) implementation of the modular computational
platform GuarDNA -- integrating everything together into the first-ever
comprehensive platform specifically designed for both biosecurity and
biosurveillance. GuarDNA will be designed following software engineering best
practices, with code modularity as a key focus to facilitate community
engagement. These four research challenges will be accompanied by a
comprehensive test and evaluation plan, which both provides an individual
assessment of each of the four research thrusts as well as continuous
integration testing to provide an overarching evaluation of the GuarDNA
platform. This research effort will open the door to novel computational
approaches for biosecurity and biosurveillance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.