* 2239810
* CAREER: Developing Algorithms for Object-Adaptive Super-Resolution in Biomedical Imaging
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Yu Gan, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Yang
* 06/30/2028
* USD 204,909.00

Advanced biomedical imaging technology has revolutionized diagnosis and
treatment by providing structural and functional details. Spatial resolution of
biomedical images, however, sometimes do not suffice for specific applications
due to constraints of image acquisition time. Conventional software-based
improvement bears high costs in computation and visualization, opening a niche
to optimize the framework towards super-resolution at reasonable costs. It
aligns with NSF’s mission to promote the process of computer science and to
advance the national health. This project is to investigate novel algorithm
development to adaptively improve digital resolution and minimize the cost of
computation in super-resolution process. Technically, this method combines the
effort of object detection and super-resolution to bring a generalizable tool to
potentially benefit multiple biomedical imaging modalities, such as optical
coherence tomography (OCT), histological microscopy, confocal images, MRI,
ultrasound, etc. The educational emphasizes activities to broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups in biomedical
pursuits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop intelligent object-
adaptive super-resolution algorithms to improve resolutions of biomedical images
in a robust, efficient, and generalizable manner. This project will develop
robust object detection neural network to identify regions to be super-resolved.
A scale factor will be determined for adaptive super-resolution. This project
will investigate on computationally efficient algorithms to super-resolve
biomedical images to multiple scale factors during a complex-valued image
reconstruction process. This project will also develop a transferrable framework
such that the super-resolution technology developed in one image modality can be
adapted into the super-resolution technology developed by a different imaging
modality. The approaches will be validated using OCT data and the domain
adaption will be validated by transferring from OCT domain to histopathological
domain. The research outcome will also result in artificial intelligence-based
educational materials and software to reduce the need of biomedical facilities
that are conventionally required but not cost-effective to underrepresented
groups. In addition, this project includes outreach activities to promote
biomedical participation in regions with limited access to biomedical resources
and a new model to mentor a diverse and inclusive team and create motivation to
the next generation of researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.