* 2239364
* CAREER: Understanding the Nature of Dark Energy with the Young Supernova Experiment and the Legacy Survey of Space and Time
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2028
* Gautham Narayan, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Glen Langston
* 07/31/2028
* USD 717,600.00

The investigator seeks to accurately determine the two numbers describing the
expansion of our Universe. The first, the "Hubble constant", is a measure of the
rate of the expansion of the Universe today. The second describes the equation-
of-state of “Dark Energy”. Dark Energy is required to explain the increasing
rate of expansion of the Universe. Some rare, bright, exploding stars, called
"type Ia supernovae" (SN Ia), are perfectly suited to this task. Each of these
supernovae provides us a single measurement of the size of the Universe at the
instant that the star died. Using a new observational project, the Young
Supernova Experiment (YSE), the investigator will measure the most uniform
sample of SN Ia in the nearby Universe. The investigator will use this sample to
develop novel methods of determining the cosmological parameters. With a team of
citizen scientists, the investigator will develop new tools to identify type Ia
supernovae in the distant Universe, using observations from NSF’s Vera C. Rubin
Observatory. Where YSE will find thousands of supernovae, the Rubin Observatory
survey, called the Legacy Survey of Space and Time (LSST), will discover
hundreds of thousands. The investigator will also involve schools and citizen
scientists in this research. The investigator will place the observations on the
public Zooniverse platform and create Jupyter Notebooks for instruction for
local students, including the “Women Astronomy Summer Camp” and “Girls who Code”
groups. They will recruit students from underserved communities in the greater
Central Illinois Region, teaching them machine learning and data science using
the material developed in this research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator
will use the YSE supernovae together with the sample from LSST. With an
anticipated 1.6% measurement accuracy of the Hubble constant and sub-percent
measurement of the equation-of-state of Dark Energy, the investigator will
connect the nearby to the distant Universe. Citizen-science is central to the
research plan. The investigator will use the Zooniverse platform to identify the
host-galaxies of supernovae for the full sample, providing a valuable cross-
check on the performance on automated algorithms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research award is partially funded by a generous gift from Charles Simonyi to
the NSF Astronomy division. The project includes significant contributions to
Vera C. Rubin Observatory’s Legacy Survey of Space and
Time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.