* 2239609
* CAREER: Critical Infrastructure Resiliency through Robust Provenance and Information Sharing
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Deepak Tosh, University of Texas at El Paso
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 05/31/2028
* USD 492,055.00

Critical national infrastructures encompass a variety of cyber physical
components to monitor and control complex operations that has direct impact to
human lives and our society. In the efforts of modernizing the critical national
infrastructures, advanced sensor and communication technologies are playing an
important role in enhancing their operational efficiency and offering finer view
on the human inaccessible physical processes. However, this has potential to
jeopardize the security of the operational technology and expand the cyber
threat landscape, which opens opportunities of cyber exploitation to the
underlying data, devices, and the physical processes. This project investigates
how to devise an overhead aware provenance framework to incorporate implicit
local resiliency in the critical infrastructure that assures data and
operational trustworthiness while thwarting rogue devices through continuous
lightweight authentications. To further enhance the cyber resiliency of the
critical infrastructure sector as a whole, this project also explores on
designing distributed information sharing models that promotes reciprocity and
reduces the risks of cyber exploitation. In addition to the research
contributions, this project has a tightly integrated education plan which
involves developing critical infrastructure security skill sets among next
generation engineers, summer training for the middle and high school teachers to
induce cybersecurity interests in their classrooms and disseminating new
critical infrastructure security knowledge to regional and national
stakeholders. The outcomes of the project have significant value to the
operators of the critical infrastructure sector to better understand and address
the underlying cyber challenges in a timely and collaborative
manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Achieving resilience in critical national
infrastructures against emerging cyber threats poses a significant challenge as
more and more network capable operational technology components are being
deployed, making the operational environment complex, interdependent, and highly
heterogeneous. This project particularly focuses on enhancing cyber resiliency
of the operational technology through two major objectives: First, devise
overhead aware provenance mechanisms that the critical infrastructure entities
can adopt locally to have an implicit resiliency against diverse cyber attacks.
The provenance schemes ensure trustworthiness of the data generated from various
physical processes in the operational technology environment, while accurately
identifying the associated devices and assuring the integrity of state changes
made by the physical processes. Second, develop community wide cyber resilience
by designing distributed cyber information sharing mechanisms that allows
disparate stakeholders to collaborate and effectively communicate their cyber
knowledge for proactively defending the national cyber infrastructure. With the
interdisciplinary research components from computer science, cybersecurity,
industrial and systems engineering, embedded systems, economics, and game
theory, this project contributes to the understanding of the effectiveness of
data and process provenance for cyber resiliency, the integration challenges of
continuous lightweight authentication for device trustworthiness, the impact of
cyber information sharing on overall risk posture of operational technology, and
the factors contributing to induce reciprocity in information
sharing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.