* 2239194
* CAREER: Socio-Algorithmic Foundations of Trustworthy Recommendations
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Giovanni Luca Ciampaglia, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 01/31/2028
* USD 172,044.00

Social media are now the main source of news for the majority of Americans and
for billions of people worldwide. The recommendation algorithms employed by
these platforms are designed to maximize views and clicks by finding engaging
content, which in turn often ends up amplifying stories from dubious news
sources, conspiracy theories, and unverified rumors. Older adults are a
demographic increasingly turning to social media as a way to stay informed and
are especially vulnerable to online misinformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
situation is especially concerning for partisan news consumers, who have a
tendency to engage with information that conforms to their beliefs, regardless
of its accuracy. The objective of this research is to build a simulated social
media platform that will allow researchers to test more robust news
recommendation algorithms designed to improve the news consumption of social
media users while recommending content that is still relevant to them. The
project will include studies of how older adults engage with the news on major
social media platforms and whether alternative algorithms would improve the
quality of their news consumption.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is based
on the observation that ranking the news by (either predicted or achieved)
popularity creates a self-sustaining cycle that prioritizes pro-attitudinal
information regardless of its quality. To break this loop, the project tests the
hypothesis that prioritizing content that generates engagement in diverse
audiences will improve the trustworthiness of recommendations. The project will
explore the relevant dimensions under which the heterogeneity of an audience
provides a good signal for news quality. The technical contributions will
include a set of new regularization techniques to incorporate audience diversity
of news sources into content recommendation methods, a quantitative evaluation
of the effect of different re-ranking methods on the quality of the information
diet of news consumers, especially older consumers, and a new experimental
methodology on counterfactual ranking with high ecological
validity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.