* 2239375
* CAREER: Optimism in Causal Reasoning via Information-theoretic Methods
* CSE,CCF
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2027
* Murat Kocaoglu, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 12/31/2027
* USD 233,835.00

Reasoning about the causes and effects of phenomena is a fundamental problem in
the development of artificial intelligence. Causal reasoning from data also
plays a key role in several disciplines, from engineering and computer science
to medical research. A formal mathematical theory of probabilistic causation has
been developed in the last few decades by Pearl (1995). Several algorithms that
illustrate how much qualitative and quantitative causal knowledge can be
extracted from data under well-defined assumptions have been proposed within
this formalism. These algorithms employ a worst-case view: if the answer to a
causal question is not unique, they return that the result is not identifiable.
However, such an approach is unsuitable for many real-world systems that violate
these crucial assumptions to varying degrees. The investigator argues that it is
possible to significantly expand the applicability of causality theory by
identifying simple causal explanations in the data that are unlikely to occur by
chance. This project will extend the theory of causation to a much wider set of
real-world instances by enabling causal reasoning for most models rather than in
the worst case.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To expand the scope of the state-of-the-art
causal reasoning formalism, the investigator will develop novel algorithms that
identify information-theoretically simple explanations of the underlying causal
system from data. The first thrust seeks to develop methods to learn causal
relations from observational data via an information-theoretic interpretation of
Occam’s razor based on the entropy of the causal system. A second thrust will
analyze how information-theoretically simple explanations can help approximately
compute causal effects that are not identifiable in the worst case. A third
thrust will leverage the results of the first two thrusts to develop
experimental design algorithms for efficiently learning causal structures and
causal effects via interventions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.