* 2239498
* CAREER: Towards Low-Energy Tests of Quantum Gravity with AMO Systems
* MPS,PHY
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2028
* Igor Pikovski, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 06/30/2028
* USD 100,989.00

More than a century ago, two theories revolutionized physics: quantum theory and
Einsteinâ€™s theory of general relativity. Quantum theory describes the smallest
building blocks of nature and predicts puzzling phenomena that have been
confirmed to enormous precision on atomic scales. General relativity, on the
other hand, describes gravity as curved space and time: it governs the dynamics
of planets, galaxies and even the universe. Both theories withstood the test of
time and there is no experimental indication that either of them needs to be
revisited. Yet, both are seemingly at odds with each other, and it remains a
puzzle how to combine them into a single framework. No complete theory of
quantum gravity has yet been found. A major challenge is the scant experimental
evidence that could guide theoretical developments, as both theories are
relevant at seemingly distant scales. This project aims to tackle the problem
from a new perspective: using quantum technologies to test the interplay of
quantum theory and gravity. The new approach focuses on fundamental concepts in
quantum information science, and on new developments in the experimental control
of quantum systems that now operate at entirely new scales. The goal of the
project is to show how to test signatures of the quantum nature of gravity and
of new physics at the interface of quantum theory and gravity. While firmly
rooted in basic research with the goal to progress science in new
interdisciplinary ways, the project will also advance the development of quantum
technologies. It will involve undergraduate and K-12 students, fostering the
fascination for the most fundamental questions of nature and provide training in
quantum information science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; While quantum gravity
effects are usually associated with the distant Planck-scale, in the past decade
a new quantum information perspective has opened novel routes for possible
indirect experimental tests of expected and speculative physics. Building on
these developments and rapidly advancing experimental platforms, this project
will address current conceptual and practical challenges to enable experimental
searches for quantum gravity. The group will design new detection methods based
on AMO systems and quantum information concepts that can enable tests of quantum
gravity phenomenology at low energies. The work will focus on tests of
fundamental principles that can indirectly reveal signatures of quantization of
gravity, and on tests of speculative models that show signatures at low energies
that can be probed in near-future experiments. The project will significantly
advance this young and promising research field by providing realistic paths for
new experiments with AMO systems, overcoming current technical and conceptual
drawbacks, and support quantum technology development for basic
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.