* 2239326
* CAREER: Mining Hints from Text Documents to Guide Automated Database Performance Tuning
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Immanuel Trummer, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 03/31/2028
* USD 198,166.00

Database management systems; that is, systems that process and manage large data
sets, are used widely, across virtually all sectors of industry. Their
performance depends on a variety of tuning decisions, determining how the system
processes data internally. For lay users, it is very hard to find settings that
optimize performance. This has motivated the creation of automated database
tuning tools that try to find optimal settings for them. However, crucial
information for database tuning is often available in the form of natural
language text, including, for instance, the database manual, text documents
describing data sets, as well as discussions on database-centric Internet
forums. Currently, automated tools are unable to benefit from such text, making
them inefficient. This project aims at creating automated database tuning tools
that extract useful information for tuning from a variety of text documents. By
increasing the quality of automated tuning tools, the project empowers lay users
and reduces the need for highly specialized workers in industry, currently
causing staff shortages and hampering the adoption of new technology. At the
same time, the project aims at the creation of new teaching offerings, helping
to educate the next generation of data
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is divided into two
primary research thrusts, dedicated to the two categories of text documents that
are most useful for database system tuning: text about data sets and text about
database management systems. Transformer-based language models will be used to
extract relevant information from such text documents. The resulting insights
can be used in multiple ways for database tuning: to guide data profiling
operations prior to tuning, to refine cost models used for tuning, or to
restrict the search space of tuning choices. The project will explore all of
those options, combining insights gained from text with other sources of
information (e.g., trial runs that result in performance measurements for
specific tuning choices). The project will consider a representative set of
classical database tuning problems, including, for instance, the problem of
selecting auxiliary index data structures to optimally support data processing,
as well as the problem of finding optimal values for database system
configuration parameters. All project outcomes will be integrated into a
software package for automated database tuning, using text documents as input.
This software will be released to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.