* 2239869
* CAREER: New Frontiers in Graph Generation
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Liping Liu, Tufts University
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 03/31/2028
* USD 306,357.00

A graph is a model of many different types of connections, relationships, or
networks between different entities. It can be used to represent micro-level
objects, like molecules being recorded as bonds connecting atoms, and macro-
level networks, like social networks consisting of connections between users.
Graph structures often contain rich information and are large in scale. An
important task is to synthesize new graphs that are similar to but different
from existing ones. For example, a drug design task may require a model to
generate new molecule graphs for screening; and a data-sharing task for a social
network may need a model to synthesize and share a graph similar to the original
network, without releasing sensitive link information. This project combines
neural networks and probabilistic methods to develop tools for generating new
graphs for a wide range of tasks. These tools also have a solid statistical
foundation and help to deepen the understanding of graph
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advocate a new direction of
developing graph generative models based on discrete sequential processes—the
generative model starts from a random or trivial graph and tailors it in
multiple steps to generate a random graph. The research effort in this project
has three technical aims. First, the project will develop a probabilistic
framework for building graph generative models with neural networks. Second, the
project will overcome efficiency issues in model training and model predictions.
Third, the project will compare newly developed models with traditional random
graph models to deepen the understanding of network data. From the comparison,
new methods will also be developed to preserve private information in the
sharing of network data. Models to be developed from this project will have a
solid statistical foundation and be connected to traditional random graph
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.