* 2239750
* CAREER:  Stimuli-responsive biomaterials for wound healing and drug delivery
* MPS,DMR
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Olga Makhlynets, Syracuse University
* Continuing Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 12/31/2027
* USD 169,623.00

Non-technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Wound healing and arthritis
treatment are two areas that people care about. New classes of “smart” hydrogels
that respond to environment and change their stiffness will be developed for
removable wound dressings and arthritis treatment. This work will improve
healing outcome for millions of patients each year. In addition to practical
applications, these materials will provide tools and methods that could be used
by everyone to rationally design hydrogel materials and will contribute to
development of the wider fields of dynamic nanomaterials, drug delivery and
biosensing. The educational component integrates research efforts and several
education programs in biomaterials by 1) developing a research training program
for high school students from Syracuse City School District (SCSD); 2) providing
research training for undergraduate students that participate in Reserve Officer
Training Corps (ROTC) at Syracuse University and 3) designing an outreach model
of biomaterials for the Milton J. Rubinstein Museum of Science and Technology
(MOST) in Syracuse. Through these multi-prong outreach programs, students across
different age groups will be inclusively engaged with a particular emphasis on
training women, underrepresented minorities, and refugees. Educational programs
will not only provide a training ground for future biochemists but will also
generate valuable results to advance the research field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
proposal is to design peptide-based, smart, stimuli-responsive biocompatible
antimicrobial materials that change their stiffness in response to changes in
redox state and pH. Synergistic combination of multiple properties is critically
important because self-healing is essential for delivery of the hydrogel via a
syringe, antimicrobial properties and cytocompatibility are critical for
practical applications, and redox switching allows the removal of the gel upon
addition of a mild reductant or drug release in response to reactive oxygen
species (ROS). Toward this goal, three classes of stimuli-responsive materials
with self-healing properties will be designed: 1) redox-sensitive peptide
hydrogels; 2) pH-responsive hydrogel to deliver fibroblast cells into wound bed;
3) hydrogels that respond to both changes in pH and ROS. This work will generate
hydrogel materials for wound care and arthritis treatment and will provide tools
and methods for rational design of functional
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.