* 2239135
* CAREER: Unified sample preparation and micro-scale centrifugal heating for the next generation of portable and inexpensive molecular diagnostic platform
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2027
* Aashish Priye, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 12/31/2027
* USD 402,222.00

The recent global pandemic has exposed some of the key limitations in our
current health management system, particularly when applied in remote areas.
Existing approaches for disease assessment are highly resource-intensive, and
this introduces a considerable time lag between sample collection, diagnosis,
and implementation of countermeasures. A need, therefore, exists for inexpensive
and robust tools that can be broadly deployed to accelerate diagnosis, and
provide real-time data to better inform decision making. This CAREER project
focuses on developing a new class of simple, inexpensive, portable, and rapid
molecular diagnostic platforms with the potential for widespread deployment by
adapting a PCR-like test from dedicated laboratories to resource-limited places
where they are needed the most. It combines insights from biochemistry,
magnetism, fluid physics, and machine learning to engineer an instrument that
can reliably and quickly detect infectious diseases in human samples. The
projectâ€™s educational component integrated with the research includes the
development of molecular biology-focused education modules and a series of
interactive and explanatory YouTube videos describing scientific concepts in
biochemistry, magnetism, and fluid mechanics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the
most pressing issues facing global public health today is the lack of
accessible, affordable, and simple-to-use diagnostic technologies. The goal of
this CAREER project is to introduce several innovations towards engineering a
novel molecular diagnostics system. First, a new biophysical model will be
developed to predict Loop-Mediated Isothermal Amplification (LAMP) - a widely
popular but poorly understood nucleic acid amplification reaction. Insights from
the model will be used to thermodynamically optimize LAMP primer sets to yield
rapid amplification of pathogenic target (&lt;10 minutes) and offer fewer false
positives. Second, a new mechanism for microfluidic heating will be explored
where small fluidic volumes on spinning discs can be heated by converting some
of the disc's rotational kinetic energy into thermal energy via magnetically
induced eddy currents. Third, machine learning based image classifiers will be
developed that will enable smartphone cameras to perform real time temperature
sensing (using color sensitive dyes) and quantitative molecular assay readouts
with high reproducibility and robustness. Taken together, the resulting
molecular diagnostic platform can deliver performance comparable to that of
current generation systems while simultaneously providing an order of magnitude
reduction in turnaround time, cost, and device
complexity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.