* 2239570
* CAREER: Multilingual Learning for Event Structures from  Text
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Thien Nguyen, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Eleni Miltsakaki
* 05/31/2028
* USD 110,879.00

Natural language text is replete with important events in different areas
(protests, cybersecurity breaches, elections, disease outbreaks, and business
transactions). Identifying events to describe who did what to whom and their
relations (causal, subevent, and coreferential) from a large amount of text can
provide valuable data to support intelligent applications and data-driven
decisions over various domains. However, current event structure extraction
systems can only perform over text data for a few popular languages such as
English, Chinese, Spanish, and Arabic. Text data from many other languages in
the world thus cannot be processed by current event extraction systems. This
limitation has hindered the coverage of data sources for the systems, introduced
language biases in the extracted events, and delayed updates with latest events
in local reports. Eventually, the collected event data from current techniques
cannot comprehensively represent the latest dynamics over the world to
effectively support decision making for important problems of national
interests. To address the multilingual challenges, this project will develop
event extraction and event-event relation extraction systems that can be
effective for data in multiple languages, emphasizing on understudied and low-
resource languages to improve the coverage of extracted data and promote
democratization of technologies. In information retrieval, multilingual event
structure data from the developed technologies can enable data management
systems to quickly obtain answers and create summaries for broader user queries
in many more languages. In cybersecurity, databases for extracted cyber attack
events from multilingual sources can be used to generate more fine-grained and
comprehensive reports to inform resource allocation decisions to better protect
online activities. In socio-political science, coded conflict and meditation
events from more languages can increase the scope and reduce biases of the data
to support better decisions for foreign policy, civil war prevention,
environmental challenges, or economic strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will address three fundamental limitations of existing multilingual
learning research for event structure extraction: (i) the lack of multilingual
datasets that provide data annotation for multiple languages to sufficiently
support generalization evaluation of models across different language families,
(ii) the limitations of current multilingual representation learning methods
when aligning representations between languages to induce language-general
features, and (iii) the scarcity of labeled data in different languages to train
multilingual models. First, the project will annotate documents for all event
extraction and event-event relation extraction tasks in many more languages
using consistent schemas. The selected languages for annotation will be
typologically diverse, understudied and low-resource to provide reliable
multilingual evaluation data for the developed methods. Second, to boost cross-
lingual performance for event structure extraction, this project will devise
multilingual representation learning methods to enable effective knowledge
transfer where models trained on labeled data of high-resource languages can be
directly applied to data of other languages. The project will develop novel
representation alignment methods for different languages using representation
matching, augmentation, and language-general structure induction for text.
Third, concerning limited training data for multilingual learning, this project
will develop novel methods to automatically generate labeled data in different
languages. The project will introduce techniques to mitigate noises in the
generated data and optimize generation procedures to boost multilingual learning
and performance. The research activities in this project will be closely
integrated with education and outreach missions to broaden their
impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.