* 2239107
* CAREER: Informed Decision Making for Software Change
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Oscar Javier Chaparro Arenas, College of William and Mary
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2028
* USD 96,525.00

Software engineers continuously change source code to add new functionality and
make improvements to software systems. Unfortunately, during this process,
engineers often make code changes that increase software defects, unintended
system behavior, and code deterioration. Low-quality code changes have
significant consequences for end-users, organizations, and society, as they
create excessive costs in software development, operation, and maintenance. In
fact, in 2020, the estimated cost of low-quality software in the United States
was two trillion dollars. A crucial cause for low-quality code changes is the
fact that software engineers often have insufficient knowledge about the code,
which leads them to make poor decisions on how to correctly change it. Obtaining
such knowledge is extremely challenging, in part because documented code-related
information is unstructured, fragmented, and scattered across various software
artifacts/repositories without explicit traceability relationships among them.
To address these fundamental challenges, this project will process and manage
code change decisions documented in software artifacts/repositories to assist
engineers in making informed decisions on how to correctly change source code.
The premise that guides this project, supported by prior research results, is
that documented code change decisions contain valuable code-related knowledge
that can inform software engineers in designing and implementing code changes
that meet software requirements and minimize the introduction of defects,
unintended system behavior, and code deterioration. This project will produce a
novel theory of decision-making for code change, as well as novel techniques and
interactive/integrated tool support to better capture, trace, and recommend code
change decision information, useful to design and implement high-quality code
changes. The results of this project will allow software engineers to easily
capture and manage their decisions in software artifacts while they are solving
new feature/enhancement requests and defect reports. Additionally, engineers
will better learn from prior decisions to produce software that is less faulty
and easier to maintain. Organizations and society will benefit from software
systems that support their business processes more effectively, leading to lower
costs in software development, operation, and maintenance.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project is centered on three goals. First, it will develop a
theory of code change decisions that will document: (i) strategies and patterns
of code change decision-making, (ii) factors that make adequate and poor code
change decisions, and (iii) actionable guidelines on how software engineers
should make/reuse code change decisions to solve new problems. Second, it will
design and develop novel automated techniques and interactive tool support for
capturing and tracing information elements of code change decisions, while
engineers document code-related knowledge in various software artifacts. Third,
it will design and develop novel automated techniques and interactive tool
support to inform engineers about: (i) the reasons why past code changes were
made, (ii) past code change decisions relevant to solve a new feature/enhance
request or defect report, and (iii) evidence of the impact that past decisions
had on code quality and defect introduction. The proposed theory and techniques
will be developed through cross-cutting research on empirical software
engineering, automated text analysis, machine/deep learning, information
retrieval, and human-computer interaction. The project aims to educate the next
generation of software engineers with a strong foundation and skills to build
and evolve high-quality software. Students at all scholarly levels will learn
about code change decisions and the way these can be used to effectively build
and maintain software. The project will create reusable educational course
packages, integrate research tools into course projects, organize community-
building and outreach events, and recruit/retain students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.