* 2239556
* CAREER: Chemoselective Functionalization of Strong C-O, C-F and C-H Bonds Using Boron Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Florence Williams, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 06/30/2028
* USD 369,578.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry
and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), Florence
Williams of the University of Iowa is studying the ability of simple boron-
containing reagents to deconstruct chemical compounds in useful ways to create
value-added materials and/or to tackle contemporary environmental challenges.
The research focuses on cleavage of chemical bonds that are ubiquitous in types
of materials commonly used in medicine, agriculture, engineering, and commerce.
During the course of these transformations, the key boron reagents are
themselves degraded into innocuous boric acid – a low toxicity chemical found in
household products such as laundry detergent. The methodology developed will be
evaluated in a variety of important contexts, including: (1) for the controlled
deconstruction (depolymerization) of epoxy resin plastics, which are not
currently recycled, and (2) for the breakdown of per- and poly-fluoroalkyl
substances (PFAS), which have arisen as persistent pollutants that cause
significant health concerns. In addition to offering anticipated technological
advancements in the areas of plastics recycling and PFAS remediation, the
broader impacts of the funded project extend to the benefits accrued to society
as Dr. Williams and her coworkers engage in a variety of activities to improve
access to chemical education and to enhance the diversity, equity, and inclusion
landscape at the University of Iowa. For example, continued development of a
widely available smart phone-based app to facilitate undergraduate student
learning in introductory organic chemistry courses is in progress and Dr.
Williams is spearheading the creation of an American Chemical Society Women
Chemist's Committee (ACS WCC) chapter at her institution. Taken together, these
initiatives are anticipated to make the science of chemistry more accessible and
inclusive to a diverse population of students and to increase general engagement
in important organic chemistry-related topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this
award, the Williams team at the University of Iowa will focus on the development
of boron-mediated reactions for the functionalization of traditionally inert
C–O, C¬–F, and C–H bonds and the demonstration and evaluation of these processes
in complex molecular settings. The work builds on insights gained from earlier
findings of the Williams laboratory which revealed the tunability of boron
trihalide-mediated C–F and C–O bond cleavage reactions and successful
application of the latter to lignocellulose polymer separation. New research is
designed to expand understanding of the key parameters driving chemoselectivity
in both C–F and C–O cleavage contexts, to explore novel (radical-based)
mechanisms of reactivity that expand into C–H functionalization, and to evaluate
the potential of these reactions for the aforementioned degradation of PFAS and
epoxy resin plastics. A design of experiments (DoE) approach will be employed to
reveal mechanistic and operational nuances not previously appreciated for the
chemo- and regio-selective cleavage of ethereal bonds. Finally, it is noted that
undergraduate and graduate students working on the funded project will receive
educational and experimental training preparing them to make significant future
contributions to the Nation's STEM (science, technology, engineering and
mathematics) workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.