* 2239067
* CAREER: Ethnic-racial discrimination influences on neural representation of threat learning in Latina girls: A multivariate modeling approach
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Kalina Michalska, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Leher Singh
* 03/31/2028
* USD 79,566.00

Children and adults of Mexican descent in the United States are often exposed to
discrimination. Discrimination has negative effects on many physical and mental
health outcomes, including stress and anxiety. About one third of teen girls are
affected by stress and anxiety, and rates among Latina teens in particular have
risen over the last few years. However, we know little about how mental health
problems like anxiety increase over that time and whether they do so by
affecting brain development. Latina girls experience many forms of unfair
treatment based on race, family and cultural characteristics, and gender, and
are therefore at risk for experiencing stress and anxiety. This study examines
whether repeated exposure to unfair treatment during the early teenage years
affects how Latina girls learn to distinguish threat from safety, and how
parents can play a role in protecting their daughters from the harmful effects
of discrimination. The transition between childhood and the early teenage years
is an especially important period to study as brain regions related to threat
and safety learning are still developing. This study is among the first to
include new methods that allow us to compare children’s brain patterns when they
view different social and emotional scenes. By using these new methods over
time, this research examines how repeated discrimination can affect brain
function and lead to anxiety, stress, and feelings of lack of safety. We focus
on the unique experiences of Latina girls growing up in Southern California and
their parents, who are shaped by their cultural identities and their experiences
of discrimination. Doing so leads to a better understanding of community health
and brain development, and it informs more effective practices and policies that
address the needs of families across the region and the country.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ethnic-racial discrimination—defined as differential
treatment of individuals on the grounds of ethnic or racial group membership, is
a salient reality and threat for minoritized youth. The immigration policy
contexts and the discourse around it has heightened Latinxs’ experiences with
ethnic-racial discrimination and an overwhelming majority of Latinx individuals
report being subjected to unfair treatment based on their ethnic background.
When a child experiences ethnic-racial discrimination, the brain identifies it
as a stressor requiring immediate response, but over time, it also becomes a
learned process that creates anticipation and heightened threat vigilance
towards possible future exposures. For minoritized youth, little is known about
how mental health problems like anxiety accumulate over that time and whether
they do so by altering trajectories of brain development. A nascent literature
has shown that Latina girls, specifically, demonstrate higher rates of untreated
anxiety diagnoses relative to other racial and ethnic groups. The goal of this
longitudinal study is to examine neurobiological pathways through which
cumulative experiences of ethnic-racial discrimination may be associated with
integrity of brain networks that detect and regulate threat responses in Latina
girls. We use latent change score models to identify perceptual and emotional
contributions to threat and safety learning in Mexican-identifying Latina girls
during late middle childhood and early adolescence via behavior and multivariate
neuroimaging, and examine the independent and interactive influence of ethnic-
racial discrimination experiences and parental socialization on neural
signatures of heightened threat vigilance and overgeneralization—the inaccurate
classification of safe stimuli as threatening. The novel conceptualization of
threat and safety learning posits that maintaining flexible distinctions between
threat and safety without inappropriately attributing threats to non-harmful
stimuli, depends on safety representations not only in previously identified
emotion neurocircuitry, but also in higher-order visual areas, affecting how a
child perceives her environment. The model also specifies the influence of
ethnic-racial discrimination experiences on girls’ neural representations of
threat and safety. Understanding how such experiences affect representations of
threat and safety is a crucial next step for the science of threat learning in
childhood, particularly in this underrepresented
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.