* 2239771
* CAREER: Learning for Real-Time Embedded Optimization
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Bartolomeo Stellato, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 05/31/2028
* USD 400,000.00

In todayâ€™s constantly changing world, cyber-physical systems must be able to
safely react to changing conditions and unexpected disruptions by making high-
quality decisions in real-time. Mathematical optimization offers a powerful and
flexible tool to formulate and solve decision-making problems, with numerous
applications in engineering, computer science, and operations research. However,
applying optimization to real-time decision-making has always been limited by
two fundamental challenges: ensuring robustness to uncertain problem parameters
(e.g., energy demand, obstacle positions); and ensuring real-time algorithm
convergence on embedded platforms with limited computational resources (e.g.,
embedded microcontrollers). This project seeks to address these challenges using
machine learning to develop the next-generation real-time optimization tools to
safely control cyber-physical systems. These results will lead to open-source
software for embedded optimization, which will ease their application in a wide
range of engineering disciplines (e.g., energy, transportation, and autonomous
systems) where real-time optimization is considered too computationally
expensive and unreliable.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research outcomes of this
project will be integrated into a synergistic education plan to train future
engineers by promoting optimization and computational thinking. These
initiatives include the development of new learning units for undergraduate and
graduate core courses in optimization; a new biennial workshop for graduate
students on learning, decision, and control; and a new student-created
podcast.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve these results, we will exploit the
repetitive nature of real-time decision-making. In practical scenarios, we solve
the same optimization problem repeatedly with different data. For example,
control systems update the input actions as sensor signals (e.g., system state)
and goals (e.g., desired trajectory) vary. The key insight of this project is to
exploit this structure to develop specialized data-driven optimization tools
that are reliable and efficient. (i) We will learn data-driven problem
formulations with constraint satisfaction guarantees for decision-making under
uncertainty. (ii) We will develop data-driven tools to design and numerically
verify real-time optimization algorithms, with tight convergence guarantees. The
embedded optimization techniques developed in this research will be validated
through extensive real-world experiments on real-time embedded platforms for
space exploration and unmanned aerial vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.