* 2239675
* CAREER: Wearable opto-electronic sensor for quantitative, noninvasive imaging of cerebral blood flow in humans
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Ashwin Parthasarathy, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 04/30/2028
* USD 411,269.00

The human brain receives up to 20% of the body's blood supply, despite
accounting for only 2% of the human body's mass; a true testament to the vital
function that it provides. Nevertheless, blood flow to the brain is tightly
controlled by a mechanism called autoregulation, because even momentary
disruptions in blood flow can lead to strokes, while excess blood flow can
result in brain bleeds. Due to this critical role, quantitative measurements of
autoregulation and brain blood flow can be used to detect brain injuries,
monitor treatment, and even predict recovery. Unfortunately, there is currently
no portable, easy-to-use instrument that physicians can use to quantitatively
and continuously image brain blood flow at a patient's bedside. To address this
technology gap, this project will develop the first wearable optical imaging
instrument for bedside, noninvasive imaging of brain blood flow and
autoregulation dynamics in humans. In addition to helping clinicians manage
brain injuries, this imaging instrument will improve our understanding of
critical brain function and will help identify undiagnosed local brain injuries.
The educational and outreach goal of this project is to develop and distribute
modular electronic-lego kits that will foster fun, experiential learning of
electronic design for all ages. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cerebrovascular
autoregulation (CVAR) is an important homeostatic mechanism that controls
cerebral blood flow (CBF) during changes in arterial blood pressure and
metabolic demand. Since disruption of this autonomic process is strongly
indicative of disease, quantitative measurements of CVAR dynamics are functional
biomarkers for brain injuries including ischemic strokes, traumatic brain
injuries and Alzheimer's disease. Unfortunately, the state of current clinical
monitoring is limited to CBF measurements at a few locations in the head,
forcing CVAR metrics to be characterized as a single global number that ignores
spatial distributions, potentially leading to undiagnosed local injuries. To
address this technical limitation, this project will develop new portable
optical technology to quantitatively measure cerebral blood flow with Diffuse
Correlation Spectroscopy (DCS). Specifically, (1) this project will build the
world's first wearable optical device for quantitative monitoring blood flow,
featuring technical innovations that dramatically shrink the footprint of a DCS
blood flow monitor from a large briefcase to a 1 sq. in. optical probe. (2) The
project will then adapt this wearable blood flow sensor for use over the entire
human head for non-invasive imaging of cerebral blood flow (CBF) in humans.
Rigorous experiments will be conducted on tissue-simulating phantoms, and in
humans, to characterize the accuracy, sensitivity, and noise performance of the
CBF imager. The devices developed in this project are unique for the broader
neuroimaging community. With appropriate dissemination and commercialization of
this technology, this first-of-its kind CBF imager can help a broad cohort of
researchers who study the brain including neurologists, neuroscientists,
phycologists, and behavioral scientists, and can also be adapted for other
tissue types.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal was co-funded by the Division of
Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental, and Transport Systems (CBET) in the
Directorate of Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.