* 2239527
* NSF-BSF: AF: Small: Parameter-Free Stochastic Optimization via Trajectory Cues
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Oliver Hinder, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 04/30/2026
* USD 452,694.00

Machine learning has been extremely successful at enabling computers to learn
from data to perform image annotation, speech recognition, and language
translation. Despite this success, many potential applications remain untapped.
One major barrier to more widespread adoption of machine learning is that
machine learning methods must be manually tuned to each new learning task. This
tuning requires high levels of both computational resources and user skill,
which excludes many potential machine learning users. Furthermore, even leading
machine learning practitioners make costly tuning mistakes. This project aims to
make the tuning process simpler and more computationally
efficient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on eliminating parameter
tuning from the stochastic optimization algorithms that power machine learning.
Toward this goal, two novel strategies will be employed. First, instead of using
online-to-batch conversion, a standard technique in stochastic optimization,
this project will develop algorithms for noiseless optimization and then lift
them to the stochastic setting via powerful time-uniform concentration of
measure results. Second, the project will develop algorithms based on trajectory
cues: quantities directly observable from the optimization trajectory (such as
the distance between iterates and the initial point) that serve as stand-ins for
unknown problem parameters. These two new strategies will enable this project to
tackle outstanding theoretical problems in parameter-free optimization and
design practical algorithms that reduce the burden of parameter tuning. The
project will also examine parameter-free methods for particular problem classes
such as deep learning. All software resulting from this research will be open
source. Algorithms from this project will be integrated into optimization and
machine learning curricula at both the undergraduate and graduate
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.