* 2239695
* CAREER: Towards Keepsake Technologies to Support Intergenerational Family Memory Practices
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Jasmine Jones, Berea College
* Continuing Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 07/31/2028
* USD 73,408.00

This project will contribute conceptual, technical, and empirical insights to
the social study of ubiquitous computing technology related to family memory. A
popular application of digital media technologies is for reminiscing and sharing
memories with others, especially in families trying to pass memories down across
generations. An emerging class of systems, "keepsake technologies," integrate
interactivity with digital mementos into physical objects to blend seamlessly
into family life. Devices range from interactive souvenir boxes to augmented
memorial photo altars for deceased family members. Such technologies can provide
accessible and engaging ways for generations in a family to tell stories about
the family, preserving important history and heritage even across distance and
time. Understanding how technologies shape memory practices is especially
critical to supporting families that could use these systems to preserve
important cultural heritage, such as the cultural minorities in the Appalachian
region, where this research takes place. Teams of undergraduate researchers from
Appalachia will be deeply involved in this research, learning and practicing
culturally situated design methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research starts
with a literature review of the field, identifying keepsake technologies and
characterizing their design. Next, it will develop keepsake technology exemplars
inspired by speculative design concepts in the human-centered computing, design,
and ubiquitous computing literatures. These exemplars will be used in field
studies to explore how keepsake technologies mediate family social interactions
around stories about the past, as well as the content of the story itself. To
address gaps in the literature, participatory speculative design workshops with
community members will generate ideas for technologies for currently unsupported
family storytelling practices. The outcomes of this work will be (1) a
theoretical framework characterizing design approaches of keepsake technologies,
(2) design exemplars of keepsake technologies that support family storytelling
with digital mementos, and (3) design implications for culturally sensitive
design of ubiquitous computing technologies for family social
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.