* 2239362
* CAREER: Decomposition, duality and Picard groups in chromatic homotopy theory
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Irina Bobkova, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 08/31/2028
* USD 57,031.00

This CAREER award supports research in algebraic topology: an area of
mathematics which studies geometric objects through the lens of algebra. Namely,
it classifies geometric shapes by assigning to them various algebraic
invariants, such as numbers. These tools are very powerful for studying
geometric objects in spaces of larger dimensions that we can not easily picture,
for example, the high dimensional analogues of spheres. The PI's work involves
using and developing tools from algebraic topology for describing phenomena that
arise when we consider continuous maps between large dimensional spheres. The
educational component of the project is centered around creating a series of
annual conferences with the goal of building a topology community in the South
Central region and providing mentoring and networking opportunities for junior
mathematicians from this region. The PI will also develop and run an enrichment
program in mathematics for high school students and lead a research team in a
Women in Topology workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chromatic homotopy theory is a
conceptual and computational framework for understanding the stable homotopy
category through the Lubin–Tate theory of deformations of formal group laws. It
is a key tool for stable homotopy theory, both for calculations and for
organizing the search for large scale phenomena. The PI will investigate several
projects related to duality and invertibility in chromatic homotopy theory. More
specifically, the PI will study Spanier-Whitehead and Gross-Hopkins duality in
this setting, particularly as applied to the spectrum of topological modular
forms and other important spectra in the K(2)-local category. The second part of
the project focuses on invertibility phenomena which are closely intertwined
with duality. The PI will investigate the Picard groups of K(n)-local categories
of particular interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.