* 2239428
* CAREER: Enhancing probiotic yeast colonization for stable in situ biomanufacturing
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2027
* Nathan Crook, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Steve Zehnder
* 12/31/2027
* USD 474,861.00

Treating gut disease is difficult because the body digests many therapies before
they reach their target. Probiotic yeast can produce many therapeutics for the
gut, but this yeast does not live for a long time in the body. To solve this
problem, this Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) project will
explore strategies to improve the ability of genetically engineered probiotics
to reside in the gut. Yeast will be engineered to attach to and eat the slimy,
sugar-rich mucus that line the intestines. New courses will be developed to
train students in skills for microbial engineering. High school students will
have the opportunity to evolve probiotics for faster growth and learn about
evolution and genetics while doing so. Undergraduates will learn how to
bioprospect for new genes via a new lab course developed in partnership with the
NCSU Biotechnology Program (BIT). Taken together, this work will advance the
ability to deliver medicines to the gut and will enhance the education of
underrepresented high schoolers and undergraduates in North
Carolina.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;S. boulardii (Sb) is a widely available probiotic
with generally-regarded-as-safe status. It is unique in that it is the only
probiotic yeast (or even eukaryote), and so brings with it a unique set of
advantages for in situ biomanufacturing. Both its high secretion rate and
sensing ability have been used to generate promising live therapeutics. However,
prior reports have indicated that Sb does not colonize the human or rat
intestine for longer than one week. There are two nonexclusive strategies that
commensal microbes use to colonize the gut. One is to adhere to intestinal
walls, and a second strategy is to utilize gut nutrients. This work will explore
both strategies for enhancement of Sb colonization, testing the hypothesis that
increasing Sb’s adherence to mucus, as well as its ability to metabolize mucus
glycans, would improve its residence time. Beyond these research objectives, the
strong signatures of adaptive evolution observed in the gut for Sb and other
probiotics have also inspired the development of an outreach module for local
high schools, as well as an undergraduate laboratory course harnessing
horizontal gene transfer for biotech applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.