* 2239963
* CAREER: Uncovering transcriptional regulatory mechanisms in plant thermomorphogenesis
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2028
* YONGJIAN QIU, University of Mississippi
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 02/29/2028
* USD 600,000.00

In the context of global climate change, plants face a more fluctuating
temperature environment. It is well known that extreme temperatures such as
heatwaves have detrimental impacts on crop production and biodiversity. However,
even smaller increases in ambient temperatures would dramatically change the
growth and development of various plant species. These temperature-induced
changes in the growth speed of organs (e.g., stem and roots), biomass, flowering
time, the rate of photosynthesis, and the efficiency of water usage, significant
impact crop yield and fitness. However, the precise mechanisms by which plants
sense and respond to moderately increased, nonstressful (warm) temperatures are
still unclear. The long-term goal of the proposed project is to elucidate the
regulatory mechanisms by which warm temperatures trigger the expression of
critical genes whose products contribute to the morphological and architectural
changes in land plants. To achieve this goal, innovative technologies have been
developed or adapted to examine the spatiotemporal functions and structure-
function relationships of critical transcriptional regulators and their co-
factors in thermosensory growth. Understanding these mechanisms is crucial for
us to design and breed climate-resilient crops, potentially reducing the adverse
effects of global warming on crop productivity and food security. The success of
the project will also help train next-generation scientists from high school to
graduate levels in performing cutting-edge research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Different from the stress responses triggered by extreme
temperatures, plant responses to nonstressful ambient temperature fluctuations
require unique machinery. Among the discovered components, thermosensory
transcription factors (TTFs) play primary roles in warm-temperature-induced
hypocotyl (embryonic stem) growth, a process termed thermomorphogenesis. Among
the identified TTF families, PIF4 plays a pivotal role in modulating
thermomorphogenetic growth. Warm temperatures activate PIF4 transcription
through a yet unknown mechanism, and accumulated PIF4 promotes hypocotyl growth
by activating key genes involved in the biosynthesis of and response to the
growth hormone auxin. The PI discovered HEMERA (HMR) as a coactivator of PIF4 in
activating the thermoresponsive gene expression. Although HMR is required for
PIF4 activity and protein stability at warm temperatures, how these regulations
are achieved remains elusive. Through forward and reverse genetic approaches and
bioinformatic analyses, the PIâ€™s group has identified multiple factors that may
regulate PIF4 expression, activity, and protein stability upon temperature
elevations. The proposed research will uncover PIF4-mediated thermomorphogenetic
mechanisms and transcriptional regulatory networks formed by PIF4 and other TTF
families. The integrated educational plan will improve STEM preparedness at the
University of Mississippi and across the state of Mississippi and includes
efforts to 1) enhance undergraduate and graduate education in plant molecular
genetics and physiology at UM; 2) develop a plant phenomics and molecular
genetics summer research program for underrepresented minority students at UM
and HBCUs; 3) develop a plant molecular biology summer research program for high
school and community college students with disadvantaged
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.