* 2239735
* CAREER: Torsional Quantum Optomechanics
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Dalziel Wilson, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew McCune
* 08/31/2028
* USD 405,665.00

High-Q nanomechanical resonators are the building blocks of quantum
optomechanics experiments, enabling the use of light to probe and manipulate
mechanical motion at the quantum limit. This project will explore a new
landscape in quantum optomechanics opened by the recent discovery of ultra-
high-Q torsion nanoresonators, addressing both fundamental and applied research
opportunities. A key goal is to start a dialogue between Quantum Imaging and
Quantum Optomechanics fields which share common interests but have developed in
parallel as subfields of Quantum Photonics and Quantum Optics. Another goal is
to extend nanomechanical sensing to gravimetry, giving access to broad
applications from inertial navigation to subterranean imaging. In addition to
research, the principal investigator will develop a laboratory course for the
Quantum Information Science and Engineering masterâ€™s program at University of
Arizona. Spanning techniques from single-photon detection to dilution
refrigeration, the course will answer a growing demand for hands-on experience
in the quantum workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program has three
thrusts, each based on reflecting a laser field from a strained silicon nitride
nanoribbon possessing high Q torsion modes. First, a new field of imaging-based
quantum optomechanics will be explored, with traditional interferometric
measurement replaced by laser deflectometry (the optical lever method). A key
goal is to observe radiation pressure shot noise in torque and study its
influence on the quantum state of the reflected light field. Second, a compact
pendulum gravimeter will be developed based on frequency tracking of a mass-
loaded nanoribbon. The goal is a self-calibrated gravimeter with nano-g
sensitivity in a chip-scale, arrayable format. Third, using advanced engineering
techniques, nanoribbons with torsional quality factors exceeding 1 billion will
be developed. Combined with quantum-limited deflectometry, an attempt will be
made to ground state cool a nanomechanical oscillator from room temperature, of
interest for both quantum technology and as a teaching
tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.