* 2239334
* CAREER: Accelerating General-Purpose Encrypted Computation on Diverse Hardware
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Nektarios Tsoutsos, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 06/30/2028
* USD 110,724.00

In recent years, cloud computing has risen to unparalleled societal importance,
as it enables a broad range of applications, including healthcare services,
social media, banking and electronic commerce. As a result, cloud services have
access to the digital data of millions of users and become a lucrative target
for criminals and cyberattacks. Sensitive data are stolen from cloud servers,
incurring significant financial losses to those impacted. To address the
shortcomings of current protection technologies in cloud computing, this project
employs advanced cryptography and introduces new privacy protections that allow
data to remain secure even when the cloud service is compromised. The project's
novelties are in the judicious design of computers that can understand and
process encrypted information such that, even if data are stolen or under
attack, they will be incomprehensible to the attacker. The project's broader
significance and importance is in addressing the urgent need of the cloud
computing industry to mitigate the impact of cyberattacks and to protect the
privacy of users, which is aligned with the mission of the National Science
Foundation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The key observation in this project is that
data are immune to leakage threats as long as they remain encrypted at all
times, including during processing. Towards that end, the investigator employs a
special form of encryption, called Fully Homomorphic Encryption, to protect
general-purpose computation using diverse hardware platforms such as graphics
processing units. Specifically, this project defines imperative models of
computation that improve the programmability of encrypted data processing,
without sacrificing execution performance. These models are complemented with
real-life applications such as privacy-preserving machine learning and data
mining that harness the power of encrypted computation. The results of this
project are integrated with educational activities, including web-based learning
environments and cybersecurity competitions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.