* 2239175
* CAREER: Combining Machine Learning and Physics-based Modeling Approaches for Accelerating Scientific Discovery
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Xiaowei Jia, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2028
* USD 202,193.00

Recent advances in machine learning make it possible to capture spatial and
temporal dependencies from complex data, leading to tremendous success in
several commercial applications where large-scale data are available. Given
their success in commercial domains, machine-learning models are beginning to
play an important role in advancing scientific discovery in diverse scientific
domains, which are traditionally dominated by physics-based models. The use of
machine-learning models is especially promising when relevant physical processes
are not completely understood by our current body of knowledge due to the
inherent complexity of the underlying phenomenon. However, the direct
application of machine-learning models has met with limited success in real-
world scientific applications, given that the data sets available for many
scientific problems are far smaller than what is needed to effectively train
advanced machine-learning models. Recently, there is a growing interest in
combining machine learning and physical knowledge for studying scientific
problems. Existing methods on this topic have shown promising results in
isolated experiments, but they remain limited in real-world scientific
applications with scarce training data, data variability, and incomplete or
approximate physical information. The goal of this project is to systematically
explore ways to combine machine-learning models and existing physics-based
modeling approaches in a synergistic manner to model complex, non-stationary,
and spatio-temporal processes for scientific problems.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to explore a deep coupling of
machine learning and physics-based models for modeling physical systems via four
innovations. First, a new knowledge-guided machine-learning architecture will be
built for capturing complex dynamics and interactions amongst physical
variables, which helps improve the model prediction and generalizability.
Second, new data-driven inverse models will be investigated for the discovery of
physical parameters, which aids in improving the performance of physics-based
models. Third, new model pre-training strategies will be developed to enable
knowledge-guided machine-learning algorithms to work effectively even with a
small number of observations. These pre-training strategies will leverage
simulated data sets generated by physics-based models. New techniques will also
be proposed to guide the configuration of physics-based models with the aim to
create new simulated data sets for improving the pre-training effectiveness.
Finally, new meta-learning approaches will be created for adapting the
knowledge-guided machine-learning model over space and time. The proposed
methods will leverage physical knowledge to estimate the similarity amongst
different physical systems and facilitate model
adaptation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.