* 2239056
* CAREER:  Mechanotransduction, transcription, and alternative splicing in cell biology
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Jimena Giudice, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 03/31/2028
* USD 340,000.00

Skeletal muscle functions through contraction and the contractile apparatus
transduces force both across muscle cells and within cells from the nucleus to
the plasma membrane via mechanotransduction. Nuclei in muscle cells are exposed
to tissue mechanics and to cytoplasmic forces promoted by contraction and
relaxation. Within nuclei, genes are transcribed into pre-mRNAs that are
processed into mRNAs, which are transported to the cytoplasm and translated into
proteins. Pre-mRNAs can be processed in alternative ways: alternative splicing
allows single genes to produce more than one transcript by inclusion or
exclusion of specific regions. This project will study the relationships between
alternative splicing and mechanical forces experienced by cells that modulate
cellular response. The project will also advance STEM education and diversity by
providing cross-disciplinary, mentored training opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students, and a postdoctoral associate, and by offering science
laboratory workshops (for children aged 6-10) and career discussion panels (for
high school students) in underserved communities of a developing
country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Skeletal muscle development is driven by both
molecular programs and mechanical forces. How mechanical stimuli control
transcriptional programs and RNA processing mechanisms is a fundamental question
in muscle biology. This project addresses the overarching hypothesis that
mechanical forces activate specific pathways that turn on/off certain
transcription factors and RNA binding proteins (RBPs) that ultimately control
the expression of mechanosensitive genes and splice isoforms in muscle cells.
The research will first define in an unbiased manner the signaling pathways that
respond to mechanical stretching (Aim 1), then take a candidate approach to
elucidate how a mechanosensitive transcription factor regulates gene expression
programs (Aim 2), and finally examine how the circuit controlled by arginine-
rich (SR) proteins and the CLK1 kinase senses mechanical forces in muscle cells
(Aim 3). The outcomes are expected to advance understanding of molecular
mechanisms underlying muscle response to physical forces, with implications for
human and non-human health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.