* 2239302
* CAREER: Enhancing GaN-on-Si high electron mobility transistor technology for high frequency and high power applications
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2028
* Yuping Zeng, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 07/31/2028
* USD 396,402.00

This project is jointly funded by the Electrical, Communications and Cyber
Systems (ECCS) and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR). GaN electronics attract much interest as the potential candidate to
replace silicon electronics in a wide range of applications: spanning from 5G
commercial wireless infrastructure, electronic warfare, and communications
applications to consumer electronics, data centers, electric vehicles,
electricity grid, and renewable energy systems. The GaN electronics can be built
on various kinds of substrates (i.e. Si and SiC), in which the GaN-on-Si seems
to be the most promising technology due to its low cost and large scale
capability. However, the GaN-on-Si technology is still premature and is inferior
to the GaN-on-SiC technology. A deep understanding of the real reasons for
impeding its performance is indispensable. This proposal aims to provide
insights to understand the fundamental problems of GaN-on-Si technology and
develop the ability to enhance its performance. The successful implementation of
this work is expected to revolutionize the GaN-on-Si high electron mobility
transistor technology, which can be applied to high frequency and high power
electronic systems. What integrated into the research activities is a broad
scope of educational and outreach efforts including educating young people with
emerging device technology for miniaturization, integration and improved
efficiency, developing new courses and internships, interacting with industry
and disseminating K-12 Lithokit, which are beneficial for workforce development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work addressing a number of fabrication
process challenges facing GaN-on-Si technology that, if successful, will result
in performance enhancement for both high frequency and high power applications.
Specifically, through a novel self-aligned T-shaped gate process, we expect to
revolutionize GaN-on-Si technology by enhancing its RF performance fT/fMAX to
values comparable to its GaN-on-SiC counterpart and its power performance close
to its theoretical limit. The innovative self-aligned T-shape gate process where
the T-foot length and stem height can be used to downscale the gate length and
minimize the parasitic capacitance for improved RF performance and the T-head
can be adopted as the field plate to enhance device power performance. In
addition, the developed gate dielectrics and field plate technology can be
further extended to other transistors for power applications. The developed
material and device parameters are of great value to all other GaN-related
devices. The proposed research will not only advance the basic science and
technology of the GaN-on-Si HEMTs, but also set an example for the investigation
of the physical and chemical understanding of the relationship between material
surface and interface properties and fabrication process and provide a deeper
understanding of the relationship between the fabrication process and device
performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The courses developed from this program will
educate young people with emerging device technology for miniaturization,
integration and improved efficiency, which is one of the NSF’s desired societal
impacts. The new courses, internships, interactions with industry, and K-12
“Lithokit” will increase the audience exposed to the device field, and help
expand the workforce. In addition, through the collaborative industry programs,
the potential to commercialize this technology has already attracted industry
professionals, which will greatly impact semiconductor companies that fabricate
chips.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.