* 2239734
* CAREER: Bicrystallography-informed Mechanics of Two-dimensional Heterointerfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Nikhil Chandra Admal, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 01/31/2028
* USD 607,792.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award will support research to
explore how strain can be used to study the structural response of
heterointerfaces for the design and synthesis of atomically thin two-dimensional
materials systems. Heterostructures formed by stacking distinct two-dimensional
materials demonstrate exceptional mechanical and electronic properties, such as
superlubricity, high strain tolerance, and correlated electronic physics. These
properties originate from the van der Waals interactions at the heterointerfaces
formed by the two-dimensional materials. A fundamental feature that dictates the
structural response of a heterointerface is the degree of incommensurability or
incompatibility between the atomic lattices that form it. However, the problem
of quantifying incommensurability and its effect on the structural response
remains a fundamental open question, which will be explored in this project. The
success of this study will lead to a theoretical and computational framework to
strain engineer two-dimensional materials systems for applications such as next
generation nanolubricants and electronic and optoelectronic devices. On the
education and outreach front, the project will develop transdisciplinary STEAM
activities wherein Art and Science complement each other. These activities will
involve working directly with undergraduate and high school students and
collaborating with high school teachers to develop learning modules centered
around the science and art behind overlapping two-dimensional atomic lattices.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dominant influence of bicrystallography on the design,
synthesis, and transfer of two-dimensional materials systems and the ability to
control the local microstructure using strain applied at the macroscale motivate
this project's goal: to realize the full potential of strain engineering as a
route to modulate the atomic reconstruction in heterointerfaces for functional
performance gains. The objective is to completely characterize the response of
heterointerfaces to temperature and shear and normal forces in terms of the
interface's microstructure. This study will develop a unified framework wherein
bicrystallography takes center stage to explore how a structural response to
incommensurability manifests in interfacial dislocation behavior.
Bicrystallography will be examined using algebraic tools like the Smith normal
form to reveal the translational symmetry of the heterointerfaces and
characterize their interface dislocations. Strain and substrate engineering will
be realized by the modeling of interface dislocations and substrate lattice
steps at the continuum and mesoscale. The outcome will lead to a new
understanding of how structural properties emerge from van der Waals
interactions and pave the way for a systematic design and large-scale synthesis
of heterostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.