* 2239110
* CAREER: Unifying Neuroscience and Biomechanics Paradigms for Modeling Brain and Muscle Responses to Mechanical Impacts
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Suman Chowdhury, Texas Tech University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 08/31/2028
* USD 470,681.00

Traumatic brain injury (TBI) remains a growing public health concern, with an
annual prevalence of about 1.7 million cases and a yearly cost of about $40.6
billion in the United States alone. Despite an extensive body of work on TBI in
biomechanics and neuroscience domains, there is still much progress to be made
to advance the knowledge of TBI mechanics and associated motor impairments. In
particular, fundamental knowledge of how and to what extent mechanical force
impacts brain neuronal activity and, in turn, how and to what extent brain
impairment affects neck muscle responses remains unknown. Therefore, this
Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) project seeks to develop a
breakthrough computational framework that can mimic realistic brain-muscle
activation dynamics and support discovering fundamental knowledge about TBI
mechanics and associated interventions. This research requires methods and
knowledge from various disciplines, including neuroscience, biomechanics, human
factors, and control engineering, thus impacting the convergence of engineering
and medicine. The project’s synergistic education and outreach activities
outline a plan to strengthen the interdisciplinary field of neuro-biomechanics
in bioengineering, industrial engineering, mechanical engineering, and chemical
engineering through course development, involvement of graduate and
undergraduate students in the research activities, and K-12 outreach activities.
In addition, the outreach through webinars and video blogging will enhance
scientific literacy levels about TBI among broad audiences, including first
responders and TBI patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator’s long-term
goal is to discover the fundamental relationship between brain multiphysics and
neuromuscular dynamics in order to develop engineering technologies (i.e.,
helmet technologies, neuroprosthetics, etc.) and therapeutic interventions
(e.g., TBI-focused rehabilitation, surgical treatments, etc.) to reduce TBI in
sports, workplaces, and daily activities. In pursuit of this vision, this
project will provide a Brain-Muscle-Interaction framework, called BMI-frame, a
closed-loop framework composed of multiscale brain neuronal models, head-neck
finite-element (FE) structures, proportional-integral-derivative (PID)
algorithms, and neural network (NN) agents. This objective will be accomplished
through three specific tasks: 1) investigate the effects of mechanical impacts
on brain neuronal signals, 2) identify NN agents to predict brain and muscle PID
gain parameters, and 3) characterize brain and muscle responses to mechanical
impacts. Task 1 focuses on developing and validating brain electromechanical
models to understand brain neuronal response to various (sub) traumatic impacts.
Task 2 will explore novel NN algorithms in order to accurately tune brain
signals and individual neck muscle activations with a minimal number of
iterations and loop delays. Task 3 focuses on validating the BMI-frame platform
by exploring the dynamics of brain-muscle interactions in response to various
(sub) traumatic mechanical impacts and TBI conditions. The research is a
breakthrough innovation as it transforms brain-muscle interaction dynamics into
a mathematically-grounded engineering framework, with the purpose of creating
unprecedented scientific knowledge about how (sub) traumatic mechanical impacts
cause electromechanical disruptions of brain neuronal dynamics and, in turn, how
brain neuronal disruptions affect neck muscle
responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.