* 2239966
* CAREER: Enhancing the State of Health and Performance of Electronics via in-situ Monitoring and Prediction (SHaPE-MaP) - Toward Edge Intelligence in Power Conversion
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2028
* Harish Krishnamoorthy, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Mahesh Krishnamurthy
* 05/31/2028
* USD 409,865.00

With over 80 % of electricity expected to flow through power converters by 2030,
there is a growing requirement to nearly double their operational lifetime
(e.g., 50 years for solar PV systems, 30 years for offshore wind, etc.) for
reducing the overall carbon footprint. On the other hand, applications like data
centers frequently replace their power hardware preemptively to avoid potential
outages. The underlying problem with most existing converter installations is
the difficulty to assess their health or adapt their performance in real-time
without disrupting their operation. To achieve dynamic performance enhancement
and reliability improvement, there is a critical need for mission profile-
oriented design methods and seamless integration of data-driven prognostic
health management with power converters onboard, referred to as ‘Edge
Intelligence’. The proposed ‘SHaPE-MaP’ framework aims to enhance the State of
Health and performance of Power Electronics via in-situ Monitoring and
Prediction using onboard FPGAs or processors for edge intelligence. If
successful, the SHaPE-MaP framework will enable the identification of aged or
potentially failing modules in real-time and avoid ‘preemptive decommissioning’,
thereby increasing the operational life. It will further benefit the system
operators in decision-making about maintenance or repair, and the supply chain
team to better estimate the logistics or manage the inventory items. Hence, this
project will have a widespread impact on most large-scale converter
applications, potentially saving hundreds of millions, if not billions of
dollars. Moreover, a robust education program will augment this
interdisciplinary project to engage K-12 and college
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Predicting system behavior and health has been
restricted to the technology design or prototyping phases, and they are hardly
implemented in the final products. It is due to the need for additional
computing resources, such as a laptop, to execute these techniques – a seemingly
impractical scenario, especially in applications with a large number of power
converters (e.g., data centers, solar PV farms, etc.). The proposed SHaPE-MaP
framework will be a game-changer in enabling such edge intelligence. This
project will advance the state-of-the-art power converter hardware and control
systems via the following four key thrusts: (i) Development of integrated
devices and onboard systems to estimate degradation at the component level; (ii)
In-situ implementation of health prediction techniques and fault handling along
with the converters using machine learning; (iii) Status estimation and
resilient handling of faults and cyber-attacks at converter nodes using edge
intelligence; and (iv) Design of coordinated circuits with embedded systems to
minimize the computing resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.