* 2239688
* CAREER: Scaling up Brain Circuit Reconstruction with Human-centric Machine Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Donglai Wei, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* Sorin Draghici
* 03/31/2028
* USD 220,000.00

The field of connectomics aims to reconstruct the connections between various
parts of the brain from extremely high resolution microscopy images. Such a
transformative approach can provide detailed renderings of the brain at the
cellular level to reveal the organizing principle and the mechanism of neural
connectivities. Furthermore, these new insights could accelerate the treatment
development for neurodegenerative diseases and inspire novel AI algorithms.
However, the connectomics image data of a mere one-millimeter cube brain region
is on the petabyte scale, where existing computational pipelines produce too
many errors for domain experts to correct in neuron reconstruction. What is
missing is not just a better reconstruction method but a human-centric approach
to automate the labor-intensive workflows before and after the reconstruction,
e.g., data annotation to train the model and error correction to refine the
results. This project will build a scalable human-centric computational pipeline
with novel algorithms to mimic human cognition to reduce human effort in the
pipeline significantly. If successful, the developed workflows will be deployed
to expedite the BRAIN Initiative’s ambitious whole-mouse brain reconstruction
project to revolutionize the understanding of the brain.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on accelerating the labor-intensive workflows
of data annotation, proofreading, and transfer learning in the machine learning
pipeline. Inspired by human cognitive abilities, this project will develop novel
machine learning algorithms to exploit various data sources beyond the
traditional densely annotated 3D neuron reconstruction. Concretely, this project
has the following aims. (1) This project will distill the unlabeled data to
learn to group images by appearance to assist domain experts in effectively
discovering sub-volumes for annotation and propagating sparse labels to dense
reconstruction. (2) This project will build automatic agents to learn from
domain experts’ proofreading strategies to detect and correct the automatic
reconstruction results. (3) This project will develop transfer learning methods
to reuse labeled connectomics datasets and pre-trained models to assist biology
labs in analyzing their microscopy images. These three research aims will be
accompanied by comprehensive evaluations on collected benchmark datasets and
accessible software resources for the biomedical image analysis
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.