* 2239171
* CAREER: Towards in situ control of BCS-BEC crossover in solid state systems
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Yu He, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 03/31/2028
* USD 371,546.00

Non-technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;Among the biggest triumphs of quantum mechanics
was the discovery of macroscopic quantum states - billions of electrons
spontaneously fall into the same quantum state without any central coordination.
One of the most prominent examples is superconductivity, where many electron
pairs coherently move through the material without any resistance hence
generating no heat loss. There are two ways for this to occur: two electrons
first tightly bind into a molecule, then develop coherence with other molecules;
or many electrons develop pairing and binding all at once. These two regimes are
two limiting cases of how macroscopic coherent states can form, which are widely
seen and used in cornerstone modern technologies such as lasers, superconducting
qubits, and supermagnets. This project aims to realize tunable materials
straddled between these two limits, exploring novel states of matter and their
electronic structure during this crossover. Students from local middle and high-
schools will be engaged in this project through interactive lectures and
demonstrations of superconductivity and lasing. Local college undergraduate and
graduate students will co-develop the curriculum and co-lead the sessions with
the research team for broader participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract&lt;br/&gt;Bardeen-Cooper-Schrieffer (BCS) mechanism and Bose-Einstein
Condensate (BEC) are two limiting scenarios of one continuous route to realize
macroscopic quantum coherent state of interacting fermions, where all particles
in a system simultaneously occupy the same many-body ground state. Incarnated in
solid state systems, these limiting scenarios can drive metal-to-superconductor
and metal-to-insulator phase transitions. Despite immense theoretical interest,
experimental realization of this crossover in solid state systems is scarce and
controversial. In this research, the team aims to realize, understand, and tune
BCS-BEC crossover in novel bulk and thin film solid state model systems, with a
special emphasis on thermodynamic and spectroscopic investigations as the
systems are tuned in situ through the crossover. This project not only sheds
light on the crucial role of the wave function "phase" in macroscopic quantum
states, but also develops new material platforms and novel thermodynamic
techniques to investigate the phenomenon in both three and quasi-two
dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.