* 2239679
* CAREER: Nontrivial correlations in the neural code: a question of synchrony
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Thibaud Taillefumier, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Amina Eladdadi
* 03/31/2028
* USD 218,294.00

Neural networks process information by propagating patterns of electrical
impulses, known as spikes. These spiking patterns exhibit a striking level of
variability, even in neural network that are driven by identical sensory
stimuli. Owing to this variability, neural networks have been thought to operate
in the asynchronous state. In the asynchronous state, neurons fire independently
from one another, so that the probability that a neuron experience synchronous
synaptic inputs is exceedingly low. This neglect of synchrony has been further
supported by the apparent weakness of spiking pairwise correlations. However,
recent experimental and theoretical works seriously challenge this view.
Specifically, large-scale spiking recordings have revealed weak but nonzero
spiking correlations. At the same time, the levels of voltage variability
observed in single-cell recordings cannot be explained without some degree of
input synchrony, compatible with weak but nonzero spiking correlation. To
address the challenge posed by these recent findings, the PI will characterize
how synaptic synchrony can stably emerge in networks that are otherwise plagued
with biological noise. Specifically, the PI will (1) model synchrony-based input
correlations via jump processes, (2) elucidate how noisy spike-generation
mechanisms can propagate synchrony to output neurons, and (3) characterize how
synchrony-based correlations can stably emerge in limit neural networks. The
payoff of (1) will be characterizing how activity correlations can explain the
high degree of observed neural variability. The payoff of (2) will be estimating
the temporal information content of a spike. The payoff of (3) will be
identifying the network features stabilizing synchrony-based correlations. While
reaching for his research goals, the PI will design an original undergraduate
flipped course mixing mathematics and neuroscience audiences. Within the
research center that he animates, the PI will also kickstart a service offering
for affiliates who want to acquire theoretical support in their research
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cortical spiking patterns can exhibit exquisite
time precision of behavioral relevance. This supports the prevalence of time
codes for which neuronal spiking is synchronized. However, the maintenance of
spiking precision is at odds with typically observed level of cortical noise.
This supports the prevalence of rate codes, for which neurons spike
asynchronously. That said, such a coding dichotomy is misleading as the same
neuron can jointly acts as a synchronous coder and as an asynchronous coder. The
PI will resolve the synchronous/asynchronous coding dilemma as a matter of
degree rather than a matter of alternative, by characterizing collective
dynamics in idealized neural circuits with nontrivial spiking correlations.
Concretely, nontrivial correlations will arise from synaptic synchrony, whereby
synapses to a neuron tend to coactivate over small timescales with respect to
the neuronâ€™s time constant. This is by contrast with most theoretical approaches
which are rooted in mean-field approximations with trivial correlation
structure. To resolve the synchronous/asynchronous coding dilemma, the PI will
develop a novel theoretical and computational framework to model, quantify, and
analyze the impact of synchrony on neural dynamics. The mathematical challenges
at stake will be to perform (1) a stochastic analysis of biophysically-relevant
neuronal models when driven by synchronous input, (2) an probabilistic analysis
of the spike-generating mechanism viewed as a free-boundary problem, and (3)
bifurcation and scaling analyses of the nonlinear partial differential equation
capturing the so-called Poissonian mean-field dynamics. In all cases, the
methodology will exploit modern analytical and probabilistic techniques in
combination with advanced numerical methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is
jointly funded by the MPS/DMS Mathematical Biology program and CISE/IIS Robust
Intelligence program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.