* 2239537
* CAREER: Deploying Transferable Medical Imaging Diagnosis System in Diverse Environments
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Mingchen Gao, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Yang
* 06/30/2028
* USD 190,130.00

Medical imaging, such as Computed Tomography (CT), Magnetic Resonance Imaging
(MRI), chest X-ray, and retinal imaging, are valuable tools to assist in
diagnosis. Medical imaging analysis has been significantly advanced using deep
learning models. The knowledge extracted from large amounts of medical data can
be used to make predictions for new patients. It has been demonstrated in many
cases that the performances of machine learning models are comparable to board-
certified radiologists or other professional experts, indicating the potential
successful integration of those models in clinical applications. For example,
imagine a patient notices a painless rash on their skin. If they could take a
photo with a cell phone and receive a quick assessment comparable to experienced
dermatologists, life-threatening diseases would be intervened or avoided early.
However, the current success of deep learning is heavily dependent on large and
high-quality labeled datasets. Such nearly perfect environments are only
available in ideal lab environments because of the population shift, device
differences, or rare diseases in real clinical applications. This project plans
to focus on those specific challenges of non-ideal medical imaging diagnosis
environments to advance the knowledge of building transferrable deep learning
models and enhance national health by providing better tools for medical imaging
diagnosis. Furthermore, this research will support the cross-disciplinary
development of a diverse cohort of Ph.D. and undergraduate students and outreach
activities to diverse communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically, this
project will investigate and build transferable medical imaging diagnosis
systems in diverse environments. The project proceeds with one overarching theme
of leveraging the understudied geometric properties of deep neural networks to
address three universal barriers when deploying medical imaging systems in
various environments. Specifically, there are challenges to transferring models
to novel classes, where there are not enough training samples, and novel
domains, where the deploying environments change, and more importantly,
preserving the previous knowledge in the model. If successful, the proposed
research is expected to advance the understanding of building transferring deep
learning models by leveraging a novel geometric interpretation of deep neural
networks partitioning the input and feature space into generalized Voronoi
diagrams. The driving applications of the proposed techniques are the prediction
of long-tailed disease patterns on chest X-rays and ensuring consistent
screening services for glaucoma in underserved communities. In addition, the
proposed methods have the potential to be extended to similar scenarios with
diverse deployment environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.