* 2239004
* CAREER: Fundamental Understanding of Thermal Transport at the Single Molecule Level
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Longji Cui, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 02/29/2028
* USD 429,335.00

Understanding and control of matter, energy, and information at the nanoscale is
one of major hallmarks of modern engineering and sciences. Atomic and single-
molecule devices represent the miniaturization limit of any physical machine,
and have great potential to create unprecedented functionalities that overcome
the performance barriers set by classical physical laws. Directly probing heat
transport at the molecular scale will elucidate the fundamental thermal
transport mechanisms and dissipation limits in these ultraminiaturized devices,
but has remained as a great technological challenge. The principal aim of this
project is to fill the knowledge gap in the understanding of thermal transport
at the single molecule level. The outcomes of this project can potentially
transform the current technologies of energy efficient nanoelectronics and
photonics, as well as enable rational bottom-up design methods of high
performance thermal and renewable energy materials. This project also focuses on
training and diversifying the pool of young generations of nano-engineers and
thermal scientists through an integrated education and outreach program that
promotes the engagement of K-12 and undergraduate students, particularly those
from underrepresented groups, in cutting-edge lab research, workshops, and
hands-on learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to establish
a comprehensive research framework for the fundamental study of heat conduction
and energy conversion mechanisms in single molecules. This research will enable
systematic tests to address long-standing open questions in molecular thermal
transport, which although having a long research history starting from the
1950s, remain at a qualitative level due to the lack of experimental
benchmarking data. This project leverages a recently developed scanning thermal
microscope with ultrahigh sensitivity that allows the discovery of new thermal
effects and promotes creative design of organic molecules from a thermal
perspective. Experimental studies will be performed in a series of molecular
systems with specific aims to reveal the structure-property relationships in
thermal transport of single organic monomers and polymers, and to quantify
quantum effects and the figure of merit of thermoelectric molecules. This
research is expected to yield deep understanding in molecular phononics and
quantum thermoelectrics, and profoundly impact the field of heat management,
molecular electronics, and the material design of thermally-enhanced
polymers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.