* 2239605
* CAREER: Ensuring Privacy, Inclusiveness, and Policy Compliance in the Era of Voice Personal Assistants
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Long Cheng, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* James Joshi
* 07/31/2028
* USD 94,934.00

Voice personal assistants such as Amazon Alexa and Google Assistant are rapidly
gaining in both domestic and business popularity. Despite many convenient
features they provide, concerns have been raised about the security and privacy,
and content safety related risks to end users they also pose. During the
interaction with voice assistants, users expect the voice assistants to fulfill
their requests without compromising the privacy or being exposed to unsafe
content, and without experiencing racial or gender disparities in terms of the
automated speech recognition. The project’s novelties are new techniques and
mechanisms to ensure privacy, inclusiveness, and policy compliance in voice
assistant systems. The project's broader significance and importance include 1)
increasing general awareness of cybersecurity in the K-12 community through
various outreach and educational activities; 2) training the next generation of
cybersecurity researchers especially underrepresented and minorities; and 3)
strengthening cybersecurity education by developing new course materials and
hands-on labs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project first develops a voice-based
privacy notice mechanism to enable users (in particular, visually impaired
users) to make informed privacy decisions through the voice channel. It creates
a new paradigm for accessible and inclusive privacy notification. This project
then proposes a machine learning-based dynamic analysis framework, which allows
a systematic evaluation of policy compliance and social biases in voice
assistant systems. It can be used by users to check for any privacy or content
safety violations in voice applications, and can potentially aid government
agencies to perform a large-scale investigation into the policy compliance
practices of existing voice applications in the Amazon Alexa and Google
Assistant platforms. Finally, this project develops static analysis techniques
to assist developers in producing policy-compliant voice applications at the
development phase. This project also integrates a comprehensive education and
outreach plan with the proposed research to train the next generation of
cybersecurity researchers in an interdisciplinary environment, and to attract
more students from underrepresented groups into the cybersecurity
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.