* 2239169
* CAREER: Novel Direct Current Power Distribution for Large-scale Electrified Transportation Charging
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Hongjie Wang, Utah State University
* Continuing Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 07/31/2028
* USD 397,367.00

This NSF CAREER project aims to make fundamental advances and create new
scientific knowledge in direct current power distribution (DCPD) and enable
transformative impact on efficient, reliable, and low-cost large-scale electric
vehicle (EV) charging. The project will bring transformative change to
electrified transportation, e-mobility, goals for net-zero emissions, and
associated societal impact. The intellectual merits of the project include (1)
introducing a novel solution for distributing power to chargers for large-scale
EV charging, (2) advancing knowledge in modeling and control for a family of ac-
dc architectures, (3) introducing architectures for renewable energy
integration, (4) creating scientific findings for modular system design and
control, (5) producing new knowledge for power converter electro-thermal
analysis, (6) advancing the field of dynamic modeling, stability analysis,
operation, and protection of DCPD, and (7) creating a new scalable and
transferable hardware platform for experimental evaluation and validation. The
broader impacts of the project include (1) facilitating widespread EV adoption
by enabling effective power distribution for large-scale EV charging and
training the diverse engineering workforce necessary to carry the technologies
forward to widespread adoption in society, (2) improved air quality, reduced
greenhouse gas emissions, and reduced cost to move people and goods, (3)
increasing the interest of women and underrepresented minority groups in an
engineering career, and in pursuing higher education in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CAREER plan goal is to make fundamental
advances and create new scientific knowledge in direct current power
distribution architectures, power converter design techniques, power converter
and system modeling, and novel electro-thermal analysis, collectively enabling
transformative impact on efficient, reliable, and low-cost large-scale EV
charging. This will be achieved by proposing a novel DCPD with charging units
connected in series through a trunk cable powered by a grid-tied ac-dc current
source to address the significant fundamental problem of how to distribute power
to the chargers for large-scale EV charging. The education and research of the
program are woven together to increase diversity, equity, inclusion, and
accessibility (DEIA) in engineering and train the next generation of engineers
to be well-prepared for the transformation in electrified transportation in the
U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.