* 2239374
* CAREER: Foundations of Collaborative  Machine Learning
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Mehrdad Mahdavi, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 07/31/2028
* USD 218,888.00

Recent advances in machine learning rely on collecting an enormous amount of
data and learning immense models in a centralized cloud. However, the excessive
storage and computational needs of centralized approaches, alongside regulatory
challenges in sharing private data, put the utility of this paradigm in doubt.
Collaborative machine learning is a recent alternative paradigm to tackle these
issues by developing algorithms collaboratively without exchanging or
centralizing the data. For example, different geographically distributed
hospitals, each being in possession of limited patients’ data, may
collaboratively develop predictive algorithms to improve diagnostics and
treatment beyond what could be accomplished alone. Unlocking the full potential
of collaborative learning strongly depends on the ability to encourage a large
pool of individuals or corporations to share their private data and resources.
Towards this aim, this CAREER award offers an intersectional approach to develop
theoretically-grounded collaborative algorithms to facilitate learning optimally
from fragmented, heterogeneous private data under resource constraints by
jointly addressing various computational, statistical, systems, and game-
theoretic challenges. By promoting a stable and fair ecosystem to benefit and
retain all participants, without imposing stringent data and resource
constraints, this project’s outcomes promise to make data-driven intelligent
systems more effective, personalized, and robust in a myriad of application
domains, such as personalized healthcare, precision agriculture, and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To promote a healthy data and compute ecosystem
and enable optimal use of distributed heterogeneous data under resource
constraints, this project offers an intersectional approach to rigorously
address computational, statistical, and game-theoretic challenges. On the
practical side, it introduces a pluralistic learning paradigm and develops
distributed algorithms that are cognizant of statistical heterogeneity and
confined to learning models that meet available resources. On the statistical
side, the project focuses on establishing generalization guarantees and
understanding information-theoretic tradeoffs, providing an opportunity for
synergistic advancements and insights. The project makes an intimate connection
between collaborative learning and aggregative games and leverages developed
theoretical and algorithmic investigations to answer questions related to
equilibrium, incentivization, fairness, and stability to promote a healthy
ecosystem. The intersectional and unified study the project proposes, creates
essential connections, and fosters new transformative methods not developed by
efforts within the individual disciplines. The research will be integrated with
education through hosting workshops, mentoring students, and developing
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.