* 2239066
* CAREER: Harnessing Ferri- and Antiferro-Magnetism for Reconfigurable Wireless Transcievers
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Amal El-Ghazaly, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2028
* USD 449,137.00

For 5G and 6G next-generation wireless systems accessible to more simultaneous
users and sufficiently versatile for worldwide communications, transceivers need
to be able to handle more communication bands and tune between them. Full
integration of reconfigurable transceiver front ends requires both tunable
electric and tunable magnetic components. To date, only integrated electric
(i.e., capacitive) components are tunable. This research aims to fill the
critical gap in wireless capabilities by creating tunable microwave and
millimeter-wave magnetic (i.e., inductive) components. These components will
take the form of tunable microwave inductors and tunable resonant waveguides
using monolithically integrated magnetoelectric thin films. The uniquely
designed magnetoelectric thin films will provide direct in situ and simultaneous
control over the permeability and permittivity at much higher frequencies than
previously achievable in order to efficiently tune the resonance frequency of
wireless communication systems. By integrating these components with transceiver
front-ends, this project will demonstrate their impact in enabling adaptive
microwave and mm-wave wireless systems for providing widespread 5G and 6G
wireless technology. Such reconfigurable transceivers have the potential to
increase the capabilities of future sensing, medical, and agricultural systems
and broaden access to quality education, thereby improving the standard of
living worldwide. The education component focuses on three specific initiatives
for increasing URM interest, enrollment, and retention in engineering. Expanding
the existing teaching and mentorship efforts through an annual Ph.D. skills
seminar course for first year URM doctoral students, creating new hands-on
sensors design course for undergraduates, and developing a community-engaged
course to cultivate the students for device engineering to increase enrollment.
Outreach activity include engineering education initiatives in juvenile
detention centers for juvenile justice teachers that has been previously
established and will be extended through RET program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will build on the PI’s experience in developing tunable gigahertz-range
inductors and magneto-electric resonators to develop corresponding capabilities
in the microwave and mm-wave regime. Research objectives include design of
high-Q magnetic inductors and transmission lines using ferromagnetic CoFeB,
ferrimagnetic Gd–Co alloys, a synthetic antiferromagnet made of CoFeB/Ru/CoFeB,
and exchange-coupled ferromagnetic Fe65Co35-core/antiferromagnetic-shell
nanoparticle composites. These devices will be tested for permeability, self-
resonance frequency, and loss tangent to evaluate the best one for microwave and
mm-wave device performance. Higher material bandwidth (up to 30 GHz) but lower
permeability (below 20) is expected by moving from ferromagnetic to
ferrimagnetic/antiferromagnetic thin-films and composites. Subsequently, the
highest-efficiency, microwave and mm-wave magnetic inductors and transmission
lines will be fully-integrated with transceiver front-ends to evaluate the
performance of the complete system. In addition, adaptive transceiver
capabilities will be developed by combining the selected magnetic material with
piezoelectric AlN to create integrated tunable magnetoelectric devices and will
subsequently be incorporated into an integrated transceiver for evaluation of
device and system performance by determining the figures of merit required to
enable adaptive 5G and 6G wireless technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.