* 2239518
* CAREER: Design and modeling for modular bionanotechnology and citizen science
* MPS,DMR
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Petr Sulc, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvio May
* 01/31/2028
* USD 220,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Bionanotechnology is a field that uses
designed molecules to construct devices and structures at nanoscale level, with
promising applications for the development of novel materials, detection
devices, as well as platforms for therapeutics or diagnostics. However,
construction of such devices presents significant technical challenges. Computer
modeling can provide useful insights into the design mechanisms of such systems.
Computer-aided design software is often used in our macroscale world to design
e.g. computer chips, cars, planes, etc. so that the device operation can be
tested and optimized in simulation first. Construction at the nanoscale however
presents multiple challenges. As opposed to our macroworld, nanostructures are
typically realized by self-assembly, where individual components randomly
diffuse until they meet and assemble into a target structure. To realize more
complex structures that would self-assemble in high yields, there is a need for
a new simulation framework that can efficiently and, at the same time,
accurately represent the assembly and function of such nanostructures. This
project will develop a new modeling framework that is capable of simulating
self-assembled DNA nanostructures, which currently represent one of the most
advanced branches of bionanotechnology. The research team will use this
framework to optimize nanostructure assembly for high yield, and computationally
design new types of reconfigurable nanostructures. Next, the team will extend
the modeling platform to allow for the incorporation of other organic/inorganic
molecules and materials, and use it to design a nanoswimmer that can move
preferentially in one direction. Overall, this project will facilitate the
creation of new nanodevices capable of performing complex tasks that would be
difficult to realize experimentally without a sophisticated modeling platform,
and bring the field closer to large-scale industrial applications. For the
education component of the project, the research team will develop new learning
opportunities for university students and the general public. The main effort
will involve developing an online citizen science platform, where users can use
the simulation platform to design and optimize structures themselves, allowing
to crowd-source nanotechnology designs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nucleic acid nanotechnology is one of the most
advanced branches of bionanotechnology, with promising applications ranging from
biotemplated manufacturing to diagnostics and therapeutics. However, the system
sizes (thousands of nucleotides) and the timescales associated with their
assembly and function (minutes to hours) make their assembly kinetics very
challenging to model. There is hence a pressing need in the field for
computational modeling tools that can incorporate additional molecules and
materials into the DNA or RNA nanostructures, simulate far-from-equilibrium
processes such as ATP-powered motors, and capture nanostructures’ assembly and
function over long experimental timescales. To address this challenge, this
project will develop a new family of coarse-grained models that can simulate
large scale nanosystems, use them to study DNA and RNA nanostructure assembly
kinetics, and optimize their designs to improve yields. The PI will use this
framework to design new types of DNA and RNA nanostructures with controlled
folding pathways that specifically select one possible stable conformation of
the molecule, thus creating a reconfigurable biomaterial. Next, the research
team will use the modeling platform to design an ATP-powered nanoswimmer that is
capable of directional motion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The general framework
developed in this project will allow modular design and harness different
materials (both organic and inorganic) and functional molecular complexes for
nanotechnology construction, thus bringing the field of nanotechnology closer to
industry-scale applications and incorporating theoretical modeling into the
bionanotechnology design pipeline.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI’s education
program will focus on training undergraduate and graduate students in
interdisciplinary research skills required to tackle problems in
bionanotechnology harnessing approaches from diverse fields and creating
practical hands-on research opportunities as part of the teaching program.
Furthermore, this project will develop a citizen science online platform. The
platform will use a game-like interface where the players will solve real
scientific problems of designing functional DNA nanostructures that will be
tested using the developed computer models. It will enable crowd-sourcing the
design of nanostructures and hence provide a platform to engage the general
public in nanotechnology research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.