* 2239961
* CAREER: Ultracold Molecules Assembled in a Tweezer Array for Quantum Simulation
* MPS,PHY
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Jonathan Hood, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Jones
* 06/30/2028
* USD 199,996.00

General audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The behavior of atoms and molecules is
governed by quantum mechanics, but solving for the behavior of systems with many
interacting particles is notoriously difficult even on the most powerful
supercomputers. Scientists aim to learn about quantum systems by building a
simulator that consists of many quantum particles with controlled interactions,
but at a length and time scale amenable to observation and manipulation in the
lab. The PI and his team will build a quantum simulator from an array of laser-
trapped and cooled ultracold molecules. In contrast to atom-based simulators,
the molecules introduce new types of interactions, for example, the long-range
and anisotropic interaction from molecular dipole moments. The development of
this novel simulation platform will potentially lead to the design of advanced,
strongly interacting materials in energy transport, light harvesting, and
quantum information science. It will provide invaluable insights into the
fundamental properties of a wide range of correlated quantum systems, including
black holes and nuclei. The PI will train an interdisciplinary team of students,
as well as work to increase diversity and inclusion in quantum science. The PI
will also design a curriculum for chemists that integrates quantum sciences,
thus helping train the next generation's quantum workforce.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Technical audience abstract:&lt;br/&gt;The platform is based on a
tweezer array of ultracold LiCs molecules, where the interactions between
rotational states are mediated by the electric dipole moment and tuned using
static and microwave fields. The long-range interaction and long rotational
coherence times will be used to simulate an extended Hubbard model and
generalized quantum spin model, leading to the observation of new topological,
exotic superfluid, and supersolid phases. Several challenges remain before
laser-assembled ultracold molecules become a robust simulation platform. First,
the Stark shift from the trapping light leads to measured rotational coherence
times orders of magnitude shorter than the theoretical limit, which should be
minimized when the molecule is in the tweezer ground state. Second, laser-
assembled molecules are currently detected through reverse-assembly back into
atoms, and the PI will develop a non-destructive direct molecule imaging scheme
based on either a forbidden cycling transition in LiCs or on Rydberg-molecule
interactions. Finally, single molecule assembly efficiency is limited by two
atom motional excitations in the tweezer, and the PI will develop new more
robust tweezer ground state preparation methods beyond Raman sideband cooling.
Together, these breakthroughs will result in record-level interaction fidelity,
and the simulation of new classes of strongly interacting
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.