* 2239021
* CAREER: When Two Worlds Collide: An Intersectional Analysis of Black Women's Role Strain and Adaptation in Computing Sciences
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Krystal Williams, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 06/30/2028
* USD 112,841.00

The University of Alabama will examine Black undergraduate women’s academic and
career-related outcomes in the computing sciences (CS). Computing fields are
currently in high demand with favorable workforce outcomes and a need for
diverse perspectives. Nonetheless, Black women remain underrepresented along CS
professional pathways. Some factors that influence Black women’s trajectories
into computing professions are their college experiences—especially the
challenges or biases that they face, as well as the strengths and supports that
foster resilience. This project will also develop educational initiatives to
promote public engagement in equity issues regarding Black women in these
fields. Collectively, these activities will help to promote CS diversity and to
expand opportunities in computing for the overall benefits to
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mixed-methods research plan for this CAREER
project includes a national survey to examine how Black undergraduate women’s
challenges, multilevel psychosocial risks and multilevel psychosocial strengths
combine to shape key academic and career-related outcomes in computing. This
study will compare outcomes for Black women to other important groups (i.e.,
Black men and White women) given the dire need to better understand their unique
experiences at the intersection of biases due to their race and gender.
Moreover, qualitative data will be used to further explain Black women’s race-
gendered experiences and how it impacts their academic and career-related
outcomes. As a compliment to the research, the educational plan for this project
will include initiatives to: 1) nurture a community of scholars in CS education
to further the work of broadening CS participation; 2) combine STEM and the arts
(i.e. STEAM) via production and dissemination of a documentary to increase
awareness about the challenges and strengths that impact Black women’s CS
academic and career-related outcomes; 3) create and disseminate a media-informed
curriculum to provoke thought and dialogue about the experiences of Black women
in computing, along with strategies for organizational transformation; and 4)
create virtual platforms on social media for undergraduate Black women in
computing to develop community and solidarity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.