* 2239957
* CAREER Deciphering how enhancers encode tissue-specificity and phenotypes
* BIO,IOS
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2027
* Emma Farley, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 11/30/2027
* USD 300,000.00

Our genome is 3 billion letters of DNA which encode the tools (proteins) and
instructions for making every single cell within our body. These instructions
for building us are embedded within genomic sequences called enhancers, which
act as switches to turn on the production of proteins in particular cell types
at particular times, allowing a fertilized egg to develop into a complex
organism. Changes in the enhancer sequence can alter where proteins are made,
causing dramatic effects, such as extra toes, loss of fins, or even novel
functions that allow an organism to exist in a new environment. Indeed, changes
within enhancers underlie the majority of differences between individuals and
contribute to the diversity of species on our planet. Yet these elements are
poorly understood. This research will develop cutting-edge approaches to test
millions of versions of enhancers for function to understand how changes in the
enhancer sequence can alter when and where proteins are made. These findings
will help uncover how genomes encode the instructions for making us and how
changes within enhancers can lead to changes in the function and structure of an
organism. Middle school students from a Title I school will contribute to this
research by conducting experiments in the classroom and on the university
campus. Supporting underprivileged students from a young age and giving them
access to research and higher education experiences is essential to help
students see college as an attainable goal, engage in science, and strive for
educational goals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Enhancers are genomic elements that
control the timing and location of gene expression; as such, enhancers ensure
the successful development and integrity of an organism. Although we can
identify putative enhancers in genomes with relative ease, we have little
understanding of how the underlying sequence encodes gene expression. This lack
of knowledge is a major problem as sequence changes within enhancers are thought
to underlie the majority of phenotypic diversity. The goal of this proposal is
to develop a deep understanding of how enhancers encode tissue-specific
expression patterns, how transcription factors interact specifically with
enhancer sequences, and the mechanisms by which enhancer variants alter
phenotypes. To achieve these goals, this research will use a creative
combination of high-throughput enhancer assays in developing vertebrate embryos
(chick), binding assays, and transgenic approaches in mice. These assays will be
implemented in the context of limb development as this is an ideal system in
which to study how enhancers encode tissue-specific expression patterns and how
changes in these patterns impact organismal integrity. These studies will
uncover overarching principles governing the relationship between enhancer
sequence and tissue-specific expression and provide a mechanistic understanding
of how sequence changes within enhancers alter phenotypes. The broader impacts
will involve middle school students from a Title I school contributing to this
research by conducting experiments in the classroom and on the university
campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.