* 2239524
* CAREER: Harnessing Interference with Deep Learning: Algorithms and Large-Scale Experiments
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2028
* Mojtaba Vaezi, Villanova University
* Continuing Grant
* Murat Torlak
* 09/30/2028
* USD 78,095.00

The increasing density of cellular networks and the adoption of drones have made
interference a significant obstacle to achieving efficient and high-quality
communication. Existing solutions for inter-cell interference are impractical
due to excessive signaling overhead and synchronization burden. This project
leverages deep learning to manage interference from neighboring cells without
requiring channel information for interference signals. The proposed algorithms
will rely on measured signal and interference power or quality, which are
available in modern cellular networks, particularly in 5G. The goal is to
improve the spectral efficiency of cellular networks, enable widespread drone
adoption, and simplify the design of communication systems. The project also
includes outreach efforts to educate underrepresented high school students in
Philadelphia. Undergraduate students will have opportunities for
interdisciplinary research in wireless communications and artificial
intelligence, and a new senior elective course on deep learning for
communications will be designed. The findings of this research will be
disseminated through high-impact journals, conferences, and workshops,
benefiting both academic and industrial communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will pursue a new approach for interference mitigation in two-
dimensional and three-dimensional cellular networks. The proposed deep learning-
aided algorithms could transform the way real-life cellular networks are
designed and operated in two ways: (i) by creating new foundation for
interference management that work even when channel information is unknown and
the network topology dynamically changes; and (ii) designing end-to-end
communication models that can adapt to interference, simplify the current
blockby-block design, and yield significantly higher data rates. The proposed
algorithms will undergo extensive testing on both small and large scales, and
the results will be evaluated on the NSF PAWR platforms that could lead to real-
world implementation. This project has the potential to significantly increase
the efficiency of current and next-generation cellular networks and enable the
widespread use of drones in cellular networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.