* 2239665
* CAREER: Mechanobiology of Load-bearing Interfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Roberto Andresen Eguiluz, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 05/31/2028
* USD 523,303.00

Arthritis is a significant debilitating disease that affects millions of people
in the US alone. When the cartilage, a cushion that helps reduce friction
between bones, gets damaged, it leads to diseases such as arthritis, causing
pain. This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award aims to understand
how the surface of articular cartilage direct and control friction. In addition
to the cartilage covering the ends of bones, synovial fluid also serves as the
natural lubricant of joints that reduces friction. Combined cartilage and
synovial fluid maintain healthy joints, thanks to the lubricating molecules that
stick to the surface of the cartilage. This study focuses on examining the
biomechanical behaviors of lubricating molecules sticking to the cartilages.
Results from this research will help identify molecular strategies to treat
arthritis. This research is highly interdisciplinary involving biophysics,
polymer physics, surface chemistry, biology, and tribology. This project also
supports several educational and outreach activities involving the inclusion and
training of underrepresented groups in biomaterials and mechanobiology-relevant
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lubricant film formation is critical during
locomotion to lubricate and wear-protect the surface of articulated joints. The
molecular components of the cartilage extracellular matrix surface provide
anchoring sites for lubricating molecules, thus serving as a platform for the
assembly of the load/energy-dissipative films. The role of the collagens family
in mediating the adsorption of lubricating and wear-protecting molecules has
been studied in depth. However, the role of fibronectin, another important
cartilage extracellular matrix component, and its various conformations in
regulating synovial fluid component adsorption and wear-protecting properties
has been overlooked. This award fills this knowledge gap by determining the role
of cartilage surface fibronectin in mediating the adsorption and retention of
synovial fluid components to regulate joint boundary lubrication and wear
protection. To test this hypothesis, this project will: i) develop articular
cartilage surface models to control molecular compositions and conformations,
ii) quantify synovial fluid component adsorption, and iii) perform
nanomechanical and nanotribological characterizations to establish relationships
between fibronectin-mediated synovial fluid film formation and tribological
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.