* 2239561
* CAREER: Enzymatic Sulfur Incorporation and Modification in the Biosynthesis of Natural Products
* MPS,CHE
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* JIE LI, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 01/31/2028
* USD 519,585.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes Program in the Chemistry
Division, Jie Li from the University of South Carolina is studying how nature
uses enzymes to incorporate and modify sulfur centers in microbial secondary
metabolites. These natural products provide a competitive advantage to the
producing microbes while also conferring significant fundamental value in
medicinal, manufacturing, agricultural applications. In contrast to extensively
studied sulfur incorporation in primary metabolism (e.g., nucleotides and amino
acids), there is a gap in the general understanding of the installation of
sulfur in secondary metabolites. Thus, this study seeks to develop a molecular-
level understanding of this life process, which will provide not only valuable
sulfur-containing natural products but also opportunities to employ relevant
enzymes in practical applications, including synthetic biology and green
chemistry. Furthermore, this research synergizes with education and outreach
activities aimed at conveying the importance of the chemistry of living systems
to diverse groups of students, particularly members of underrepresented minority
communities including students at historically black colleges and universities
in South Carolina. An important outreach activity will involve a Backyard
Chemists program, through which backyard microbial samples will be collected in
the larger community, thereby engaging community members in the discovery of new
natural products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project is directed at the
investigation of the enzymology of sulfur incorporation and modification in the
biosynthesis of microbial natural products, with initial efforts focused on two
unique types of sulfur-containing natural products: sulfenic acids and
sulfonolipids. The goal of the research includes understanding how a sulfur
center is transferred, incorporated, and modified in sulfenic acids and/or
sulfonolipids through a series of enzymatic steps, as part of both primary and
secondary metabolism and from both organic and inorganic sulfur sources. A
flavoprotein and two pyridoxal phosphate-dependent enzymes and their mechanisms
will be studied. A combination of in vivo genetic manipulation, in vitro
enzymatic reconstitution, site-directed mutagenesis, enzyme kinetics, and
protein crystallography will be employed. Considering the remarkable diversity
of sulfur reactivity, this work is expected to both facilitate discovery of
sulfur-containing natural products and advance fundamental understanding of
enzymatic sulfur incorporation and modification in natural products
biosynthesis. This work has the potential to yield new strategies to unleash the
power of enzymatic reactions in natural products
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.