* 2239591
* CAREER: Investigating Curiosity-Driven Visual Processing during Science Learning
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Emily Peterson, American University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 06/30/2028
* USD 486,160.00

This project will investigate the role that curiosity plays in students’
learning about scientific phenomena. Curiosity is a hallmark of scientific
discovery and can propel students to ask questions, explore scientific ideas,
enhance memory, and boost persistence during learning. Yet, studies of curiosity
have mostly focused on whether curiosity increases learning rather than how
curiosity increases learning. Therefore, to understand how curiosity impacts
learning about scientific phenomena, this project will conduct a set of three
studies with high school and undergraduate students to test whether sparking
curiosity about scientific phenomena changes students’ visual processing. These
experiments will test whether feeling curious changes visual processing in ways
that support student learning about science. This project will also develop
citizen science projects to engage K-12 students in cognitive science research
about curiosity and visual processing. Results from this project will contribute
to understandings of curiosity and visual processing, provide recommendations
for future interventions to increase the positive impact of curiosity, and will
be the first to examine relations between curiosity and visual processing during
science learning. The project is supported by a CAREER award to American
University by the EHR Core Research (ECR) program, which supports work that
advances the fundamental research literature on STEM
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Within educational research, it is clear that
both motivational processes, such as curiosity, and cognitive processes, such as
visual-spatial thinking, support student learning across STEM fields. The
potential relations among motivational and cognitive processes are well-
articulated at the theoretical level. However, empirical research studies in
education have not yet maximized the potential for cognitive science methods
such as eye-tracking to elucidate these relations, and cognitive science
research has tended to utilize domain-general stimuli (e.g., trivia facts,
faces) to investigate intersection of motivation/emotion and cognition during
learning. Therefore, the central question of this project is: How does curiosity
shape visual processing when students use visuals to learn about scientific
phenomena? To investigate this question, this project will conduct a set of eye-
tracking and behavioral studies to investigate the specific ways curiosity
modulates cognitive correlates of visual processing. In these studies, high
school and undergraduate students will learn about scientific phenomena using
visuals such as maps and diagrams. Study 1 will experimentally manipulate
curiosity using a question-asking intervention. Studies 2 and 3 will examine
within-subject fluctuations in curiosity as students are exposed to visuals
about scientific phenomena designed to spark or resolve curiosity. As brain
regions implicated in curiosity-driven reward processing (i.e., dopaminergic
circuits) are also associated with a range of visual processes including visual
information-seeking and mental imagery formation, this project will target these
visual processes as potential mediators to explain why students learn better
when they feel curious. Because these findings will provide insight into how
(rather than just whether) curiosity supports learning about science, the
proposed research will generate specific recommendations for the types of
science learning tasks that would benefit most from supporting curiosity.
Knowing that, for instance, curiosity impacts learning by supporting visual
information seeking more than by enhancing mental imagery (or vice versa), has
implications for identifying the types of educational tasks that may benefit
most from curiosity-promoting instruction and for developing curiosity-promoting
interventions that are maximally effective in supporting the underlying
processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.