* 2239102
* CAREER: Structure Learning and Forecasting of Large-Scale Time Series
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Sumanta Basu, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Jun Zhu
* 06/30/2028
* USD 89,422.00

In many areas of modern biological and social sciences, researchers and
practitioners seek to gain insight into the dynamics of a complex system using
large-scale time series data sets. Examples include gene regulatory network
reconstruction using time-course gene expression data sets, functional
connectivity analysis of brain network architecture using neurophysiological
signals, and monitoring systemic risk in the financial market using historical
data on many firms' stock prices. The overarching goal of this project is to
develop scalable statistical methods for learning such dynamic relationships
using high-dimensional time series (HDTS) data sets, and provide a rigorous
analysis of their properties. These methods, upon successful completion, are
expected to aid data-driven testable hypothesis generation in systems biology,
imaging-based biomarker search in computational neuroscience, and inform
regulatory policy for financial risk management and monitoring.The research
outcomes will be integrated into a number of education and outreach activities,
including development of a modern data science curriculum with an accompanying
online textbook as well as training of graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing algorithms for analyzing HDTS data sets
rely primarily on using modern regularization in machine learning coupled with a
squared error loss designed for independent data. This is in sharp contrast with
the core modeling philosophy of classical time series, where temporal dependence
among observations is explicitly encoded in the likelihood or loss function to
increase the accuracy of structure learning and prediction. This project will
narrow the gap by designing new algorithms where temporal dependence and
regularization inform each other using dependence-aware machine learning
methods. In particular, impulse response and quantile-specific graphical models
in the time domain, adaptively regularized graphical models in the frequency
domain, and random forests that explicitly incorporate temporal dependence in
building regression trees, will be developed. These methods will be validated on
real data sets from genomics, neuroscience and financial economics in
consultation with domain experts. Results will be disseminated to public by
publishing peer-reviewed articles in statistics, machine learning and other
scientific journals. Software implementations of algorithms developed in this
project will be made publicly available in the form of R
packages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.