* 2239539
* CAREER: CAS: Broadband UV-NIR Ultrafast Photochemistry Imaged in Space and Time
* MPS,CHE
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2028
* Elham Ghadiri, Wake Forest University
* Continuing Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 01/31/2028
* USD 260,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Elham Ghadiri of Wake Forest University is
advancing time-resolved microscopies and using them to visualize how the
fundamental photochemical charge-transfer processes taking place in solar light-
harvesting materials are affected by the microscopic structure of their local
surroundings. Capturing these charge-transfer processes is challenging, however,
as they take place in times approaching a millionth of a billionth of a second,
and the time scales vary from one point to another in a material on nanometer
length scales. Dr. Ghadiri and her students are developing femtosecond optical
microscopy techniques that can visualize the fundamental photochemical reactions
in light-harvesting semiconductors made from earth-abundant materials. Their
discoveries could lead to a better understanding of complex photochemical
processes that take place in highly heterogenous materials, as well as help to
develop design criteria for efficient light-harvesting materials used in future
clean energy generation and storage applications. In partnership with the WFU
sustainability program, the Ghadiri group will engage in community outreach
using research-based educational platforms designed to educate people of all
ages about the role of sustainable solar devices in daily life as one aspect of
climate change mitigation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ghadiri group will develop
ultrafast microscopy and spectroscopy methods to allow the visualization of
fundamental photoinduced reaction dynamics in complex and heterogeneous solar
energy conversion materials. The primary focus is on semiconductors that are
highly light-absorbing and that are based on earth-abundant elements, which
makes them promising candidates for sustainable energy conversion applications.
The performance of solar cells fabricated from the materials depends on the
efficiency of ultrafast and fast electron and proton transfer reactions that
occur independently, and in competition with each other. Ultrafast transient
absorption and diffuse reflectance microscopies will be used to probe the
dynamics on sub-micron length scales and ultrafast time scales with broad
spectral coverage. The project aims to provide an in-depth spatiotemporal
analysis of charge carrier processes that are central to solar cell function.
The advancement of microscopy tools that push the limits of conventional time-
resolved spectroscopy is a potential broader impact of the
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.