* 2239472
* CAREER: Nonlinear Infrared Studies of Biomolecular Coacervation
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Arnaldo Serrano, University of Notre Dame
* Continuing Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 02/29/2028
* USD 260,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms A (CSDM-A)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Arnaldo Serrano of the University of Notre
Dame is using advanced laser-based spectroscopic techniques to investigate
protein structure and interactions both in and on the surface of droplets that
are composed of distinct phases. Proteins fold into well-defined three
dimensional structures 'spontaneously' in biological organisms and are likely
involved in cellular organization. The Serrano group is advancing two-
dimensional infrared spectroscopy and microscopy methods that can detect changes
in protein folding and shape with high sensitivity and specificity. By also
using small well-controlled droplets, impacts on protein function and structure
can be learned. Discoveries made through this line of experimental inquiry could
lead to better understanding of protein structure that could be subsequently
modulated to achieve targeted functions. The Serrano group will also engage with
other researchers through a regional graduate student workshop on advanced
ultrafast spectroscopy and imaging, as well as in the development of an open-
source web-based chemical kinetics software platform for
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Serrano group will study liquid-liquid
phase separation (LLPS) or coacervation using ultrafast infrared spectroscopic
tools including two-dimensional infrared (2D-IR) and infrared sum frequency
(IRSF) spectroscopies. Organization of building blocks in biological systems
such as those that form from proteins during LLPS, are hypothesized to represent
a universal mechanism of cellular organization with phase transitions being
critical to the level of protein secondary structure and hydration that is
locally observed. The chemical physics of proteins and other biopolymers will be
studied as new phases form. 2D-IR and IRSF spectroscopies will be used to
monitor the in-situ characterization of protein structure, dynamics, and
solvation within liquid-liquid phase-separated droplets. The advancement of
these spectroscopic tools coupled with LLPS droplet systems has the potential to
create new biophysical measurement approaches capable of revealing how phase
separation induces variations on the secondary structure and function of
proteins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.