* 2239189
* AGS-FIRP Track 1: The 2023 University of Nebraska DOW (Doppler on Wheels) Education and Outreach (UNDEO-2023) Project
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Adam Houston, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Subhashree Mishra
* 12/31/2023
* USD 49,986.00

This award will provide funding for an educational deployment of the Doppler on
Wheels (DOW) mobile radar which is part of the Community Instruments and
Facilities (CIF) suite of instruments supported by the Facilities for
Atmospheric Research &amp; Education (FARE) program. The project aims to aims to
provide undergraduate and graduate students in the University of Nebraskaâ€™s
Radar Meteorology course an opportunity to use a research radar to collect data
for small student-driven research projects; improve scientific literacy of
students in a large-enrollment general-education meteorology course; and exhibit
the DOW facility to local K-12 students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
enable integration of field-based research experience into the course curriculum
and advance student understanding of weather radar theory and application. The
project will also contribute to the development of a globally competitive
science, technology, Engineering and Math (STEM) workforce and improved STEM
education by providing an educational opportunity that enables students to gain
experience and professional skills in radar meteorology, field-program design
and execution, scientific data collection and analysis, and scientific
communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.