* 2239328
* CAREER: Unifying Scientific Knowledge with Machine Learning for Forward, Inverse, and Hybrid Modeling of Scientific Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Anuj Karpatne, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 06/30/2028
* USD 198,303.00

One of the fundamental goals in science is to build mathematical models of
scientific systems that can explain the nature of the physical world by
predicting the system's behavior. Current standards of science-based models,
rooted in scientific theories and equations, suffer from several shortcomings in
modeling complex real-world systems. At the core of these shortcomings is their
theoretical scientific nature that restricts them from making effective use of
data that is not well-described theoretically. Consequently, machine learning
methods, that can automatically extract patterns and relationships from data,
are increasingly being viewed as promising alternatives to science-based models.
However, black-box machine learning models, that solely rely on information
contained in data and are agnostic to scientific theories, have met with limited
success in scientific problems. Instead, there is a growing realization to unify
scientific knowledge with machine learning in the emerging field of knowledge-
guided machine learning. This project aims to make novel advances in knowledge-
guided machine learning in the context of three driving use-cases: fluid
dynamics, aerosol modeling, and lake modeling. A central goal of this project is
to prepare the next generation of workforce in science and engineering
comprising of a diverse cadre of students who can easily cross disciplinary
boundaries between machine learning and scientific fields. This project will
also have direct impacts to science and society through the three real-world
use-cases and through collaborations with industry partners. The long-term
vision of this project is to establish knowledge-guided machine learning as a
full-fledged research and education discipline for the advancement of
science.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to make novel
advances in three primary research tasks of knowledge-guided machine learning:
forward modeling with scientific equations and data, inverse modeling for
inferring parameters in science-based models, and hybrid-science-machine
learning modeling to remove imperfections in science-based models. This project
will contribute transformative innovations in knowledge-guided machine learning
for incorporating a wide variety of scientific knowledge in machine learning
frameworks, from partial differential equations in fluid dynamics to numerical
models in aerosol modeling and phenomenological rules in lake modeling. In the
task of forward modeling, this project will develop a new class of algorithms in
science-guided curriculum learning to exploit the interplay between data-driven
and scientific supervision while training deep learning models. This project
will also develop novel science-guided resampling strategies for generating
scientifically consistent predictions during inference. In the task of inverse
modeling, this project will lead to novel formulations of knowledge-guided
inverse modeling, where scientific supervision (in terms of knowledge of the
forward model) is used to guide the training of machine learning-based inverse
models. In the task of hybrid modeling, this project will result in a new class
of residual correcting neural networks for augmenting systematic biases or
residuals in science-based outputs, and methods to jointly infer parameters of
science-based models while correcting for residuals in their outputs. Beyond the
three use-cases, the methodologies developed in this project can potentially
impact a number of scientific disciplines where scientific knowledge and models
are routinely used.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.