* 2239799
* CAREER: On The Hydrodynamics of River Ice
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2027
* Trung Le, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2027
* USD 405,047.00

River ice drives many disasters, such as flooding, scour, ice jams, and bank
erosion. Understanding this flow will lead to new mitigation measures and
prevention methods for disasters in streams and rivers. However, this problem is
very complex because it requires obtaining turbulent flow data at a large
disparity in spatial scales, from the level of macro-roughness on the channel
bed to the entire channel planform (kilometers). The proposed project will use
field measurement, theoretical analysis, and numerical simulation as a holistic
approach to understanding the key factors that govern the river ice processes.
This proposal's educational plan focuses on the three-prong collaborations with
the Red River Keepers, the ND EPSCoR Office, and the USGS North Dakota Water
Science Center to provide accessible scientific activities for local K-12
students and teachers. These educational activities are aimed at kindling the
interests of K-12 students in winter hydraulics. Furthermore, a series of
seminars and workshops will be organized to inform the general public and the
authorities about the importance of icy flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal aims to integrate research and educational activities, the Ice-Flows
project, based on the idea that ice coverage dictates the turbulent flow
characteristics of rivers in winter. One unique contribution of the proposed
research is developing a theoretical approach to investigate the impacts of ice
coverage on bed shear stress in meandering rivers. While the distribution of bed
shear stress has been studied before in laboratory settings, it has rarely been
studied in alluvial channels. Another core novelty of the proposed work is a
model for cross-stream momentum transfer in ice-covered rivers. Using field
measurement and numerical simulation, the proposed model will reveal the link
between the cross-stream momentum transfer and the three-dimensional structure
under ice coverage. The PI's development of a state-of-the-art numerical
framework for Large Eddy Simulation is the essential tool to analyze icy flows
at roughness scales for alluvial channels. The proposed LES model will be used
as a tool to investigate the hydrodynamic impacts of ice cover at a large
disparity of spatial and temporal scales. Therefore, the proposed project has
the potential to transform the current engineering practices, which have been
primarily based on empirical relationships.&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by Fluid Dynamics program and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.