* 2239614
* CAREER: CAS: A Building Block Approach to Study Charge Transport: From Single-Molecule to Bulk
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Michael Inkpen, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Francis D'Souza
* 06/30/2028
* USD 282,011.00

With this CAREER project, supported by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp;
Mechanisms B Program of the Chemistry Division, Michael Inkpen of the Department
of Chemistry at the University of Southern California (USC) seeks to develop
integrated methods that explore how electrical charges move through materials
across different length scales (from single-molecule to bulk). The proposed
approach draws inspiration from the chemical building blocks and linkages used
to build conducting and permanently porous ordered polymers (OPs). The key goals
of this project are to provide a deeper fundamental understanding of how the
atomic details of these molecular structures influence their electronic
function(s), and to evaluate possible correlations between charge transport
through chemically comparable single-molecule and bulk materials. This research
ultimately aims to expose new design principles for molecular-scale devices,
such as wires and switches, that approach the limit of miniaturization for
electronic circuits used in computation and data storage. The goal is to
identify the most promising molecular building blocks for constructing
functional OPs with potential applications in energy storage, energy conversion,
or sensing. Concurrently, Dr. Inkpen and his research team will leverage
development of a new academic search database to engage underrepresented 1st and
2nd year undergraduate students, by improving the teaching of molecular
nanoscience at USC and beyond, and by implementing a virtual, asynchronous
summer workshop to reach students who cannot easily attend in person outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fields of molecular electronics and
conducting ordered polymers (OPs) each are directed at the understanding and
manipulation of charge transport through molecularly well-defined systems, yet
efforts in these research domains are rarely coordinated. Bridging these
research areas, this proposal aims to explore fundamental structure-electronic
property relationships across different length scales by studying model single-
molecule, extended oligomeric, and bulk materials using a combination of
scanning tunneling microscope-based break junction (STM-BJ), conducting-probe
atomic force microscopy (CP-AFM), and 4-point probe methods. Quantum
interference (QI), d-Ï€ conjugation, and redox effects will be probed in new
families of molecular devices inspired by the multi-topic and metal-containing
structures used in two-dimensional and three-dimensional OPs. Possible trends
between single molecule conductance and band transport in structurally analogous
bulk materials will be evaluated as a means to select specific building blocks
for the construction of extended ordered systems with targeted electronic
properties. New synthetic strategies will be developed that target the
construction of compositionally distinct OPs with comparable crystallinity and
defect concentrations. Studies of such model extended materials, on surfaces and
in bulk, have the potential to improve structure-property comparisons and to
allow practitioners to build new nanoscale-to-bulk transport property
correlations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.