* 2239598
* CAREER: Atomic-Scale Origins of Fast Ion Conduction through Complex Solid-State Electrochemical Interfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Kai He, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 02/29/2028
* USD 252,351.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;Ceramic materials are essential for clean
energy technologies. Specifically, the next-generation solid-state batteries
using ceramics as a medium to conduct ions between positive and negative
electrodes can improve the safety and energy density over today’s conventional
liquid-based lithium-ion battery technology. However, the ability of ion
transport in ceramics is not high enough to make batteries charge faster for use
in electric vehicles and high-power applications. To solve this critical issue,
this project aims to study how the material’s structures and interfaces affect
the ion conduction under complex electrochemical conditions. Advanced electron
microscopy techniques are used to visualize these fundamental processes on the
nanometer scale. This is important because the obtained scientific knowledge can
be used as design rules to guide the development of viable energy storage
technologies, enhancing the energy security and sustainability. This project
provides training on microscopy and analytical tools for diverse students at all
levels and promotes broader participation of women and underrepresented
minorities in the workforce development. The education and outreach program
designed “for understanding nanotechnology and materials experience (FunMe)”
offers summer research interns and extracurricular activities for undergraduate
and K-12 students by leveraging the minority-serving programs partnered with
local and nationwide initiatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DETAILS: &lt;br/&gt;Solid-state electrolytes with high ionic conductivity and
interfacial stability are vital and urgently needed to enable safe and high-
performance all-solid-state batteries for the next generation energy storage
technology. This CAREER project aims to fundamentally understand the atomic-
scale origin of fast lithium-ion conduction through complex electrochemical
interfaces of ceramic solid-state electrolytes. Specifically, the effects of
grain boundary microstructure, compositional heterogeneity, and space charge
induced electrostatic potential on the ionic conductivity as well as the
correlated electro-chemo-mechanical interface degradation mechanism will be
elucidated using in situ transmission electron microscopy integrated with
operando electrochemical impedance spectroscopy under air-free environments. The
gained new knowledge will provide design principles for microstructural
optimization and interfacial engineering to improve the cell performance and
stability. This research will have multifaceted impacts on the advancements of
fundamental theories, microscopy methodologies, and technically viable all-
solid-state batteries for energy-intensive applications. The integrated
education and outreach program offers a unique microscopy-centric STEM pipeline
to engage graduate, undergraduate, and K-12 students, enhance broader
participation of women and underrepresented minorities, and support their career
development and work readiness through interrelated teaching, mentoring,
training, and outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.