* 2240431
* Collaborative Research: Testing the Role that Biotic Interactions Play in the Latitudinal Diversity Gradient: A Chemical Community Ecology Approach to Understanding Tree Diversity
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2026
* Jonathan Myers, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 02/28/2026
* USD 250,472.00

One of the most striking features of our planet is the dramatic increase in
biodiversity from the poles to the equator. This global diversity gradient is
especially noticeable among trees. Forest plots measuring 0.25 km2 contain 10
tree species in subarctic Canada, between 10 and 70 tree species in the
continental United States, and &gt;1,200 tree species in Amazonia. Since Darwin
and Wallace, biologists have hypothesized that environmental stress predominates
in temperate and seasonal climates, but the stresses experienced by plants in
warm, wet, tropical rainforests are dominated by their interactions with other
organisms, including insect herbivores and microbial pathogens. Plants are
thought to evolve chemical defenses against their enemies, and their enemies to
evolve counters to these defenses, more rapidly in the tropics, resulting in
greater variation in defensive chemistry among plant species in the tropics, and
ultimately greater species diversity. These ideas have gone largely untested at
large scales because of a lack of tools to study the astonishing diversity of
plant chemistry. This study will overcome this historical obstacle to chemical
ecology by taking advantage of recent innovations in metabolomics—the study of
the chemical profiles of organisms. The scientists will examine species
differences in chemical profiles, or metabolomes, for &gt;2,000 tree and shrub
species in 20 long-term forest plots ranging from subarctic Canada to the Amazon
Rainforest, their effects on the growth and survival of individual trees, their
contribution to the maintenance of diversity. The project will support two Ph.D.
students from underrepresented groups at the University of Texas at Austin and
Washington University in St. Louis, undergraduate research opportunities, and
capacity building in the larger research community. Other broader impacts
include offering workshops at international meetings and the creation of a
publicly available metabolome database for the research community. These data
will support future research at US Government-supported sites within the
National Science Foundation’s National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) and
the Smithsonian Institution’s Forest Global Earth
Observatory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will couple recent innovations
in ecological metabolomics with existing data on the diversity and dynamics of
forest-tree communities that span large-scale gradients in climate, latitude,
and tree-species diversity from boreal forest in Canada (11 species in 21
hectares [ha]) to tropical rainforest in Amazonia (&gt;1,200 species in 25 ha).
This project will leverage existing data on the growth, survival, and mapped
distributions of more than 3,600 tree species in 20 large-scale forest-dynamics
plots coordinated by the Smithsonian Forest Global Earth Observatory (ForestGEO)
and San Diego Zoo Global, as well as existing metabolomics data from 13 forest
plots. Building on these data, the researchers will collect and analyze leaves
of 1,367 species in 7 new forest plots that represent unique climates and/or
provide key seedling performance datasets. The researchers will combine
metabolomics data, neighborhood demographic models, and theoretical simulations
to determine i) how leaf-secondary chemistry shapes local species interactions
within tree communities, ii) how the effects of leaf-secondary chemistry on
local species interactions vary across latitudinal and climatic gradients, and
iii) the importance of chemically mediated niche differences in maintaining
species diversity across latitudinal and climatic gradients. Ultimately, the
combination of long-term forest plots and novel techniques in metabolomics will
provide unprecedented answers, in scope, scale, and substance, to questions that
are fundamental to understanding Earth’s biodiversity. In addition to mentoring
undergrad and graduate students, the researchers will lead a forest-metabolomics
workshop at international meetings to train students and other scientists in the
collection, analysis, and application of metabolomic data to community-scale
ecology. The workshop will provide capacity building for early-career
researchers from US and developing countries in Africa, Asia, and Latin America.
Finally, the project will generate a public database of metabolites for over 200
North American and over 2,000 Neotropical tree species, most of which are
understudied tropical rainforest trees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.