* 2240567
* Conference: Thematic Program in Geometric Group Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Daniel Wise, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Eriko Hironaka
* 12/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

This award provides support for US based participants in the semester-long
thematic program in Geometric Group Theory to be held at the CRM in Montreal,
Canada during the months of January–June, 2023. More particularly the award will
support the travel of approximately 50 junior participants from institutions in
the United States to the conferences and workshops taking place as part of the
program. Geometric Group Theory is the branch of mathematics concerned with the
symmetries of abstract geometric objects, which range from graphs (systems of
networks) to surfaces to three-dimensional shapes such as our physical universe.
The geometric study of symmetries is an active and rapidly expanding field. This
award will enhance the conferences with additional connections and
collaborations, and benefit US institutions by spreading new techniques,
questions and research ideas, thus contributing to the training of the next
generation of mathematicians.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The semester program will
include 6 workshops around vibrant sub-areas of Geometric Group Theory:
“Measured group theory” looks at groups from a probabilistic perspective and is
highly interdisciplinary; “Cube complexes and combinatorial nonpositive
curvature” includes new topics within a very well-established subfield of
geometric group theory; “Geometry of subgroups” concerns the study of the
geometry and finiteness properties of subgroups and is an emerging area in the
field; “Groups around 3-manifolds” involves the interplay between 3-manifolds
and Lie groups with geometric group theory; “Orderable groups” studies groups
with an invariant left-order and is a classical topic that has become of recent
interest through a broad range of applications; and “Huge groups” studies groups
acting with infinite stabilizers and seeks to broaden successful aspects of the
current theory.&lt;br/&gt;More details about the semester activities can be
found at this website:
https://www.crmath.ca/en/activities/#/type/activity/id/38271&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Please report errors in award information by writing to:
awardsearch@nsf.gov.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.