* 2240031
* CAREER: A deeper look at state-dependent noise in systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Gireeja Ranade, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Eyad Abed
* 05/31/2028
* USD 422,181.00

Traditional models in control typically assume that any environmental noise or
disturbance is independent of the state of the system itself. While this
assumption greatly simplifies the models, it is not always true. Under a
standard linear control perspective, some systems with state-dependent
observation noise, (which often manifests as multiplicative noise), would be
considered uncontrollable. This CAREER project focuses on discovering new non-
linear control strategies for such systems and providing provable guarantees for
their performance. This research has the potential to reduce conservativism of
designs by interactively extracting more useful information from
multiplicatively-corrupted measurements. The ability to analyze and give
guarantees for refined models can better characterize the risk for safety-
critical systems where state-dependent noise terms cannot be ignored. The
education plan for this CAREER project includes three structured interventions
to improve inclusion in higher education. These include: (1) Recruit diverse new
students through the PI’s novel lower-division engineering course that showcases
real-world applications of linear-algebra through hands-on hardware labs. This
CAREER project will build pathways to disseminate this new curriculum to two-
year community colleges. (2) Develop explicit support structures for students
and build community through an automated, scalable and feedback-based process
for inclusive student study groups. (3) Integrate accessible and structured
research-at-scale experiences into regular coursework, which can reduce the
barrier-to-entry and broaden research access for all undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;State-dependent noise in systems can emerge
through model linearization, parameter uncertainty or drift, and timing jitter.
A key technical challenge posed by zero-mean multiplicative observation noise is
that it can destroy sign information, and thus linear strategies can be
unboundedly suboptimal. However, non-linear strategies that leverage the dual
nature of control can do better. This CAREER project investigates such
strategies through three steps. (1) Since the PI’s prior work suggests that
control strategies with both exploration and exploitation elements can perform
well, this project will first compute the probability distributions induced on
the state by specific periodic non-linear control strategies. The shapes of
these distributions will guide the search for new control strategies using
computational approaches (e.g. maximum likelihood, policy gradient). (2) Regret-
based formulations will be used to provide guarantees where optimality of
strategies may be difficult to establish. Information-theoretic bit-level models
will be used to extend to the case of slow-varying multiplicative noise and non-
zero mean. (3) Finally, the project will explore approaches to augment local
models with multiplicative noise in guided policy search for reinforcement
learning frameworks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.