* 2240506
* Lower mantle seismic anisotropy and heterogeneities - insight from the thermoelastic properties of CaSiO3 perovskite
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2026
* Jin Zhang, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy Panero
* 01/31/2026
* USD 276,079.00

Growing evidence shows that the motions of mantle convection do not effectively
mix the Earth’s deep interior, most notably at the top and the bottom of the
lower mantle. Seismic observations show significant variations in both wave
speeds and anisotropy, indicative of poor mixing of different rock types. One of
the most important materials that may be responsible for these observations is
calcium silicate perovskite, or CaSiO3. It is not only a major component of the
ambient lower mantle, but also an important phase in the surface crustal
materials that are transported into the lower mantle. Thus, estimating the
amount of CaSiO3 throughout the Earth’s lower mantle can elucidate the material
exchange process between the Earth’s interior and the surface. This requires
measurement of the wave speeds through this mineral as a function of direction
and minor element composition, which is the focus of this project. This work
will also enable PI Zhang and her research group to develop a seminar course at
Texas A&amp;M University focusing on modern synchrotron experimental techniques
used to the Earth and other planets from the surface to the interior. No similar
class has been offered at Texas A&amp;M University, and such class will open
enable research opportunities for students, bringing potential users to
synchrotron facilities, and training the next-generation researchers and
scientists in US. High school students from underrepresented groups will be
recruited to work with PI on research projects, promoting diversity of the
geoscience community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will evaluate CaSiO3
perovskite (davemaoite, Ca-pv) as the potential candidate for explaining the
observed seismic anisotropy and heterogeneities in the Earth’s lower mantle. The
thermoelastic properties of cubic and tetragonal Ca-pv will be measured through
Brillouin spectroscopy methods combined with diamond anvil cell technique. Due
to the unquenchable nature of Ca-pv and the poor coupling between CaSiO3 and
Nd:YAG laser with the 1024 nm wavelength, the sample will be synthesized in-situ
using the CO2 laser heating method. Equation of state of Ca-pv will be
determined using synchrotron X-ray diffraction. Utilizing the better constrained
thermoelastic properties of cubic and tetragonal Ca-pv, PI Zhang and her group
will evaluate the role of Ca-pv in the observed seismic heterogeneities in the
lower mantle, as well as estimate the seismic anisotropy produced by Ca-pv after
combining with textural measurements of Ca-pv.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.