* 2240347
* Workshop on Information Systems for Disaster Response Management (WIS-DRM); San Antonio, Texas; Part 1 Virtual, and Part 2 19-20 June 2023
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Robin Dillon-Merrill, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 02/29/2024
* USD 49,995.00

In the digital era, the success of disaster management hinges on the proper use
of cutting-edge information technology (IT) by stakeholders in and beyond the
affected communities. However, the growth of Information Systems (IS) research
on disaster-related problems is slow and accumulated knowledge is scarce.
Acquisition of domain knowledge in disaster management enables IS scholars to
identify opportunities, challenges, and resources in conducting
interdisciplinary research projects. Drawing on their experience, the PIs
propose a new workshop to serve as an emerging forum to connect IS scholars with
disaster management experts. For IS scholars, this workshop will allow them to
collaborate more effectively with cross-disciplinary teams on high-risk, high-
reward ideas and build a critical mass. This workshop will also help disaster
management researchers understand and capture new possibilities and pathways
that the IS discipline can reveal. Finally, this workshop will fuel the
integration of related lines of inquiry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This workshop
aims to generate collaborative efforts between IS and disaster management fields
and to eventually lead to transformative discoveries that answer the key
research questions articulated in the NSF’s 10 Big Ideas, NHERI’s Science Plan,
and NWIRP Strategic Plan. It will focus on topics such as but not limited to,
the discovery of knowledge gaps and misalignment between IS and disaster
management scholarship; consideration of equity, vulnerability, and justice in
IT tool access, use, and management; and designing cyberinfrastructure to
improve hazard data collection and analysis. The workshop will welcome different
methods, such as qualitative, quantitative, and design science, as they yield
different insights that inform disaster management strategies and practices. The
workshop has two parts. In the Part 1 event (to be conducted virtually), IS
scholars will learn from disaster management practitioners and researchers,
whereas in the Part 2 event (to be hosted in collaboration with the 2023 NHERI
Summer Institute, IS scholars with an interest in disaster-relevant research
will interact with disaster management scholars to further build joint research
projects and/or grant proposals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.