* 2240211
* CAREER: Leveraging the Three-Dimensional Multi-Stability from Origami Folding to Synthesize Multi-Functional Material Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2022,04/30/2024
* Suyi Li, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 04/30/2024
* USD 236,310.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) award supports
fundamental research to derive a novel approach to harness three-dimensional
multi-stability induced by origami folding for engineering multi-functional
material systems. These material systems can potentially bear mechanical loads
but also perform other duties. The research aims at transforming the ancient art
of origami into a theoretical framework for designing multi-functional
materials. It is envisioned that these multi-functional origami materials can
significantly advance the performance and sustainability of many strategic
applications like morphing airframes, adaptive wind turbines, energy harvesters,
and medical devices. Origami folding - due to its seemingly infinite
capabilities of developing 3D geometries from 2D sheets - is becoming an
increasingly popular subject among mathematicians, educators, architects, and
engineers. However, we are still scratching the surface of its potential. The
research will formulate a systematic method: analysis, design, and experiment,
to fully uncover the physics underpinning the 3D multi-stability from folding.
Such physical insights will be exploited to create linkages to translate these
stability properties into unprecedented material functions, such as on-demand
property programming, static diode effects, and motion rectification. Research
results will also be leveraged to enhance origami as an engaging teaching tool
through the creation of a book of origami folding exercises for teaching
engineering. The research will also lead to a Creative Inquiry project for
undergraduates, in collaboration with the Clemson Engineers for Developing
Countries program, on the design of origami emergency shelters in Haiti. This
project will produce educational tools that are specifically designed to be
adopted by other educators to train high-quality researchers and engineers as
well as to motivate K-12 students to pursue undergraduate and graduate STEM
study. The research outcomes of this project will enable new low-cost material
systems to adaptively protect infrastructure systems from natural and man-made
disasters and to increase the collection of energy from renewable
sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multi-stability has been used to create many
multi-functional materials and structures for shape reconfiguration, property
adaptation, vibration control, and energy harvesting. However, current systems
are built upon low dimensional mechanisms such as the buckled beams, the
simplicity of which severely limits their overall potential. This CAREER award
aims to leverage the mechanics of origami folding to advance the study of multi-
stable systems into the fundamentally three-dimensional domain. The
sophisticated shape transformations via folding can impart novel stability
properties that are unavailable in the lower dimensional mechanisms, including
the anisotropic arrangement of stable and unstable states, asymmetric energy
barrier between stable states, and the use of pressurization to eliminate or
create stable equilibria. This project will formulate nonlinear mechanics
analysis, experiment validation, and crease design methodologies to harness
these stability properties and synthesize architected multi-functional material
systems. This project, if successful, will create a new field of three-
dimensional multi-stability, including a high-fidelity mechanics modeling
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.