* 2240977
* I-Corps: A Scalable Cloud-based Route Optimization Software for Efficient Aerial and Road Logistics
* TIP,TI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Sharan Srinivas, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 08/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a software application to generate optimized route plans for
parcel delivery. The goal is to empower last-mile service providers who employ
electric trucks and a mixed truck-drone fleet. The adoption of electric trucks
and autonomous drones for last-mile logistics has risen steadily in the United
States due to growing parcel volumes, rising costs, changing customer
expectations, and increasing corporate climate pledges. Lack of capabilities in
the existing technology limits the safe, seamless and efficient use of such
emerging ground and aerial vehicles. The proposed software application may meet
the emerging market needs by enabling logistic managers, route planners,
dispatchers, and truck drivers with faster planning, greater visibility, real-
time tracking and turn-by-turn navigation. This may allow service providers to
lower supply chain costs and be competitive while facilitating last-mile
delivery solutions that lead to lower carbon emissions and faster fulfillment.
These capabilities may accelerate the adoption of electric trucks and drones for
package delivery and alleviate the growing strain on this distribution
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of
a cloud-based route optimization software that will generate last-mile
distribution plans for electric trucks and hybrid truck-drone systems. The
proposed machine learning and optimization-based decomposition algorithms are
designed to exploit problem-specific characteristics, such as battery
constraints, charging operations, and payload capacity, to efficiently solve
complex routing problems. The algorithm also may account for real-life spatial
(e.g., no-fly zones), temporal (e.g., time-of-day operating restrictions) and
logistical (e.g., customer availability) constraints to ensure practical route
plans. In addition, the proposed technology also may allow an active traffic
management strategy by generating an alternative route plan in real-time using a
deep reinforcement learning-based dynamic rerouting model. The proposed route
optimization software may lead to new theories and contribute to the state-of-
the-art knowledge on route planning methods and advance the capabilities of
route optimization software to handle new logistics technologies for efficient
ground and aerial last-mile delivery service.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.