* 2240535
* SPARKing Representation in Cognitive Science
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Jean Fox Tree, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 07/31/2026
* USD 239,553.00

African American, Latina/o/e/x/, and Indigenous students and researchers are
underrepresented in cognitive psychology and cognitive sciences. These fields of
study generally focus on understanding how the mind represents and manipulates
knowledge and how these mental representations and processes are realized in the
brain. With its focus on understanding how humans perceive, think, and
communicate, cognitive psychology and training in cognitive psychology and/or
the cognitive sciences positions individuals for careers ranging from academia
to industry, specializing in topics from artificial intelligence to business and
marketing. Cognitive fields are a centerpiece of future jobs growth; the aim in
this proposal is to support the development of a diverse work force. The SPARK
Society supports learners and researchers at all ranks (undergraduate, graduate,
early career, senior scholars) with the overarching goal of creating a support
infrastructure to help historically marginalized individuals excel in this field
of study. Support is provided in the form of group mentoring, peer-to-peer
mentoring, and dissemination of informational resources across multiple
platforms. Improving experiences of historically marginalized scholars helps
create a more just society. The Spark Society partners with several national
conferences for cognitive scientists, allowing for community building for
historically marginalized scholars and providing mentoring wherever they are
located. This creates a sense of belonging and has the potential to reduce
feelings of isolation that drive historically marginalized learners and
researchers away from the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mentorship model is
supplemented by evaluative measures, including analyses of PhD programs.
Understanding how changes in graduate program recruitment and requirements have
impacted changes in the compositional diversity of cognitive science and
cognitive psychology programs, and by developing clear methodologies to identify
why historically marginalized scholars are largely absent from field-wide
leadership, will allow for more targeted development of effective programs to
support training in the field and create a space where leadership is an open and
desirable avenue. The research will focus on developing methodologies that allow
for evaluation of graduate policy effectiveness in recruitment of historically
marginalized students. Central to this aim is identification of relevant
programs, coding of policy changes related to recruitment, and consideration of
outcomes (i.e., program completion, job placement). Development of methodologies
that assess the impact of policy change on graduate student diversity and
identify drivers hindering diversity in leadership are important steps towards
the long-term goals of creating a more diverse and inclusive field of study and
accompanying workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is also supported by
the EDU Racial Equity in STEM Education program (EDU Racial Equity). The program
supports projects that advance racial equity in STEM education and workforce
development through research and practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.