* 2240024
* CAREER: On Non-Linear Graph Eliminations
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Xiaorui Sun, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Peter Brass
* 01/31/2028
* USD 173,567.00

Graphs, being natural abstractions of relationships, are widely used to model
data from various scenarios, such as social networks, deep neural networks, and
human brain neuron systems. The scientific research community has benefited from
the profound expressibility and analysis power of graphs. However, with the
explosive growth in the amount of available data, traditional graph algorithms
often fall short of efficiency. This project aims to develop faster graph
algorithms from the aspect of graph sparsification, which compresses large
graphs into small graphs so that computation can be performed on smaller graphs.
The goal of this project is to advance graph sparsification as a new paradigm of
graph algorithms and to provide new sparsification-based software for graph
problems that are crucial to applications in machine learning, data mining, and
computational biology. The investigator will incorporate the research closely
into education by providing research opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students and integrating the research results into related
courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to investigate graph vertex
sparsification tools that reduce both vertices and edges of graphs while
preserving certain graph properties between a subset of vertices. The major
challenge of vertex sparsification lies in the fact that the reduction of
vertices is difficult to achieve with linear operators, such as Gaussian
elimination, which are employed by classic edge reduction. To address this
challenge, this project will focus on developing and analyzing non-linear
operators, such as combinatorial truncation and non-linear algebraic transform,
to construct new vertex sparsifiers for fundamental graph properties. In
addition, this project will propose new principles for designing vertex-
sparsification-based algorithms. Particularly, this will include incorporating
vertex sparsifiers with optimization methods, investigating the interaction
between sparsifiers and other structures such as graph decompositions, and
identifying the key features of sparsifiers that enable their applications in
dynamic, distributed, and parallel settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.