* 2240352
* GOALI: Hybrid Silicon-Transparent Conductive Oxide Devices for Large-Scale On-chip Wavelength Division Multiplexing Optical Interconnects
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2022,11/30/2023
* Alan Wang, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 11/30/2023
* USD 329,918.00

Large-scale parallel optical interconnects hold the key to resolving the grand
challenge of enormous bandwidth requirement between on-chip cores and within
multi-chip modules. Silicon photonics, which is the mostly available integrated
photonic platform, must excel in energy efficiency and bandwidth density in
order to meet the stringent requirement of future extreme-scale photonic
interconnects. The goal of this GOALI proposal is to develop hybrid silicon-
transparent conductive oxide (Si-TCO) devices, especially microring resonators
including microdisks, with unprecedented electro-optic (E-O) tunability and
energy efficiency for large-scale on-chip wavelength division multiplexing (WDM)
optical interconnects. The proposed research is highly interdisciplinary and
will impact academia, industry, and photonics community by proving a unique path
to integrate highly efficient TCO materials with silicon photonics. If
successful, this GOALI project will lay a solid foundation toward developing a
new type of silicon photonic devices for future extreme-scale on-chip WDM
optical communication. The education and outreach activities will benefit
graduate, undergraduate and K-12 students, and broaden the participation of
under-represented minorities and women students at OSU. This research will also
promote industrial collaboration with Hewlett Packard Enterprise and AIM
Photonics, and broaden the research experiences of students in science and
engineering at Oregon State University (OSU).&lt;br/&gt;Technical:
&lt;br/&gt;TCO materials have attracted escalating research interests in
integrated photonic devices, metamaterials and metasurfaces in recent years due
to the extraordinary refractive index tuning achieved either through oxygen
vacancy doping or electrical gating. In addition, TCO materials can be deposited
with high quality using DC- or RF-sputtering on various platforms, which also
possess long-term stability. Therefore, TCO materials are fully compatible with
silicon photonics and has the potential to be readily integrated with existing
silicon photonic integrated circuits (PICs). This GOALI project will focus on
the development of metal-oxide-semiconductor (MOS) capacitor-driven active
silicon-TCO photonic devices as well as exploring the feasibility of scalable
integration with existing silicon photonic platforms. The main objectives of
this research include: 1) demonstrating hybrid Si-TCO micro-ring filters with
extremely large E-O tuning efficiency to compensate fabrication errors and
temperature variation without any thermal heater; 2) implementing an athermal
on-chip 4-channel WDM transmitter module using dual-functional microring
resonators, which can simultaneously function as wavelength tunable filters and
high speed E-O modulators; and 3) verifying process compatibility and hybrid
integration with silicon photonics for future scalable manufacturing using AIM
Photonics foundry service. We expect that the electrically tunable silicon
microring resonators with near-zero wavelength tuning power will replace the
power-hungry thermal heaters that have been used for decades. Most importantly,
we will prove that such scalable MOS-driven photonic devices can be fabricated
by combining AIM Photonics passive silicon-on-insulator multi-project wafer
(SOI-MPW) runs and in-house TCO processes at OSU.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.