* 2240094
* CAREER: A systems approach to create multiplexed microfluidics to study human immune cell dynamics
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Caroline Jones, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 06/30/2028
* USD 410,527.00

It is difficult to study the function of immune cells directly in a living
person. As a solution, engineers use small microfluidic devices, also known as
microphysiological systems, to simulate the conditions of health and disease in
humans. This CAREER project will lead to the development of validated models of
human inflammation in multiple tissue microenvironments. By mimicking the
complex 3D microenvironments of tissues and organs, the models created will
allow researchers to investigate the dynamic interactions between immune cells,
signaling molecules, and pathogens (micoorganisms that cause disease).
Complementary to microfluidic models, mathematical modeling offers a
quantitative framework to understand the underlying mechanisms and dynamics of
inflammation. By employing mathematical equations and computational simulations,
researchers can design better human-based in vitro (in the lab) models and
analyze cellular and molecular interactions involved in inflammation. These
models aid in predicting and optimizing treatment outcomes, unraveling the
complexity of chronic inflammation, and identifying potential interventions. The
Investigator will integrate research with teaching through an interactive
immunology virtual reality game that teaches how the immune system and vaccines
work. This virtual reality learning module will be presented at the Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) conference and disseminated to the
local community in a K-12 partnership with Dallas and Richardson Independent
School Districts. The Investigator proposes a comprehensive strategy to recruit
and retain underrepresented students and has served in several leadership roles
in the Dallas community, including serving as a mentor for the Young Women In
Science and Engineering Investigators (YWISEI) program and the George A. Jeffrey
NanoExplorers Program at the high school level. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The vision
of the Investigator’s Lab in the next decade is to combine mathematical and
multiplexed microfluidic experimental approaches into a unified and powerful
tool to decipher the emergent properties governing immune cell differentiation
and activation in response to the external microenvironment. Understanding the
basic differences in immune cell function in different microenvironments is
expected to shine light onto the mechanisms of end-organ-failure. Towards this
vision, the goal of this CAREER project is to employ a systems immunology
approach, integrating experimental data with computational modeling to unravel
the dynamics of immune cell responses by pursuing the following objectives: (1)
Creating a multiplexed-microenvironment chip that is informed by a quantitative
framework (deterministic and stochastic spatiotemporal models and data analytics
methods) for immune cell migration and neutrophil extracellular trap release
(NETosis) in specific organoid microenvironments (lung, kidney, brain); (2)
Validating the multiplexed organ microenvironments-on-a-chip and mathematical
models by correlating time-lapse movies of in vitro immune cells phenotypes
(migration and NETosis) with clinical outcomes (end-organ-failure) in pediatric
patients before and after cardiac bypass surgery; and (3) Modulating the immune
function on-chip with lipid mediators and novel chemotactic microparticles. The
engineering tools developed in this project, can be applied not only clinically,
but to study basic mechanisms and roles of immune cells in inflammatory
disorders, infectious disease, and regenerative
therapy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.