* 2240508
* Adapting to the Human Body: Shape-Adaptive Attachment for Parallel Wearable Robots Using Jamming
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Haohan Zhang, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 03/31/2026
* USD 425,000.00

Wearable robots like exoskeletons have been developed to restore movements for
individuals with mobility limitations. These robots are attached to the user’s
body and transmit assistive forces through physical attachments (i.e., belts and
cuffs). However, current belts and cuffs cannot fully conform to the body or
adapt to changes in body shapes (e.g., muscle atrophy). As a result, the
assistive force is unevenly distributed, causing discomfort or even soft-tissue
damage. The challenge of using belts and cuffs as the attachments is more
profound in wearable robots where multiple parallel chains of linkages (i.e.,
parallel mechanisms) are used to connect the body attachments. The deformation
of the cuffs and belts causes model errors, limiting robot performance and
introducing risks of injuries. To address these challenges, this project will
develop a new attachment system for parallel wearable robots to better conform
to the user’s body and adapt to the body shape changes without compromising the
model accuracy. This project offers an exciting opportunity to involve persons
with mobility limitations (e.g., head drop, amputee) in research, fostered by
close collaborations with medical professionals at the University of Utah
Hospital. The project will provide convergence training to engineering students
to also become experts in healthcare. Trainees will shadow physicians in a
multidisciplinary clinic and conduct interviews with patients and their
caregivers to learn the needs of persons with mobility limitations. Workshops
will be organized at conferences to disseminate knowledge and raise awareness of
research for persons with mobility limitations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
objective is to develop a new strategy to attach wearable robots on the human
body to improve comfort, adapt to body shape changes, and ensure accuracy. To
attain this overall objective, jamming structures will be embedded within the
design of the attachments to conform to the body shape when soft, and maintain
that shape when hardened, by manipulating the internal pressure of the jamming
structures. The specific knowledge products will include: (1) a design
methodology for jamming embedded attachments; (2) a dataset to demonstrate
jamming embedded attachment for body shape adaptation as a result of a
disability (e.g., head drop in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis); and (3) a
delineation of longitudinal user-robot interaction using jamming embedded
attachments. The knowledge gained from this research is also expected to
generalize to other biomedical devices (e.g., prostheses, orthoses, braces) and
applications that use wearable devices (e.g., construction, manufacturing). This
work challenges the conventional design paradigm for parallel wearable robots,
emphasizing both the body and the machine. Therefore, the project forms a
roadmap for future research at the intersection of engineering and long-term
patient care.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.