* 2240277
* DARE Conference: Transformative Opportunities for Modeling in Neurorehabilitation; Los Angeles, California; March 3-4, 2023
* ENG,CBET
* 12/15/2022,06/30/2023
* Francisco Valero-Cuevas, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 06/30/2023
* USD 100,000.00

Computer algorithms and models (i.e., computational modeling) of how the brain
controls the body have had profound impacts on the field's scientific
understanding and implementation of rehabilitation in neurological conditions
(neurorehabilitation) such as stroke, Parkinson’s disease, cerebral palsy,
spinal cord injury, etc. Researchers have used computational models of
sensorimotor control and of musculoskeletal dynamics to guide their designs for
neuromodulatory approaches to enhance motor function and for control strategies
of assistive technologies. Similarly, computational models have informed
treatment decisions in orthopedics and sports medicine, where analyses
describing trajectories of development, disability, and recovery have had the
potential to help prioritize and focus treatment. As technologies such as
artificial intelligence, multimodal remote sensors, and multiscale datasets
(from genomics to behavior) begin to integrate with computational modeling, a
future in which personalized, adaptable neurorehabilitation driven by knowledge
of fundamental mechanisms is envisioned to be possible. Nevertheless,
computational modeling efforts remain largely confined to research communities —
and thus underutilized in clinical care and not available to clients of
neurorehabilitation. There is, therefore, an urgent need to bring together
stakeholders invested in these technologies, models, neuroscience,
rehabilitation, and advocate communities to evaluate progress to date,
opportunities opened by novel software and devices, and client needs. This will
allow the community to identify gaps and opportunities to improve quality of
life and care. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference will bring together experts
and trainees from around the world to discuss critical questions, challenges,
and opportunities at the intersection of computational modeling and
neurorehabilitation. The mission of the researchers involved in this workshop is
to develop innovative techniques that can use computational modeling and device
design to understand, optimize, and improve neurorehabilitation. Computational
modeling can provide foundational insights of fundamental mechanisms that
explain experimental data or infer features of behavior that cannot be obtained
experimentally. Further, computational modeling can support the design of
assistive technology and other innovative technologies that can accelerate and
optimize neurorehabilitation. Importantly, this conference will assemble a
community of experts from different fields who can establish the foundation by
which computational modeling can create the scientific insights, theories, and
actionable platforms to improve the efficacy and personalization of
neurorehabilitation. The PI Team is committed to a diverse, inclusive, and
accessible conference. Speakers will be drawn from diverse career stages and
backgrounds, and the conference will be advertised to a wide breadth of
institutions, professional societies, and areas of expertise. Video recordings
of all sessions will be publicly available via a YouTube channel with supporting
articles, documentation, and resources for others to view and build upon to
support future research, translation, and innovation. The conference will be
designed following the SIGACCESS Guidelines for Conference Accessibility. The
conference will also have a dedicated team member as Accessibility Chair, and
the resources required to support physical, digital, and social access to all
aspects of the conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.