* 2240982
* CPS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Developing Data-driven Robustness and Safety from Single Agent Settings to Stochastic Dynamic Teams: Theory and Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Debankur Mukherjee, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 05/31/2026
* USD 320,000.00

This Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) project will make foundational methodological
advances that enable safe and robust reinforcement learning (RL)-based control
algorithmic solutions that are driven by problems in smart traffic signal
control systems. Recent advances in computation, communication, storage, and
sensing have led to a demand for data-driven learning-based decision-making and
control in modern cyber-physical systems (CPSs), such as smart transportation
systems. In such systems, decision-making agents need to operate safely and in a
robust manner while working in complex environments with constraints that need
to be respected. This project will develop foundational advances in robust RL
solutions, and safe and constrained RL with provable guarantees by taking
traffic signal control systems within smart transportation systems as our
motivating CPS application and evaluation platform. This work will additionally
focus on advancing curriculum development, recruitment of students from under-
represented groups, involvement of undergraduate students in research, K-12
outreach, and also research community outreach via workshops, conference
sessions, and seminars. The researchers will interface with companies and other
stakeholders to communicate the results of the research as well as provide them
with educational material on methodology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical
approaches include: 1. Robust RL solutions incorporating model class knowledge,
use of future predictions and robustness characterizations, and off-policy
methods to address distributional shifts and data paucity arising from the use
of a simulator/emulator or offline data; and 2. Efficient, safe, and constrained
RL algorithms using model-free approaches and function-approximated methods, and
also methods for partially-observed systems. To close the loop with the
motivating CPS application, the RL algorithms will be evaluated in the context
of traffic signal control via a comprehensive simulation-based evaluation using
models of two instrumented sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.