* 2240761
* 2023 GERMINATION Investigator Workshop
* ENG,EFMA
* 09/15/2022,08/31/2024
* Patrick Little, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Louise R. Howe
* 08/31/2024
* USD 99,974.00

The EFMA GERMINATION program seeks to promote the development and implementation
of novel approaches, platforms, and environments for training academic
researchers to formulate societally impactful research questions. This award
will provide support for a two-day workshop to be held at Harvey Mudd College in
early 2023, which will convene teams funded through the GERMINATION program.
This event will build on past meetings by including researchers from both
current and completed GERMINATION projects. The 2023 workshop, which is intended
as an in-person meeting, will be preceded by a shorter virtual meeting in 2022
to initiate connection building across the GERMINATION teams. These meetings
continue the goal of GERMINATION investigator workshops to propel information
exchange and further community building, and in particular will explore ways to
establish and support relationships beyond the lifetime of individual awards.
Broader Impacts are inherent in the goals of the GERMINATION program – the
development of pedagogical frameworks, platforms and/or environments that
stimulate formulation of transformative research questions that address
important societal needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2023 workshop will bring
together GERMINATION awardees and other stakeholders to report and reflect on
how their projects have facilitated the formulation of transformative research
questions. The planned workshop will provide a unique opportunity to prototype a
culture of relational collaboration within the framework of the annual
workshops. Non-traditional modes of presentation of research goals, plans, and
findings will be explored, with the goal of using fun learning experiences as a
mechanism to generate potentially long-term interactions among the participants
from different projects. The workshop-organizing PIs have developed a set of
workshop principles to guide the activities, including an emphasis on
interaction, recognition of interesting and creative approaches, and
identification of collaborative connections. Anticipated activities will include
exploration of attributes of relational interdisciplinary collaboration,
including collaborative foundations, power relationships, means of expression
and approaches to risk. Ultimately, the workshop should provide a prototype for
a research culture that scaffolds creative collaboration and risk
taking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.