* 2240048
* CAREER: Solute Transport Coupled to Geomechanics and Convective Mixing
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Birendra Jha, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Hendratta Ali
* 02/29/2028
* USD 268,931.00

The movement and dilution of fluids in a fractured aquifer is important because
it affects the safe disposal and effective containment of industrial wastes
leaching into the ground. Computer simulations to predict the position and shape
of the moving plume of fluid are challenging because the fluid inside the
fractures moves faster than the fluid outside. The fracture properties that
control this behavior change with the fluid pressure and mechanical stress in
the aquifer. In groundwater systems, the viscosity and density of the
contaminant fluid often differ from that of the water saturating the aquifer,
which causes the fluid to channel through the aquifer in the form of fingers.
Although these fingering processes are known, the effects of their interaction
on the spreading and mixing of a contaminant plume in a fractured aquifer are
unknown. This project will use laboratory experiments and computer simulation
modeling to study the interaction between fluid flow, rock deformation, and
fracture processes that affect the spreading and dilution of aquifer plumes for
radioactive waste disposal and carbon sequestration applications. Increasing our
knowledge will lead to better selection of the waste disposal site, and minimize
errors in the forecast of plume position and plume size at a selected site, and
help decrease the aquifer remediation cost and time. The project will generate
publicly available datasets and modeling tools which will be shared with
groundwater engineers, hydrogeologists, and environmental engineers through an
industry-academia partnership. A Masters-to-PhD Bridge program with summer
research experience will be created for students from under-represented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The spreading and mixing of groundwater solutes in
fractured rocks are multiphysics problems in hydrogeology due to the coupling
between fluid flow, solute transport, and geomechanical processes. This project
will improve our understanding of the physical mechanisms stemming from the two-
way coupling between solute transport and geomechanical processes in stress-
sensitive aquifers in the presence of fingering and convective mixing. How the
coupling activates certain fracture and fingering directions while suppressing
others and how the hydromechanical properties affect the spreading and mixing
metrics are questions that will be addressed through high-resolution numerical
simulations, fracture mechanics and hydrodynamic instability theory, and
experiments of solute transport in rocks. A novel spectrofluorimetric tracer
quantification method coupled with distributed strain sensing will be developed.
Experimental and simulation results will be synthesized to define a transport-
geomechanics coupling strength parameter based on the hydromechanical properties
of the aquifer and the physical properties of the
solute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.