* 2240267
* EAGER: Quantum Manufacturing: Enabling Integrated Quantum Network Nodes
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Farhan Rana, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 03/31/2025
* USD 299,999.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) Quantum Manufacturing
project tackles the challenge of networking local quantum computers using
integrated optical networks. Currently, quantum computers are limited to purely
local computation, analogous to computers without an internet. Additionally,
optical fiber communication infrastructure that works for classical information
is not suitable for quantum information. This project focuses on solving
materials and integration challenges that will enable the team to fabricate
scalable nodes of a quantum optical network, thus making a key step toward
establishing a quantum internet. For quantum optical network nodes to succeed,
they must unify high-quality optical devices that control and manipulate light
with local elements that store the fragile quantum information. The research
team will integrate the materials needed for these two distinct tasks by taking
advantage of recent advances in semiconductor growth. With the integrated
materials, the optical devices can be fabricated in a cleanroom. These devices
will communicate with local quantum states, and the research team will benchmark
the performance of the system. As part of this effort, the team will include
undergraduate and graduate students in quantum manufacturing research, thus
developing a workforce prepared for the challenges of emerging quantum
technologies. The team will also aid in the recruitment of female engineering
students and students from groups that are currently under-represented in
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will create a silicon
carbide on aluminum nitride quantum optical platform, taking advantage of the
crystalline epitaxy between aluminum nitride crystals grown on silicon carbide
substrates. The silicon carbide will host optically active spin qubits in the
form of silicon vacancy centers. This will be coupled to nitride-based optical
waveguides, cavities, modulators, and nonlinear optical elements to enable all
necessary aspects of quantum network nodes. The research will involve materials
growth and optical structure fabrication with the goals of solving the critical
bottleneck of scalable quantum network nodes. The research team will
characterize the optical and spin performance of these structures, thus clearing
the way for scalable quantum networks. The education plan will include
undergraduate and graduate research, recruitment of female and under-represented
engineering students, and course development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.