* 2240023
* CAREER: The Application of Strategic Anthropomorphism to Activate Empathy and Advance Conservation
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Cameron Whitley, Western Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 08/31/2028
* USD 83,827.00

Biodiversity loss negatively impacts economic, political, and social life,
making it critical to identify ways to encourage conservation behaviors. This
CAREER project investigates the use of animal imagery to activate empathy,
promote conservation behaviors, and engage diverse populations. This study
focuses on the effect of imagery that highlights animalsâ€™ human qualities, known
as strategic anthropomorphic animal imagery (SAAIs). The results from a series
of online and in person survey experiments, observation, and focus groups give
zoos, aquariums, and other conservation organizations essential information
about how to depict animals to activate empathy and promote conservation
efforts. The project also assesses who feels included and excluded in
conservation efforts and how imagery can be used to promote greater access and
inclusion. The study involves both academic research and public educational
activities that include talks, trainings, and workshops for students, academics,
artists, and industry professionals on best practices for using animal imagery
to advance conservation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research draws from
collaborations with an internationally recognized conservation photographer and
with the Advancing Conservation Through Empathy for Wildlife Network (ACE),
which is a network of 20 zoos and aquariums. Because they are the largest and
most public-facing conservation organizations, zoos and aquariums from the ACE
network serve as the research sites for the in-person components of the study.
The first phase of the study involves collecting data from 17,400 participants
through six survey-experiments with the goal of identifying the image and text
that most effectively activate empathy and enhance conservation. Insights from
Phase 1 will be used in Phase 2 for in-person experiments where zoo and aquarium
signage is changed and data are collected through participant observation and
surveys of at least 2,400 patrons. This phase also involves a longitudinal
component assessing whether initial empathy and conservation enhancements
persist over time. Phase 3 involves conducting a nationally representative
survey (n=1,200) to assess the degree to which members of the public feel
included in conservation efforts. This information is used to inform focus
groups to assess how strategic anthropomorphic animal imagery (SAAIs) might be
used to promote greater access and inclusion in conservation. Desired outcomes
of this project are to generate scientific data to inform conservation work, to
identify depictions and frames of animals that activate empathy, and to broaden
perceptions of inclusion within conservation organizations. The project aims to
address biodiversity loss, which has implications for national security, food
security, disease control, and climate change
mitigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.