* 2240113
* CAREER: Developing Nanoscale Scanning Electrochemical Probe Systems to Reveal the Electrical Double Layer at Electrocatalytic Interfaces
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Hang Ren, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 02/29/2028
* USD 375,001.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Hang Ren of the University of Texas at Austin is
developing a nanoscopic tool to study the chemistry and physics of
electrochemical interfaces. Conventional electrochemical methods typically lack
the spatial resolution required to correlate local structural heterogeneity to
the observed properties at complex electrochemical interfaces. Professor Ren and
his group are developing a tool that provides spatially resolved information
about the local interfacial structure and the local electrical double layer and
subsequently relates this information to electrocatalytic reactivity Their
discoveries could lead to a better understanding of electrochemical devices used
for energy storage and conversion. Dr. Ren is also developing a course to help
students develop skills related to building and handling analytical
instruments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ren Lab will develop a nanopipette-based
method to image the local electrical double layer properties, including the
potential of zero charge, at complex electrochemical interfaces. While the
ensemble properties of electrochemical interfaces are routinely evaluated for
model electrode systems, most electrochemical interfaces contain local surface
structures that lead to heterogeneities in the electric double layer. The Ren
Lab is developing methods that reveal how local structure such as grain
boundaries of polycrystalline materials, influence the local electric double
layer and associated localized electrocatalytic reactions. This improvement in
spatial resolution has the potential to lead to new design principles for
engineering interfacial structures for better
electrocatalysts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.