* 2240748
* Technologies of Futuring: Computational Modeling Practices at the Intersection of  Environmental Governance and Environmental Justice
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2024
* Akshita Sivakumar, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2024
* USD 14,015.00

Technocrats and scientists working in state-sanctioned programs for
environmental governance increasingly use computational models to fulfill a
plurality of legislative mandates. These mandates include assessing regulatory
actions in terms of environmental justice, prompting experts to invite
historically disadvantaged groups to participate in modeling environmental
scenarios. Modeling practices are thus mediating whether and how environmental
justice concerns are represented and enacted in environmental governance
programs. However, social scientific research demonstrates that such mediation
practices can obscure, rather than reveal, social and cultural differences,
undermining the potential for transformative change. There is thus a need to
evaluate whether and how model-mediated participation can lead to the robust
implementation of state-driven, justice-oriented environmental governance
programs. This project evaluates the case of Californiaâ€™s model-driven
decarbonization plan. It examines why technocrats use environmental modeling
tools for mediation and attends to how participating marginalized groups assert
their desires for better political representation and social recognition. This
project will contribute to the public understanding of technoscientific modes of
environmental governance, shedding light on how community and activist
participation can reshape the tools of the state. Insights from this project
will be shared via a public website and report and will be useful to
policymakers, environmental justice activists, community groups, scientists, and
state agencies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to analyze the potential
for justice-oriented participation through a cluster of energy, economic, and
environmental models aimed at decarbonization. This study will draw on
participant observation, semi-structured interviews, and extensive model
analyses with technocratic experts and activists. Questions guiding this project
include: 1) What happens when computational models' inputs and outputs cannot
capture marginalized groups' needs? 2) How do these groups assert their
knowledge to ensure robust development and implementation of decarbonization
plans? Results from this study will enhance theories of civic participation in
technoscientific forms of environmental justice and
governance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.