* 2240885
* Immunocapital: Pandemics, Publics, and Immunity
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Kavita Sivaramakrishnan, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 09/30/2025
* USD 234,082.00

Understanding how knowledge about immunity has evolved during and before
pandemics is one of the most pressing and complex questions in global health
today as it can shape health outcomes and recovery in a time of recurring
pandemics. The PI will train graduate students in anthropology and history, and
work with undergraduates. This project will help frame global health case
studies. These will be available as open-source material and used in teaching
programs in social medicine, epidemiology and health communication in US medical
schools. This course material will also be used for curricular collaborations in
global health teaching programs. The project will also offer a podcast titled,
Infection and Immunity in Cities: A Global Cities Podcast anchored in New York
City, bringing together scholars, health activists, and policy makers. This
podcast will focus on reaching a younger public and lay listenership, to
familiarize them with historical debates relating to health crises and risks.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to explore and uncover how knowledge and
practices relating to immunity are debated, recast and managed during pandemics.
It offers a unique perspective at the intersections of biological, economic and
social ideas to explore how the meanings of immunity are periodically recreated
by experts, policymakers, and by the public’s understanding of epidemic disease
and preventive health. Using historical, ethnographic, and policy analysis, this
project will situate knowledge formation about immunity historically in
colonial, post-colonial and globalizing structures, and explore how they are
colored by long-term experiences of racism, poverty, labor practices, and
exclusion. In global health–in recent decades–populations are evaluated and
termed as being valued and productive as human capital, or viewed as dependent
and unsuccessful based on their immunity and productivity, and these
perspectives need to be recalibrated based on comparative, historical research.
This raises questions about how science, economic, and political priorities are
fused to shape the infrastructure of health, and indirectly affect choices about
whose health and ill health matters are considered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.