* 2240407
* FMRG: Artificial Intelligence Driven Cybermanufacturing of Quantum Material Architectures
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Radhika Nagpal, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 08/31/2025
* USD 3,342,306.00

Quantum material architectures consist of graphene and other two-dimensional
materials, which, when stacked in precise three-dimensional architectures,
exhibit unique and tunable mechanical, electrical, optical, and magnetic
properties. These three-dimensional architectures have broad potential
applications and are highly promising components for microchips, batteries,
antennas, chemical and biological sensors, solar-cells and neural interfaces.
However, currently, due to the lack of fundamental understanding of the physical
and chemical processes, it has been difficult to control or scale the
manufacturing of these three-dimensional structures. This Future Manufacturing
(FM) grant is to develop a transformative Future Manufacturing platform for
quantum material architectures using a cybermanufacturing approach, which
combines artificial intelligence, robotics, multiscale modeling, and predictive
simulation for the automated and parallel assembly of multiple two-dimensional
materials into complex three-dimensional structures. This platform enables
future production of high-quality, custom quantum material architectures for
broad and critical applications, supporting continued U.S. leadership in
technology development. The research in cybermanufacturing is integrated with
innovative educational programs for cross-disciplinary training of scientists
and engineers, especially, women and underrepresented minorities, in advanced
manufacturing, artificial intelligence and quantum structures, as well as
engaging the public in future manufacturing concepts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
grant research focuses on a fundamentally new method for scalable manufacturing
of 3D quantum material architectures or van der Waals heterostructures (vdWHs)
using microfluidic assembly. vdWHs are composed of unlimited combinations of
atomically thin layers and exhibit interesting emerging functionalities. The key
process innovation is precision microfluidic folding of 2D materials, which has
been demonstrated at a small-scale. This method has promising potential to scale
up to wafer scale, with no fundamental limit on scaling. A second key innovation
is embedding artificial intelligence (AI) across all aspects of the
manufacturing process flow, from low-level precision control, to automated
characterization, to high-level structure predictions. Predictive simulation and
visualization tools combined with in situ spectroscopy allow real-time analysis
of atomic-scale physical and chemical processes and their control. Moreover,
parallel self-assembly in microfluidic environments is investigated as a pathway
toward truly scalable manufacturing. The expected outcome of the award is to
produce superlattices consisting of tens of atomic layers with precisely
engineered stacking order and alignment, leading to fundamentally new custom
quantum material architectures with electronic and photonic properties
impossible to obtain from conventional material architectures. This research
advances fundamental knowledge in material physics, nanoscale electronics and
photonic science leading the way to manufacturing of future devices, such as
twistronics. A key outcome is an AI-driven, robotics-controlled
cybermanufacturing microfluidic platform that is capable of manufacturing
complex structures for emerging quantum and other device
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Future Manufacturing research grant is
supported by the following Divisions in the Engineering Directorate: Civil,
Mechanical and Manufacturing Innovation; Electrical, Communications and Cyber
Systems; and Engineering Education and Centers; and the following Divisions in
the Mathematical and Physical Sciences: Materials Research; Chemistry; and
Mathematical Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.