* 2240281
* Collaborative Research: New Phase Diagrams for Predictive Solvothermal Synthesis in Non-Aqueous Solvents
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2027
* Wenhao Sun, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 01/31/2027
* USD 207,363.00

Non-Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;Solvothermal synthesis involves precipitating a
solid out of a supersaturated solution and is a common materials synthesis route
for functional materials. Many classes of important materials cannot be easily
precipitated using water as the solvent; including intermetallics, sulfides, and
nitrides; which are more readily synthesized in non-aqueous organic solvents.
The number of available organic solvents is large, but there is currently no
rigorous understanding of which combination of solvent and starting material is
best to synthesize a given target material. With this project, supported by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in NSFâ€™s Division of Materials
Research, Professor Wenhao Sun at the University of Michigan and Professor
Daniel Shoemaker at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign build new
predictive theoretical models to better understand which compounds precipitate
out of supersaturated non-aqueous solutions. This scientific understanding
allows chemists to skip the tedious trial-and-error efforts of solution
synthesis optimization and enables the rational design of synthesis recipes for
the manufacture and processing of new, more complex, or higher-quality materials
that drive technological innovation. The research is carried out by
undergraduate and graduate students, who are trained in computational materials
science and experimental thermochemistry during this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Many classes of
materials are synthesized in organic solvents, such as ethanol, ethylene-glycol,
ammonia, acetonitrile, hydrazine, DMSO, DMF, THF, etc. Currently, there are no
thermodynamic frameworks to guide solvothermal synthesis in non-aqueous media,
meaning chemists largely rely on heuristics for precursor solubility and
laborious trial-and-error efforts for solution synthesis optimization. This
project undertakes a combined computational and experimental research program to
develop the first thermodynamic phase diagrams to guide solvothermal synthesis
in non-aqueous organic solvents. The project involves measuring and developing
predictive models for the chemical potentials of solvated species in non-aqueous
solvents, and then combining these ion chemical potentials with high-dimensional
thermodynamic frameworks to predict the solubility and chemical equilibria of
complex materials under various non-aqueous solvents and conditions. These new
solvothermal phase diagrams offer a rigorous foundation to rationally design
recipes for the targeted solution-based synthesis of advanced solid-state
materials. Broad availability for the tools developed in this project is aided
by interfacing with freely-available and widely-used thermochemical databases.
Hands-on learning is supported by precisely aligning model precipitation
reactions with undergraduate thermodynamics lessons in chemistry and materials
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.