* 2240769
* GRC Fluids and Health 2022: Fluids in Disease Transmission and Contamination
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Lydia Bourouiba, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 08/31/2023
* USD 30,000.00

The COVID-19 pandemic has demonstrated how a respiratory pathogen that emerged
in one part of the world can quickly spread globally, paralyze entire economies,
and bring local and national healthcare delivery systems to the brink of
collapse. Early successes in the use of non-medical interventions to reduce the
spread of COVID-19 have highlighted the need for efficient and cost-effective
technologies and solutions to mitigate and prevent the spread and transmission
of respiratory pathogens in the built environment including
residential/commercial buildings, schools, and healthcare/recreational
facilities. However, a fundamental understanding of the transmission and spread
of respiratory pathogens in the built environment and communities has remained
elusive. The proposed Gordon Research Conference (GRC) will be devoted to the
critical and important topic of “Fluids in Disease Transmission and
Contamination.” The GRC will bring together a group of experts and stakeholders
from a broad range of disciplines and fields including fluid dynamics,
environmental engineering, applied and computational mathematics, epidemiology,
microbiology, virology, and public health. The conference will provide a unique
forum for scientific, engineering, and public health communities that rarely
meet or interact to discuss and assess the current level of understanding of the
fluid dynamics and multiphase transport of pathogen and disease transmission
along with its public health implications. This NSF award will enable the
conference organizers to broaden participation to the GRC by providing travel
grants (including registration costs) to early career researchers including
women, junior faculty, post-doctoral researchers, and students from
underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The COVID-19 pandemic has
highlighted critical knowledge gaps in the fundamental understanding of the
fluid dynamics and multiphase transport of pathogen and disease transmission.
Pathogens are transported in fluid phases – air, water, and biological fluids
including blood and saliva. In addition, fluid dynamics and multiphase transport
play key roles in the design and implementation of efficient and cost-effective
pathogen decontamination technologies. Yet, limited research has been devoted to
the fluid dynamics and multiphase transport of pathogen and disease transmission
in the built environment and communities. The proposed 5-day Gordon Research
Conference (GRC) on “Fluids in Disease Transmission and Contamination” will be
held in August 14-18, 2022, at Mount Holyoke College (MA). The conference will
bring together a group of scientists, engineers, clinicians, public health
researchers, and infection control practitioners at various stages of their
careers and provide them with a forum to discuss the science, engineering, and
healthcare implications of the fluid dynamics and multiphase transport/physics
of pathogen and disease transmission. The conference program and discussion will
be structured around nine sessions including an introductory session entitled
“Front-line challenges in the prevention, control, and modelling of emerging
infectious diseases and contamination” (Session 1), a session devoted to
“Interfacial flows in contamination/decontamination: Surface-fluid interaction,
fragmentation, droplets, and their phase change” (Session 7), and a session
devoted to “Spillovers, transmission ecology and animal models, viral and
bacterial diseases” (Session 8).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.