* 2240014
* CAREER: 4D Human-Object Interaction Understanding in the Wild
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Xiaolong Wang, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Jie Yang
* 04/30/2028
* USD 91,996.00

For many applications in robotics, social science, and medical analysis, it is
critical to have computers to understand how humans interact with the physical
world. The goal of this project is to build an artificial perception system that
goes beyond 2D visual understanding and focuses on parsing the time dynamics and
3D structure of human-object interaction. Thus, to allow real-world
applications, the system for understanding 4D (3D + time) human-object
interaction is designed to generalize to unconstrained environments of daily
life. The developed technologies will enable household robots to predict, and
assist humans and doctors to analyze the behaviors of the elderly for providing
better care, etc. The education and outreach activities of the project will
advance the theoretical courses in computer vision and robotics, and offer
practical guidance for undergraduate, graduate, and K-12 students to study in
this field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research develops a 4D human-object
interaction understanding system, with a focus on generalization to environments
in the wild. Existing approaches are limited to operating within constrained
labs or uncluttered scenes. This is mainly due to current computer vision
methods heavily relying on detailed 3D/4D annotations, which are usually
unavailable for unconstrained environments. To address this limitation, the
project provides a framework that will (i) recognize objects from videos in an
open-world setting using only text-supervision and self-supervision; (ii)
reconstruct and estimate the human and object structures in 3D using minimum 3D
supervision and manually defined priors; and (iii) perform 4D interaction and
contact relation reasoning between humans and objects using a 4D Interaction
Graph. Based on the research studies, the project will develop a 4D Vision
Education Platform on course materials focusing on both the generalization
aspect of computer vision and the applications in robotic tasks. This platform
will be applied in undergraduate and graduate courses, and tutorials for K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.