* 2240660
* Standard Research Grant: Explaining Variations and Social Outcomes of Cumulative Impact Assessment for Environmental Justice by Government Agencies in Environmental Permit Review
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Jill Harrison, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 07/31/2026
* USD 436,156.00

Standard Research Grant: Explaining Variations and Social Outcomes of Cumulative
Impact Assessment for Environmental Justice by Government Agencies in
Environmental Permit
Review&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Racially marginalized,
Indigenous, and working-class communities across the U.S. are disproportionately
subjected to environmental problems such as contaminated drinking water,
industrial air emissions, and dangerous workplaces. Vulnerable communities often
endure multiple such harms simultaneously. These layered environmental
inequalities lead to serious inequalities in illness, quality of life, and life
expectancy. This study will examine government agencies’ use of cumulative
impact assessment for environmental justice (CIAEJ) to improve quality of life
in these overburdened, vulnerable, and underserved communities. This study aims
to strengthen government agencies’ abilities to reduce environmental
inequalities and foster environmental justice (EJ) by identifying agency
practices that are most effective toward this end and the conditions that foster
them. In addition to providing substantial graduate student training in methods
of empirical data collection and analysis, the project findings will be shared
to scientists, government agencies, EJ advocates, and the broader public through
academic publications, invited presentations, formal comments at public
hearings, and the PI’s participation in agency EJ advisory
councils.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year, empirical study will examine the
ways three environmental regulatory agencies are currently applying CIAEJ
techniques into environmental permit review. Data will be gathered from agency
documents, public comments on these initiatives, confidential interviews with
agency staff and external stakeholders, and observation of agency meetings. This
project will advance scientific knowledge in STS, political ecology, and EJ
studies by identifying social factors shaping the use of CIAEJ within regulatory
decision-making, and analyses will focus on how bureaucrats determine what
counts as risk, and how different contexts and creative bureaucratic practices
may foster social justice reforms through regulatory agency
practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.