* 2240858
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Science and Traditional Ecological Knowledge
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2024
* Myla Vicenti Carpio, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2024
* USD 14,011.00

Increasing threats to biodiversity from climate change and other human impacts
are forcing scientists to realize the importance of acknowledging and utilizing
the Traditional Ecological Knowledge and strategies of Indigenous peoples who
have lived with and within their respective ecosystems for millennia. Research
on and incorporating Traditional Ecological Knowledge has become increasingly
popular among conservation biologists who collaborate with and work within the
traditional homelands of many Indigenous groups. However, these successes have
largely occurred without a complete understanding of how these different forms
of knowledge can work synergistically. Furthermore, most conservation
initiatives are developed by non-Indigenous groups and institutions. This
project uses research methods developed by Indigenous scholars to understand how
Indigenous institutions develop and implement their own conservation goals and
policies. An equally important outcome will be understanding how conservation
policies interface with traditional Indigenous lifeways, specifically those
based in animal agriculture.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To this end, the project will
use a combination of interviews and surveys developed in collaboration with
Indigenous scholars to gauge how different groups leverage their knowledges and
experiences to achieve conservation and agricultural goals. Data collection will
focus on Navajo Nation Department of Fish and Wildlife and Navajo Nation
Department of Agriculture, which are ideal institutions for modeling how this
kind of knowledge exchange and translation occurs. These institutions have more
than 100 years of combined experience using both traditional Navajo knowledge
and scientific knowledge to develop and achieve conservation and management
outcomes that are important to the members of the Nation. Responses will be
analyzed by appealing explicitly to categories and types of knowledge that are
exclusive to Navajo worldviews. By modeling the synergies of scientific and
Indigenous knowledge through perspectives specific to individual Indigenous
groups, future collaborations in these areas will be more equitable, just, and
preserve the autonomy and agency of Indigenous groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.