* 2240281
* Collaborative Research: New Phase Diagrams for Predictive Solvothermal Synthesis in Non-Aqueous Solvents
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2027
* Wenhao Sun, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 01/31/2027
* USD 207,363.00

Non-Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;Solvothermal synthesis involves precipitating a
solid out of a supersaturated solution and is a common materials synthesis route
for functional materials. Many classes of important materials cannot be easily
precipitated using water as the solvent; including intermetallics, sulfides, and
nitrides; which are more readily synthesized in non-aqueous organic solvents.
The number of available organic solvents is large, but there is currently no
rigorous understanding of which combination of solvent and starting material is
best to synthesize a given target material. With this project, supported by the
Solid State and Materials Chemistry Program in NSF’s Division of Materials
Research, Professor Wenhao Sun at the University of Michigan and Professor
Daniel Shoemaker at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign build new
predictive theoretical models to better understand which compounds precipitate
out of supersaturated non-aqueous solutions. This scientific understanding
allows chemists to skip the tedious trial-and-error efforts of solution
synthesis optimization and enables the rational design of synthesis recipes for
the manufacture and processing of new, more complex, or higher-quality materials
that drive technological innovation. The research is carried out by
undergraduate and graduate students, who are trained in computational materials
science and experimental thermochemistry during this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Many classes of
materials are synthesized in organic solvents, such as ethanol, ethylene-glycol,
ammonia, acetonitrile, hydrazine, DMSO, DMF, THF, etc. Currently, there are no
thermodynamic frameworks to guide solvothermal synthesis in non-aqueous media,
meaning chemists largely rely on heuristics for precursor solubility and
laborious trial-and-error efforts for solution synthesis optimization. This
project undertakes a combined computational and experimental research program to
develop the first thermodynamic phase diagrams to guide solvothermal synthesis
in non-aqueous organic solvents. The project involves measuring and developing
predictive models for the chemical potentials of solvated species in non-aqueous
solvents, and then combining these ion chemical potentials with high-dimensional
thermodynamic frameworks to predict the solubility and chemical equilibria of
complex materials under various non-aqueous solvents and conditions. These new
solvothermal phase diagrams offer a rigorous foundation to rationally design
recipes for the targeted solution-based synthesis of advanced solid-state
materials. Broad availability for the tools developed in this project is aided
by interfacing with freely-available and widely-used thermochemical databases.
Hands-on learning is supported by precisely aligning model precipitation
reactions with undergraduate thermodynamics lessons in chemistry and materials
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.