* 2240489
* EAGER: Quantum Manufacturing: In-situ Nano-Patterned Topological Josephson Junctions
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2025
* Shuolong Yang, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 01/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Quantum computing, where the logic states of zeros and ones can be represented
and processed simultaneously, is rapidly emerging as the computing technology of
the future, with tremendous promises in information processing, secure
communications, and national defense. Among all the platforms of quantum
computing, topological quantum computing can realize quantum information
processing with immunity to error propagation and material defects. However, it
is based on advanced materials which are currently difficult to be processed or
engineered, especially at the required nanoscale. This EArly-concept Grant for
Exploratory Research (EAGER) Quantum Manufacturing award supports the
development of an original manufacturing technique to fabricate basic logic
units of a topological quantum computer based on advanced quantum materials. It
is inspired by the ancient technique of block printing, where patterns are
printed by pressing papers onto a pre-patterned woodblock. In this EAGER
project, the team develops nanoscale blocks by carving the pattern on an oxide
substrate, and fabricates the quantum devices by depositing ultrathin, iron-
based quantum materials on the substrate. This technique avoids air
contamination and harsh chemical environment in traditional nanofabrication.
Moreover, the manufacturing protocol can be potentially scalable, enabling
translational activities to boost the emerging quantum economy. This project has
a significant societal impact by inspiring and preparing the next generation of
workforce through outreach programs such as the Microscopy And Spectroscopy for
Transient Electronic-matter Research (MASTER) Summer
School.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most pressing challenge in realizing
topological quantum computing is to engineer topological superconductors, where
the fundamental quasiparticles called Majorana zero modes carry quantum
information with immunity to classical and quantum errors. Iron based
topological superconductors - iron selenium tellurium - are promising material
candidates due to the intrinsic coupling between the topological electronic
states on the surface and the superconductivity in the bulk, yet these complex
materials are air-sensitive and incompatible with the traditional
nanofabrication techniques. This project seeks to develop a new manufacturing
technique to create nanoscale topological Josephson junctions, which are
heterostructures composed of iron based topological superconductor islands and a
gap of a few nanometers in-between. It is done by pre-patterning the strontium
titanate substrates and using the substrates for nanoscale block printing in a
molecular beam epitaxy setup. The devices fabricated in this project allow the
testing of fundamental scientific hypotheses such as non-abelian statistics in
topological superconductors. The manufacturing protocol is scalable and can also
be applied broadly to the nanofabrication of other quantum
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.