* 2240114
* CAREER: GHz imaging of strongly correlated and topological phenomena in moire materials
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Monica Allen, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Mun Chan
* 02/29/2028
* USD 285,161.00

Nontechnical abstract: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A major thrust of condensed matter
physics concerns the discovery of new electronic states in emerging quantum
materials. A prominent example is the rapidly expanding class of topological
insulators, which are characterized by conductive edges that enclose an
insulating interior. This project sheds light on exotic phenomena that can arise
from the interplay of correlations and topology in two-dimensional (2D)
materials and harnesses these novel phases to build the next generation of
quantum devices. The key to our approach is use of a novel low temperature
imaging technique, which detects the unique fingerprint of the conducting edge
currents at high frequencies and spatially disentangles them from trivial states
in the interior of the material. Emerging topological states in 2D materials
could potentially be harnessed in the future to enable new quantum technologies,
including exceptionally robust forms of quantum computing in which environmental
noise is strongly suppressed. To train the next generation of scientists and
engineers, this project also develops a new Quantum Materials and Devices
teaching module, which equips students with an interdisciplinary toolbox
spanning materials and device preparation, measurements in a cryogenic
environment, data analysis, and technical writing skills. To integrate research
and outreach, the principal investigator aims to organize a science-themed
public art exhibit, which presents the microscopy of quantum materials as an
exciting new frontier for scientific exploration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
abstract: &lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project is to investigate the microscopic
nature of collective phenomena arising from the interplay of interactions and
topology in van der Waals (vdW) heterostructures and magnetic topological
insulators. By pushing the frontiers of microwave impedance microscopy (MIM) to
ultra-low temperatures, this research strives to detect the unique signature of
plasmonic excitations in magnetic topological insulators and construct a
microscopic picture of dissipation along the edge. Building upon recent
developments on the materials front, a complementary thrust focuses on
engineering correlated topological states in vdW heterostructures by tuning the
angular rotation between layers and the electrostatic environment. In
particular, the project features a focused investigation of Moire superlattices
in twisted bi-layer MoTe2, in which narrow bands are predicted to give rise to a
family of many-body states, including quantum anomalous Hall and
antiferromagnetic insulators. These experiments utilize electronic transport and
microwave imaging methods to construct a comprehensive phase diagram of ordered
states, shedding light on the key symmetry-breaking mechanisms. This research
builds the foundation for GHz characterization of topological states in emerging
quantum materials; it complements the materials discovery effort in the
synthesis community by enabling fast characterization of chiral edge states in
thin films, multi-domain systems, and devices. In the future, this milliKelvin
imaging capability could potentially be used for local readout of topological
states in device platforms for quantum computing
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.