* 2240075
* CAREER: Utilizing Physical Interactions to Improve Legged Mobility on Challenging Terrains
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Feifei Qian, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 03/31/2028
* USD 600,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award supports research that will
create new methods to allow legged robots to utilize physical interactions to
achieve high mobility on complex natural terrains. Robots are becoming
increasingly better when moving on rigid, flat ground, but still struggle to
move through soft sand, sticky mud, and rubble piles, limiting their
capabilities in critical missions such as search and rescue, delivery, and
explorations. The insights and new methods from this work will enable the
development of next generation robots that can actively “harvest” environment
interaction forces, or even large disturbances, to generate agile movements.
This capability can significantly reduce robot control effort and computational
complexity in challenging environments, and therefore empower legged robots for
a broader range of applications important for national health, prosperity, and
welfare, such as environment monitoring, earthquake rescue, and planetary
exploration. Additionally, by translating part of this research into tangible
education activities, this project will integrate classroom, laboratory, and
real-world application experiences to inspire and engage a diverse group of
students from middle school through graduate levels to form the next generation
of engineers and scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Legged locomotion on natural
deformable terrains is fundamentally challenging due to our limited
understanding of the complex terrain responses. Upon robot leg contact, sand and
soil can deform and flow like a fluid, or jam like a solid, while loosely
embedded rocks and boulders can slide or rotate, causing robots to slip, stuck,
or even flip over. To overcome this challenge, this research will integrate
locomotion experiments, granular physics theory, and dynamical systems methods,
to determine how intrinsic terrain properties and leg-terrain contact modes
influence terrain responses and the resulting robot locomotion dynamics. This
new knowledge will allow robots to incorporate predicted terrain forces as part
of their locomotion control, to produce desired dynamics across different
environments. Terrain force predictions will be validated by laboratory
experiments, and the robot locomotion performance will be evaluated in both
laboratory experiments and field testing at White Sands,
NM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the cross-directorate
Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed and funded by the
Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and Information Science and
Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.