* 2240593
* BIORETS: Coastal Ecosystems Research Experience for Teachers (CE-BIORETS)-From the Everglades to the Coral Reefs
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Todd Crowl, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Aruna Kilaru
* 02/28/2026
* USD 599,282.00

This Coastal Ecosystems Research Experience for Teachers (CE-BIORETS) Site award
to Florida International University (FIU), located in Miami, FL, will support
the training of 24 teachers for 8 weeks during the summer and up to 44 weeks
during the academic year. During 2023-2025, three cohorts of teachers will
participate in coastal ecosystems research, develop and implement new
curriculum, and inspire students to pursue STEM careers. Designed for local
teachers, this project will target teachers in school districts that serve the
highly diverse student population that is over 93% underrepresented in southeast
Florida. Teachers in the program will develop instructional materials that: 1)
are standards-aligned; 2) engage students in research; and 3) advance the
understanding of coastal ecosystems. This CE-BIORETS will influence the quality
and delivery of learning experiences for teachers and students, foster
engagement, and create competent 21st century STEM graduates. Project outcomes
will be assessed through classroom implementation of curricula, public symposia
for teacher/student presentations, and formative and summative evaluations by an
external evaluator. To ensure the advancement of DEI goals, candidates will be
selected from schools with large, underrepresented
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is housed in the Institute of
Environment and focused on the Coastal Ecosystems of South Florida. Research
projects will examine ecological processes of the Everglades, mangroves,
seagrass beds, and/or coral reefs with cross-cutting themes related to
conservation, environmental forensics, and public health, among others. This CE-
BIORETs program leverages NSF CREST, REU and LTER programs at FIU. The program
will include a field/lab research experience, presentation of results,
curriculum development and implementation, ethics/responsible conduct of
research training for mentors/participants, and an annual interview of
mentor/participant experiences for program assessment. Applications are accepted
through the NSF ETAP system. The PI and CoPIs will begin reviewing applications
on the due date and continue until filled or April 30. Teachers from Florida are
encouraged to apply. More information about the program is available by visiting
https://environment.fiu.edu/get-involved/index.html or by contacting the PI
(Nicholas Oehm, oehmn@fiu.ed) or co-PI (Bryan Dewsbury,
bdewsbur@fiu.edu)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.