* 2240813
* CAREER: Confluence of magnetic and electric dipoles on the pyrochlore lattice
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Geneva Laurita, Bates College
* Continuing Grant
* Birgit Schwenzer
* 02/29/2028
* USD 224,878.00

Part 1: Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;Materials that can respond to external
stimuli (such as magnetic or electrical fields) are highly desirable for a wide
variety of technological applications, including those relevant to the
electronics and energy industries. While many materials have the ability to
respond and interact with one type of external stimulus, only a few materials
are known that can simultaneously interact with more than one stimulus and the
discovery and understanding of such materials is an active area of research.
With this CAREER award, supported by the Solid State and Materials Chemistry
program in NSF’s Division of Materials Research, Prof. Laurita’s group at Bates
College focuses on understanding how the arrangement of atoms allows for
interaction with external stimuli in a widely studied yet poorly understood
family of materials called pyrochlores. The understanding and principles
obtained from this work will ultimately offer design considerations for a broad
range of technologically important properties. Undergraduate education and
research are central to this work, which addresses a national need to educate
and train future generations of material scientists. The proposed educational
component establishes a bridge between graduate studies at research-intensive
institutions and a career in undergraduate education at a primarily
undergraduate institution (PUI). Through targeted advertisement at URM-serving
graduate institutions, the principal investigator promotes participation of
individuals from historically excluded and underrepresented groups. This program
additionally plays a role in long-term and broader goals to diversify academic
faculty, particularly at PUIs. With support from this grant hands-on, immersive
internship experience at a research-focused PUI for upper-level graduate
students will be created. This activity informs graduate students on a career at
a PUI, provides valuable interaction and co-mentoring between graduate and
undergraduate participants, and advances the science objectives of the grant and
the graduate students’ dissertation work through collaborative research
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part 2: Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;The pyrochlore
crystal structure exhibits a myriad of technologically relevant properties
including superconductivity, ferroelectricity, photocatalysis, and frustrated
magnetism. While there exists a wealth of studies on pyrochlores, the
intricacies of this system leave many questions about intentionally manipulating
the chemistry and structure for the desired functionality. The pyrochlore
structure is inherently complex due to two interpenetrating subnetworks, and
structural changes can be driven by substitution or vacancies on either network.
Additionally, the triangular arrangement of cations on each sublattice leads to
structural and behavioral questions due to geometrical constraints. The research
carried out under this CAREER award builds on previous studies on the drivers of
structural distortions in pyrochlores. Now the principal investigator
investigates two hypotheses that arose from this work: (1) magnetic cations,
regardless of long-range ordering, play a role in magnetoelectric interactions
on both a local and crystallographic scale and (2) the crystallographic ordering
of vacancies/dopants dictates the ordering of electric dipoles and is key to
driving long range polar structures. The current work focuses on the confluence
of magnetic and electric dipoles in the pyrochlore structure and the role of
vacancies in these interactions. Specifically, the research investigates: (1)
substitution of cations with the propensity to form electric dipoles (d0 or s2
electronic configurations), (2) substitution of magnetic cations with unpaired d
or f electrons, and (3) the presence of anion vacancies; and thereby aims to
contribute to our understanding of the complex structural behavior of
pyrochlores, our understanding of the behavior and interaction of magnetic and
electric dipoles on both a local and crystallographic scale, and ultimately
towards the design of novel materials for multiferroic applications. With
support from this grant hands-on, immersive internship experience at a research-
focused PUI for upper-level graduate students will be created. This activity
informs graduate students on a career at a PUI, provides valuable interaction
and co-mentoring between graduate and undergraduate participants, and advances
the science objectives of the grant and the graduate students’ dissertation work
through collaborative research efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.