* 2240554
* GOALI: Manufacturing of Two-Dimensional MXene Nanosheets by Salt Solution Etching and Their Solution-based Layer-by-Layer Assembly into Heterostructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Miladin Radovic, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 04/30/2026
* USD 599,514.00

MXenes are a broad family of two-dimensional (2D) ceramic nanosheets with a wide
compositional diversity and tailorability of properties for a broad range of
practical applications, including energy storage, catalysis, electromagnetic
interference shielding, sensors, composites, and batteries. However, challenges
in the advanced manufacturing of MXenes prevent widespread production and use.
Manufacturing challenges include (i) difficulties in synthesizing MAX phases
beyond titanium aluminum carbide, (ii) the use of hazardous acids in the
synthesis, (iii) a lack of chemical stability, particularly in aqueous or humid
environments, and (iv) adhesion and control in functional films and coatings.
This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award supports
fundamental research to provide the knowledge needed to meet these challenges.
This project involves new synthesis and processing avenues that enable the
scalable nanomanufacturing of new MXene compositions while preventing
degradation and new methods of controlled layer-by-layer assembly of MXenes in
functional coatings. A special emphasis is placed on coating assembly features
such as tunable optoelectronic properties. Additionally, education objectives
include (1) mentoring undergraduate and graduate students alongside the GOALI
industry partner, and (2) engaging the broader community via 2D nanomaterial-
focused curriculum enhancements, a joint industry-government-academic workshop,
and K-12 outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical approach to meeting the
challenges with advanced manufacturing of MXene nanosheets includes experimental
advances in their synthesis, etching, and assembly. In one objective, this
project utilizes alternative etchants such as molten salt solutions for one-step
HF-free synthesis of next-generation MXenes with a focus on how etchant type and
etching conditions affect MXene yield, quality, and stability against chemical
degradation. In another objective, this project creates layer-by-layer-assembled
heterostructured functional coatings containing these next-generation MXenes.
The focus of this objective is on the water-based solution assembly of MXenes
into unique heterostructured coatings that contain precisely stacked regions of
various MXene types with or without polymers. The manufacture of conformal
coatings with alternating blocks of polymer and MXene allows for tailored
optoelectronic properties leading to applications such as Shottky junctions,
Bragg reflectors, and optical filters. In addition, this GOALI project has a
partnership with Lynntech for added expertise in scalability of MXene production
and advanced manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.