* 2240176
* CAREER: A Novel Framework for Measuring and Engineering Twisting and Writhing in DNA
* BIO,MCB
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Enoch Yeung, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 04/30/2028
* USD 269,996.00

Genes are the basic units of biological code inside of every living cell. The
genome of every cell has thousands of genes, arranged in distinct, spatial
patterns that give rise to complex, coordinated genetic programs. Each time a
gene is turned on, the twisted, double helical structure of DNA must be
uncoiled, to expose single-stranded DNA for RNA synthesis (transcription). As
thousands of genes are simultaneously transcribed, the displaced twists of the
DNA travel across the genome, forming a living, fluid landscape of DNA writhing.
This project will develop new biotechnology to reveal how the dynamics of
persistent twisting in DNA alters cellular activity and cell fate. The
overarching goal is to understand the functional relationship between different
spatial arrangements of genetic programs and the fluid landscape of DNA
twisting. Using a combination of techniques from synthetic biology, experimental
biophysics, and control theory, the work will allow researchers to
experimentally visualize and model localized DNA twisting, in concert with gene
transcription. The results are expected to provide practical understanding of
how to spatially design synthetic neighborhoods of genes and ultimately,
synthetic genomes that could be used in biotechnology. Research opportunities
will be provided for graduate and undergraduate students. In addition, in
collaboration teachers in the Santa Ynez, Santa Maria and Lompoc school
districts in California, the project will develop curricula, hands-on training
workshops, educational videos, and interactive life-sized spatial models to
promote understanding of the programmability and the dynamics of DNA.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biologists have previously studied the migratory dynamics
of twisting in relatively short strands of DNA. This project aims to
simultaneously visualize and integrate models for the processes of DNA twisting
and gene transcription, which historically have been studied separately on
different timescales. The PI has recently functionalized and integrated a
magnetic tweezer fluorescence microscopy system with cell-free reactors in
small-volume capillary tubes. This system, combined with an array of recently
developed genetic circuits and reporter constructs, will be used to study of
effects of DNA writhing and twisting on transcription. Simultaneously, the
formation of higher-order DNA knots in linear and circular DNA, such as
plectonemes, will be visualized. These are new in vitro methods for measuring
how local supercoiling density alters or controls nearby gene transcription. The
project also will develop new in vivo biosensors that measure the degree of
localized twist and writhe in circular DNA in living cells, to link in vivo
supercoiling to nearby transcriptional activity. In addition, biophysical models
will be developed to describe how the spatial distribution, transport, and
insulation of localized supercoiling controls transcription in
DNA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.