* 2240417
* Collaborative Research: High-velocity and long-displacement stick-slips: Experimental analogs of earthquake rupture and the seismic cycle
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Nicola Tisato, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 02/28/2026
* USD 168,110.00

An earthquake develops when rocks deep in the Earth suddenly break, or when
sudden offset or 'slip' occurs along a pre-existing fault. Geoscientists lack
detailed knowledge of rock failure and fault slip behavior, and this is one
reason that efforts to forecast damaging earthquakes have not been entirely
successful. Earthquake fault slip begins below the Earth's surface where it
cannot be directly observed, so scientists perform laboratory experiments to
simulate miniature earthquakes in blocks of rock under controlled conditions.
Tisato and their team will develop new laboratory techniques to generate small
earthquakes in the lab, and will take detailed measurements of quantities like
fault slip speed, rock temperature, vibrations, and fault strength in an effort
to better understand their mechanics. Tisato's experiments are unique in that
they can simulate long sequences of earthquakes and can see how these
earthquakes interact with each other. Knowledge gained from these experiments
can be applied to real-world faults using mathematical equations, and may enable
scientists to identify phenomena that could signal an upcoming large
earthquake.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, experimental systems of earthquake
processes belong to two general types: (A) Rotary shear apparatuses that produce
large displacements under controlled slip-velocity but cannot simulate the
spontaneous nucleation, propagation, and seismic recurrence of natural
earthquakes, and (B) Stick-slip systems that simulate the spontaneous nature of
earthquakes but are limited to small displacements. This proposal will integrate
the capabilities of these two experimental types into one system that can
simulate the key earthquake features of spontaneous nucleation and rupture
propagation, along with millimetric to metric slip displacements. The
preliminary results of this unique method already produced a gamut of typical
features of natural seismogenic faults, including high-intensity events due to
fast rupture propagation and high slip velocity, large slip displacements,
foreshocks, and slow-slip events. The planned use of transparent materials and
high-speed cameras will allow the observation of the processes happening on the
laboratory fault while monitoring acoustic emissions as earthquake analogs.
Experiments will also be performed on rock samples, and the analyzed results
will be applied to validate natural earthquake models. The intrinsic nature of
the method is well-tailored for statistical and machine-learning algorithms that
could be used to create earthquake forecasting models. The project will also
focus on outreach by creating educational materials and providing laboratory
experiment experiences for undergraduate and high-school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.