* 2240789
* Collaborative Research: Consensus and Distributed Optimization in Non-Convex Environments with Applications to Networked Machine Learning
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Alfredo Garcia, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 07/31/2026
* USD 250,000.00

Distributed optimization is a vehicle for machine learning and data analysis
over networks as it provides the means to train models in a scalable fashion.
This project aims to advance the fundamental knowledge on distributed non-convex
optimization by studying two important classes of non-convex problems. The
intellectual merits of the project include investigating distributed retraction-
free manifold optimization, and distributed non-smooth weakly-convex
optimization. Scientific contributions of this project will bring transformative
change to the understanding of consensus and coordination in non-convex
environments. The broader impacts of the project include educational components
to introduce distributed optimization as a practical tool for the next
generation of engineers. These educational plans include seminar presentations
for a broader audience as well as advanced course development to introduce
state-of-the-art decentralized optimization techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to address distributed approaches for non-convex
optimization implemented in heterogeneous computing environments. Retraction-
free methods for distributed implementation of Riemannian Stochastic Gradient
Descent will be investigated, followed by illustration of the benefits of this
technique in reduced rank and sparse regression as well as training of sparse
deep neural networks. In both cases, sparsity will be ensured by constraining
the search for the model parameters to a lower-dimensional Riemannian manifold.
The study will further consider distributed non-smooth, non-convex (weakly-
convex) optimization, and develop asynchronous sub-gradient descent methods for
communication-efficient optimization. The goal will be to establish both global
and local convergence results for the proposed
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.