* 2240815
* CAREER: Efficient coding of visual,structural, and semantic scene information
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Michelle Greene, Barnard College
* Continuing Grant
* Simon Fischer-Baum
* 06/30/2028
* USD 254,260.00

It is commonly said that “a picture is worth a thousand words”, a phrase that
evokes the rich amount of information we can gain from the scenes that make up
our visual world. But do all scenes contain the same amount of information?
Intuitively, the answer seems to be ‘no’ -- we often encounter situations where
we are overwhelmed with visual information, such as in a crowded concert venue
or a cluttered desk. Further, when overwhelmed with visual information, we may
make consequential mistakes, such as failing to find a tumor on a medical scan
or crashing one’s car. This CAREER award aims to understand what types of scene
information create overload and the time course of neural processing when
overcoming information overload. Using both behavioral and
electroencephalography (EEG) measures, we assess four levels of information,
ranging from purely visual to semantic. These experiments provide insights into
the mechanisms of visual perception and may enable designers to create spaces
that minimally tax our cognitive resources. This award also takes meaningful
steps toward democratizing training in basic computing. The PI and students work
to create an open educational multi-media textbook that trains students in
scientific computing skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award aims to gain
insights into the mechanisms of scene perception by assessing the system under
information overload. We gain insights into cognitive and neural mechanisms when
we push systems to their limits. Rapid visual perception has intrigued
researchers because the speed of perception places bounds on the types of neural
mechanisms that can achieve recognition. However, most work centers around the
successes of rapid scene understanding than its failures. This work assesses how
four levels of increasing informational complexity (visual, object-based,
semantic, and experiential) contribute to early scene processing. Specifically,
the research tests how each information level affects performance in rapid scene
detection and classification tasks and how each alters the time course of
information processing using EEG. The results of these experiments reveal what
types of information affect visual processing and at what time scales, providing
critical insights into the mechanisms of rapid visual perception. The PI
collaborates with students to create an open multimedia textbook on scientific
computing skills that are often missing from early computer science
classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.