* 2240330
* Reward Prediction in Creative Perception and Production
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Elizabeth Margulis, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Betty Tuller
* 06/30/2026
* USD 527,350.00

Creativity is a cornerstone of human innovation. Despite its importance, it has
traditionally been difficult to define and study rigorously. One important
element of creativity seems to involve defying otherâ€™s expectations, by
contributing something surprising or novel. Within psychology and neuroscience,
robust methods exist for studying how the brain prepares for expected events but
then responds to the unexpected. Until now, those methods have not been
harnessed to study human creativity. In this set of experiments, participants
either create and evaluate fictional stories in response to music or generate
melodies with an easy-to-use computer interface and then evaluate them for
creativity. Natural language processing and musical information retrieval tools
are used to identify the uniqueness or the expectation-defying features of
stories and sequences; neuroscience tools are incorporated to understand
precisely how violations of expectations arise and contribute to creative
outputs. The resultant model should help shape scientific knowledge about how to
foster the human potential for innovation. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The linkage
between innovation and expectation-violation will be explored within three major
aims: 1) To relate the ability to produce imagined stories and melodies to
measures of individual differences in creativity; 2) To relate the perception of
creativity to the fulfillment and violations of expectations as defined by the
information content of imagined stories and melodies; and 3) To relate neural
markers of creativity and innovation to expectancy violations using
electroencephalography. The proposed research activities dovetail with plans to
develop a course on Music and the Brain that brings together underrepresented
students from Psychology, Neuroscience, and Music. In addition, the researchers
and their students will organize outreach and career information events with
Trenton Arts (Trenton Youth Orchestra) in New Jersey and Project STEP (String
Training Education Program) in Boston.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.