* 2240822
* Research Community Development Grant: Collaborative Research: Knowledge of HIV/AIDS: Expertise, Participation, and the Archive in the Long Pandemic
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Marika Cifor, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 08/31/2026
* USD 150,607.00

This Research Community Development (RCD) project brings together social
scientific and humanistic scholars of HIV/AIDS situated within the
interdisciplinary field of Science and Technology Studies (STS). The core goal
is to support community formation, the exchange of ideas, and to foster novel
cutting edge research to synthesize knowledge of this long pandemic. Activities
will be organized to bridge past findings of social studies of HIV/AIDS with
contemporary trajectories in the field focused around three core themes: the
archive, expertise, and participation.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Social and
humanistic scholarship on the HIV/AIDS epidemic in North America has distinct
phases. The period prior to 1996, before effective treatments for HIV, was
marked by a wide array of scholarship on the pandemic. However, public attention
to HIV/AIDS experienced a decline and fragmentation after more effective
treatments became available – sometimes with the mistaken rationale that the
pandemic was over (or at least well-managed) and coupled to a “second silence”
in public attention to AIDS. Biomedical innovation has resulted in treatments
that can enable a person living with HIV to live a lifespan comparable to that
of an HIV-negative person. However, antiretroviral therapies are not cures, they
come with side effects, require access to resources and stability to remain in
care (from health insurance to housing), are dependent on the pharmaceutical
industry, and overall, have not ended the pandemic locally or globally. Four
decades into the pandemic, even as many countries proclaim that they will end
their HIV/AIDS epidemics by 2030, there is no actual end in sight. HIV has
become a long pandemic, one that is both exceptional while also overlapping with
many ongoing human rights, economic and public health crises.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This RCD project aims to overcome the intellectual fragmentation that
accompanied the second silence on HIV/AIDS in STS and its constituent
disciplines by creating infrastructure to support a scholarly community around
these topics. This project will assemble a productive research community via a
series of three annual workshops; by developing an online forum for
coordination; by supporting new research collaborations with small grants; and
by creating a robust mentorship program that will pair early career scholars
with more established scholars. The project will support the next generation of
scholars focused on social studies of illness and will seek to develop general
insight for both long-standing and emerging pandemics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.