* 2240250
* RUI: Investigating the relationship between magmatic processes and copper mineralization at the Lights Creek Stock.
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Hannah Aird, Chico State Enterprises
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 07/31/2026
* USD 281,067.00

As the world transitions to green energy over the next few decades, there will
be an increasing demand for metals. This is one of the most overlooked issues in
the energy transition. All metals come from minerals, and smaller ore deposits
will become more economically viable as the larger ones are depleted. This
project will investigate the relationships between the processes that formed a
small pluton in northern California and the formation of its associated copper
ore deposits. The three small iron oxide-copper-gold (IOCG) deposits of the
Lights Creek Stock are being assessed as a future source of copper. IOCG
deposits form when groundwater and magmatic fluids alter existing rocks along
fractures. The fluids change the minerals in the rocks and deposit new copper
minerals along the fractures. This can create a concentration of copper minerals
which may become economic to mine. An understanding of how magmatic processes
affect copper mineral formation can provide information about where to search
for similar deposits elsewhere. This work will be carried out by three graduate
students, up to twelve undergraduate independent researchers, and will also
encompass three class projects. “Real” research experiences (i.e. when the
instructor also doesn’t know the answer) have been shown to be very important in
helping STEM students to feel like the real scientists they are, increasing
their self-confidence and identity as scientists. This project will support
three classes of students to carry out a real research project in the classroom,
dramatically increasing student exposure to research in CSU-Chico’s geology
program, as less than half of undergraduate students typically carry out
independent research with a faculty member. The findings of these class projects
will be integrated with the findings of the independent researchers to broaden
understanding of the formation of the Lights Creek
Stock.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this work is to investigate the temporal
and geochemical relationship between magmatic processes and copper
mineralization within the Lights Creek Stock (LCS), a granitoid intrusion in the
northern Sierra Nevada that hosts three IOCG (iron oxide copper gold) copper
deposits. Proposed work will test two hypotheses: 1) LCS was emplaced through
multiple pulses of magma over several million years; and 2) the LCS-hosted
Superior, Moonlight and Engels IOCG deposits are geochemically related to one
another, and were formed from the reaction between late-stage hydromagmatic
fluids from the LCS and meteoric fluids. The Dixie Fire in 2021 intensely burned
this densely vegetated area, revealing new outcrops and allowing for more
detailed fieldwork than has previously been possible. Detailed field
descriptions and sample collection of the granitoid rocks will aid reevaluation
of a historic model for LCS formation through petrographic, geochemical and
geochronological analysis of the lateral variation within the stock. Vertical
variation within the LCS will be assessed through similar analyses of drillcore
samples during three course-based undergraduate research experiences (CUREs)
undertaken by students in a Junior-level petrology class. These vertical and
lateral data will be integrated to produce a model for petrogenesis of the LCS
(Hypothesis 1). The petrogenesis of the Superior and Engels IOCG deposits will
be analyzed individually as MS projects through detailed core logging of several
cores, supported by petrography, geochemistry and alteration geochronology
(Hypothesis 2). The integration of the IOCG and LCS petrogenetic models will
produce a bigger picture model to relate the IOCG deposits to the magmatic
history of the LCS, which can then be scaled up throughout the northern Sierra
Nevada and analogous regions throughout the world. This work will also train up
to twelve undergraduate and three graduate students in research methods in
igneous petrology and economic geology, as well as engaging three semesters of
students in authentic research experiences. Research has shown that taking part
in a research experience increases a student’s STEM identity, self-efficacy, and
persistence in the field. CUREs increase access to research experiences to a
broader and more diverse range of students, so are classed as a high-impact
pedagogical practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.