* 2240000
* CAREER: Three-dimensional Nanoscale Device Fabrication via Molecular Programming and DNA-based Self-assembly
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Grigory Tikhomirov, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 04/30/2028
* USD 545,430.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant supports the development of
a new nanofabrication approach based on self-assembly of nanoscale materials
guided by DNA molecules. Nature has evolved the ability to self-assemble
nanomaterials into complex three-dimensional geometries in a sustainable bottom-
up way. In contrast, most human-made devices are assembled through a rational
top-down process which is highly inflexible, expensive, and unsustainable. This
research seeks to combine the strengths of natural biomolecular self-assembly
and rational engineering by encoding molecular recognition into high-performance
materials. The goal is to develop a new nanomanufacturing technology to
fabricate complex nanoscale devices, without using expensive semiconductor
factories and methods. The new manufacturing approach enables a diverse range of
applications, from tiny sensors with unprecedented sensitivity to electronic
devices that can self-evolve. The research is integrated with an educational and
outreach program that introduces self-assembly concepts to students from K-12 to
graduate level and trains a workforce for versatile, sustainable, affordable,
and accessible future nanomanufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite decades of
development, molecular self-assembly has not yet yielded a disruptive nanoscale
manufacturing approach. This is largely due to two unsolved challenges: (i) the
lack of programmable complexity in achievable architectures built from diverse,
high-performance nanomaterials such as quantum dots and nanowires and (ii) the
lack of scalable yet precise methods for integrating these architectures with
existing devices. This research aims to meet both challenges by maximizing the
amount of molecular recognition encoded into nanoscale material components and
macroscale devices. The solution is to place multiple unique DNA sequences onto
precise locations on surfaces of nanoscale and macroscale components. For
nanoscale components this is achieved by wrapping nanoparticles into DNA origami
“suits” or boxes via programming nanoparticle–DNA interactions, such as metal-
purine base, electrostatic forces, DNA-DNA pairing, etc. These arrays of
multiple unique DNA strands serve collectively as molecular zip codes allowing
nanoscale components to autonomously recognize and bind to each other. For
macroscale surfaces this is achieved by patterning with conventional optical
lithography and then performing DNA origami conjugation with standard
amine–carboxyl chemistry or with new molecular barcoding approaches to anchor
thousands of unique single-stranded DNA in precise positions. This patterned
macroscale device surface provides a multitude of docking sites for the
architectures self-assembled from nanoparticles yielding the final device. By
studying and understanding the thermodynamics of self-assembly processes,
nanoscale structures, experimental parameters, and performance of the resulting
devices, this research pushes the limits of what is possible to fabricate with
molecular programming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.