* 2240110
* Career: Learning for Strategic Interactions in Societal-Scale Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Eric Mazumdar, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Bushnell
* 01/31/2028
* USD 103,596.00

In societal-scale cyber-physical systems (SCPS), machine learning algorithms are
increasingly becoming the interface between stakeholders---from matching drivers
and riders on ride-sharing platforms to the real-time scheduling of energy
resources in electric vehicle (EV) charging stations. The fact that the
different stakeholders in these systems have different objectives gives rise to
strategic interactions which can result in inefficiencies and negative
externalities across the SCPS. This NSF CAREER project seeks to develop a
foundational understanding of the strategic interactions that arise in SCPS, the
impacts they have on social welfare, and how they affect algorithmic decision-
making. The goal is to shift how engineers design algorithms for SCPS.
Currently, learning algorithms are trained and developed in isolation, and
uncertainty and strategic interactions are treated---if at all--- as adversarial
or worst-case. In contrast, the proposed research aims to develop algorithms
that can consider economic interactions, human behavior, and uncertainty when
making decisions. The theory and algorithms developed through this project will
be validated on two physical testbeds: 1. an EV charging testbed where drivers
routinely mis-report preferences for faster charging, and 2. the Caltech Social
Science Experimental Laboratory where controlled experiments will be conducted
to understand how people respond to algorithms. The proposal also includes an
integrated education and outreach plan, which includes outreach to K-12 students
and new undergraduate and graduate courses on the complexities of learning in
SCPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key goals of this project include developing a
unified design methodology for learning in the presence of strategic behaviors
in SCPS and the systematic study of the control actions and control authority
that individual users and policymakers can wield to achieve societal goals. The
fact that strategic manipulations in SCPS are played out through the
(mis)-reporting of data or through algorithmic decision-making distinguishes
these problems from those classically studied in game theory and economics.
Furthermore, in contrast with existing work in computer science and economics
that study strategic interactions, this project aims to take a dynamic view of
SCPS, which leverages tools and ideas from dynamical systems theory and
stochastic processes to complement ideas in machine learning, game theory, and
behavioral economics. This perspective will allow for new insights into how
repeated interactions affect strategic decision-making in SCPS and which design
decisions impact learning in game theoretic settings. This opens the door to new
insights and the analysis of previously overlooked control knobs for achieving
societal goals in SCPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.