* 2240069
* CAREER: In-situ Hybrid Layerwise Rolling and Sealing in Laser Powder-bed Fusion Manufacturing of Tungsten: Fundamental Processing Mechanisms and Transition Temperature Controls
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Narges Shayesteh Moghaddam, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Chou
* 04/30/2028
* USD 582,358.00

Refractory metals and alloys of extremely high melting temperatures,
particularly tungsten (chemical symbol: W), offer great potential for
applications in harsh environments found in the space, defense, and nuclear
applications, etc. Additive manufacturing has been explored in the research and
development of tungsten parts because of its ability to produce complex single-
piece components along with reducing lead times and prototype costs. However,
the inherent brittleness and high susceptibility to cracking of this material
class pose major challenges to its production using high-temperature additive
manufacturing such as laser powder-bed fusion (LPBF). This Faculty Early Career
Development (CAREER) grant supports fundamental research that will generate
knowledge related to a new hybrid manufacturing technique, combing in-situ
rolling and sealing layer-by-layer during LPBF of W parts, capable of performing
real-time modifications during the process, and thus, producing parts with
controlled and improved properties. The research will enable knowledge-driven
processing designs for the advanced production technology of W parts, which
would open doors to new applications ranging from waveguides and collimators for
hypersonic aircraft leading edges and plasma-facing components in unique fusion
reactors, and thereby, create opportunities to strengthen the U.S. economy and
national security. This project will also design and deliver intriguing hands-on
educational and outreach experiences for the recruitment of diverse high school
students to STEM majors and the retainment of undergraduate and graduate
students from underserved groups, while ensuring their success in STEM-related
careers or post-graduate education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of
this CAREER award is to understand the mechanisms that govern the evolution of
the structures and properties of W made by layerwise rolling and sealing in
LPBF. The team will first investigate how plastic deformation and strengthening,
induced by rolling and nanoparticle sealing, respectively, affect the
thermodynamic driving forces and kinetics in W as well as impacts on structural
evolution, while encountering process cycles of melting and re-melting.
Experimental studies will include LPBF sample fabrications with in-situ rolling-
sealing and materials characterization techniques. Crystal plasticity, discrete
dislocation dynamics, and cellular automata models will be integrated to
investigate into the evolution of dislocations, microstructure, and texture
during the process. Next, the project will unveil the fundamental mechanisms
underlying the newly achieved W structure and its role in the development of
ductile-to-brittle transition and recrystallization. Fracture toughness testing
will be conducted to investigate the ductile-to-brittle transition temperature,
complemented by the crack-tip plasticity theory and thermo-kinetic analysis to
discover their respective contributions to the transition temperature.
Furthermore, annealing followed by microhardness testing will be employed to
identify the recrystallization temperature, with recrystallization kinetic
models and thermodynamic principles used to determine the recrystallization
driving forces. Then, how the fabricated W structure influence deformation
mechanisms and mechanical behavior will be elucidated through tensile testing up
to fracture at different temperatures to evaluate the strength and ductility. In
addition, the plastic behavior and its contributions toward strength and
ductility will be studied using the modified Clyne model. The research findings
will offer insights into the thermodynamic and kinetic aspects of the hybrid in-
situ rolling-sealing LPBF and their influence on thermal and mechanical
behaviors under various mechanical, nano-structural, and thermal constraints.
Ultimately, the knowledge attained will enable the advancement of W materials
through improving part performance and increasing the operating temperature
limits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.