* 2240334
* Standard Research Grant: An Ethnographic Study of Agrarian Life
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2026
* Sarah Besky, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2026
* USD 131,797.00

This project is a study of applied agricultural science and settlement. To
understand how applied agricultural science and settlement make land and people
productive, the PI will collect data on agricultural extension and agrarian
landscapes and livelihoods. Developed U.S. and European universities,
agricultural extension has shaped livelihoods outside the U.S. and Europe in
ways that deserve closer attention. The PI will study the work of governmental,
university-based, and nongovernmental agricultural extension services aimed at
small farmers in high altitude, landslide-prone landscapes. The PI will create a
generalizable framework for understanding the political, economic, and
environmental technologies that make such landscapes productive. This project
will result in a detailed picture of how extension scientists and farmers work
to make farmland viable in the context of environmental and economic
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will develop a methodology for bringing
history into conversation with ethnography to understand agrarian change.
Archival documents on settlement and agricultural extension will be interpreted
and shared with farmers in focus group workshops. This methodology will
contribute to answering two questions: (1) In what ways is productivity enacted?
Agricultural extension science has transformed both what farmers grow and how
they grow it, and it aims to keep farming viable by introducing novel crops and
tools. What requires further investigation is the active role small farmers have
played in successive scientific efforts to craft productive landscapes, and how
the promotion of particular crops is enmeshed in the larger project of securing
control over challenging terrain, particularly mountain landscapes. (2) What are
the effects of agricultural extension on everyday life for farmers? Successive
agricultural extension projects have entailed both subtle and drastic changes to
the lives of small farmers, particularly women. Understanding how domestic life,
science, and the market intersect requires investigation of how settlement
creates divisions of labor across scales.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.