* 2240309
* EAGER: Quantum Manufacturing: Scalable Manufacturing of Molecular Qubit Arrays Using Self-assembled DNA
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Dirk Englund, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 04/30/2025
* USD 300,000.00

In contrast to silicon-based materials commonly used for conventional computing
and sensing devices, new materials are needed to similarly enable the low-cost,
ubiquitous manufacturing and deployment of quantum sensing and computing systems
for a variety of applications in health and diagnostics, autonomy and robotics,
and other technological areas of major societal need. Toward this end, this
EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) Quantum Manufacturing award
supports nanotechnology research to control the 2D spatial positions and
orientation of molecular “qubits” to fabricate multi-qubit systems and devices.
Novel device readouts of these qubit networks will be manufactured and
characterized with potential for integration into conventional and practical
photonic circuit architectures. An interdisciplinary team of investigators from
chemistry, biological engineering, and electrical engineering will be assembled
to pursue this transformative approach towards scalable quantum device
fabrication, which will shift how qubit manufacturing can be implemented at
scale. The research will enhance US competitiveness in this growing global
technology field. Innovative curriculum development related to this research
will be pursued at the undergraduate and graduate levels, including mentoring
high school students, women, and underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optically-addressable qubits provide a
generalizable platform for quantum information science. However, the lack of
precise spatial distribution of nanovacancy color-centers into qubit-networks
has hindered their translation towards scalable, low-cost device fabrication.
Recent progress in chemically-tailorable organometallic spin qubit systems show
promise as an alternative, whereby chemical synthesis affords bottom-up qubit
design and portability across different environments. However, these
organometallic qubits require dilution in a host-matrix co-crystal for solid
state implementation, yielding distributed color-center environments and density
across a matrix that prevents controlled, scalable qubit-networking. As an
alternative, single-molecule addressability of highly programmable DNA
assemblies programmed using the principle of DNA origami will be leveraged
together with chemically-tailorable organometallic qubits to realize a scalable
manufacturing platform for spatially controlled qubits. Distinct organometallic
color-centers using these DNA-based scaffolds will enable the integration of
qubits into higher-order spatial networks to fabricate multi-qubit systems and
devices. 2D DNA architectures will be patterned with nanoscale position and
orientation onto device surfaces using programmable shape matching of the DNA
structure to lithographically-patterned semiconductor layers. Quantum sensing of
biological analytes with addressable proximity to the qubits on a DNA platform
will be prototyped.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.