* 2240194
* Informality and Inequality in the Global North: Regulation, Non-Compliance, and Enforcement in US Land Use and Housing Law
* SBE,SES
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Noah Durst, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Reginald Sheehan
* 07/31/2026
* USD 395,000.00

Over the past decade, scholars have illustrated that informal housing – housing
that violates laws and regulations or is denied their protection – is both
common and broadly socially acceptable in the U.S. For example, homeowners
frequently convert garages, basements, or attics into housing units – or build
new dwelling units in their backyards – without seeking permits or adhering to
local regulations such as building codes and zoning ordinances. Recent estimates
suggest that in some metropolitan areas as many as half of new housing units are
built without permits. Although these informal units provide a much-needed
supply of housing in high-cost metropolitan areas where there is a severe unmet
demand for affordable housing, they can also pose important health and safety
risks to residents and exacerbate inequalities regarding access to adequate and
safe housing and infrastructure. This project examines local governments’
efforts to address non-compliance with land use and housing laws by documenting
the ways in which land use regulation itself or its discretionary enforcement
contributes to the proliferation of informal housing. It will address the needs
of socially vulnerable communities by conducting social and legal research on
understudied forms of informal housing where evidence suggests a
disproportionate share of low-income and racial/ethnic minority residents live.
It will inform more equitable policymaking and planning through project
publications and reports and will improve legal and social science education by
training graduate students in qualitative and quantitative analysis of informal
housing. Lastly, it will advance broader understandings of the importance and
implications of informal housing by developing and distributing case studies for
inclusion in undergraduate and graduate sociology, law, urban planning, and
public policy courses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study advances science and
builds on two important socio-legal traditions – the disconnection between law-
on-the-books and law-in-action, and legal consciousness – by examining the
efficacy of and challenges to land use and housing law; interrogating the
state’s approach to and capacity for enforcement in the context of widespread
non-compliance; identifying myriad challenges to governance and implications for
inequality posed by the proliferation of informal housing; and examining the
role of power and legitimacy in the implementation and enforcement of law in the
context of land use and housing. To do so, it uses quantitative data at both the
national and local levels to examine the relationship between the production of
informal housing units, the local regulatory environment, and local expenditures
on code enforcement. It also examines the dynamics of law, enforcement,
discretion, and legitimacy in the context of widespread housing informality. It
does so by documenting how public officials such as planners, code enforcement
officers, or zoning appeal boards negotiate the demands and dilemmas of public
service through discretionary decisions; how producers and users of housing
conform to or transgress laws; and the ways they make sense of the legality of
informal housing. In doing so, the project will elucidate the mechanisms by
which the translation of housing laws (“in action”) produces informal housing
units, and how cultural interpretations of housing laws and norms confer
legitimacy that contributes to their persistence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.