* 2240025
* CAREER: How hydroclimate variability is transmitted through the critical zone
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Daniella Rempe, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 05/31/2028
* USD 267,884.00

Some of Earth’s most productive and biodiverse forests experience prolonged
drought. Moisture stores found below ground are central to the resilience of
these ecosystems, however, it remains unclear how root-zone moisture will
respond to changes in climate, such as decreased snowpack or increased severity
and frequency of drought. This is largely because forest root-zones commonly
extend into rock beyond depths of conventional sensing and sampling.
Consequently, root-zone moisture storage is one of the most poorly constrained
and sparsely observed variables in the water cycle. This research will generate
new measurements of root-zone water storage to support improved forecasting of
water supply to forest vegetation and streams under climate change. This project
will also prepare the next generation of hydrologists and geoscientists to
tackle water resource challenges in a changing climate through an educational
plan focused on experiential undergraduate training as well as undergraduate and
graduate student research training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The compounding and
interacting changes to climate projected for the next century are expected to
disproportionately impact upland forests, which play an important role in
recharging groundwater aquifers and supplying water to river networks. There are
open questions about how moisture stored in the root-zone of these forests may
dampen or amplify their sensitivity to hydroclimate variability. This proposal
will intensively document root-zone moisture storage across a network of
hydrologic monitoring sites in Texas, California and Colorado to evaluate how
root-zone moisture responds to climate variability. Importantly, measurements of
moisture storage will extend beneath soils into the weathered bedrock. These on-
the-ground measurements will then be used to advance satellite-based methods for
measuring root-zone zone moisture at larger scales. The resulting datasets will
inform an ecohydrologic model to evaluate how patterns of root-zone moisture
storage respond to drought, changes in snowpack, and land use disturbance. Field
work and student training will leverage partnerships with the USDA (Forest
Service), local water agencies, and NSF-supported research, including the
Critical Zone Collaborative Network. Educational activities will increase access
and equity in experiential geoscience education through a targeted summer
research program and mentorship network for graduates of the University of Texas
at Austin’s GeoFORCE outreach program and the integration of a local case-study
into the University of Texas undergraduate geoscience
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.