* 2240044
* CAREER: Detailed distributions of tephra fall characteristics: insights into magma fragmentation and transport via volcanic plumes
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2028
* Thomas Giachetti, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 01/31/2028
* USD 333,529.00

Explosive volcanic eruptions produce ash clouds that can reach miles into the
atmosphere. These plumes are the most far reaching of volcanic hazards. They can
cause fatalities and disrupt air traffic, the global economy, and the climate.
The characteristics of the ash control how far it travels and when and where it
falls on the ground. Quantifying ash characteristics is thus crucial to
understand, predict, and model volcanic plumes. This is central to warn likely
affected areas and reduce impacts from eruptions. This research project aims at
clarifying the links between ash and eruptive processes. It will combine
traditional and new techniques and use eruptions in the US Cascades as case
studies. Models of ash transport will integrate the results of this project. It
will increase the precision and accuracy of ash cloud forecasting. The
educational project will raise awareness among high-schoolers of volcanic
eruptions and deposits. It will focus on high schools in rural and tribal areas
in Oregon and Washington. Students will learn about volcanic deposits in their
backyard via hands-on activities. They will share their new knowledge with their
local community via a presentation. The project ultimately aims at raising high
schoolers interest in STEM education and scientific
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of the subterraneous nature of the
processes leading up to tephra formation and dispersal, our knowledge of
eruptive mechanisms mostly relies on the interpretation of tephra
characteristics collected after the eruption. Morphological and textural studies
currently focus on a limited number of parameters analyzed, clast sizes, and/or
sampling locations, thus preventing a full capture of the complexity of tephra
deposits. This project will address these limitations by 1) assessing the
importance of secondary fragmentation, which leads to a change of the size and
shape of tephra after their initial formation in the conduit; 2) improving
Tephra Transport and Deposition Models; and 3) streamlining and standardizing
the analysis of tephra physical characteristics. Comparing tephra final
characteristics with those of the products of primary fragmentation in the
conduit of the volcano will establish the amount of secondary fragmentation
occurring during the eruption and its control on plume height. Contrasting
characteristics between eruptions spanning orders of magnitude in volume and
mass discharge rate will enhance our knowledge of the links between eruptive
parameters and eruptive products and outline new strategies to quantify eruption
source parameters indispensable to predict and model plume behavior.
Interpreting lateral variations in size, density, and componentry distributions
will help decipher transport processes such as particle aggregation and rafting.
Direct implementation of results into existing numerical models of tephra
transport and sedimentation will improve forecast of volcanic ash cloud and
ensuing tephra fall.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.