* 2240579
* Geographies of Early Urbanism
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Emma Rasbury, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2026
* USD 185,194.00

Researchers seek to understand which strategies enable cities to persist in the
face of economic, ecological, and demographic stressors. Archaeology, able to
trace urban adaptations over the course of centuries and even millennia, is
uniquely well placed to provide relevant insights. This project assesses whether
human and animal mobility and migration are necessary elements of durable
urbanism, particularly in fragile and ecologically dynamic settings. Focusing on
a region where large cities persisted for millennia in environments
characterized by dramatic shifts in water availability and soils highly
vulnerable to salinization, the research team tests whether early cities relied
on immigration to sustain their populations and on long-distance pastoralism to
support their economies. Throughout the research, student training and
engagement with diverse publics in multiple countries advances public scientific
literacy and global STEM education, maximizing the practical as well as ethical
value of archaeological research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to determine
whether mobility and migration are required elements of urban success, an
international team examines the geographical origins and mobility of human and
animal populations associated with durable urban settlement on a premodern
floodplain. Isotopic analyses of skeletal remains enable scientists to trace
ancient organismsâ€™ mobility and migration in regions where baseline maps of
isotope values are available. The research team creates the first strontium,
neodymium, and lead isotope map of the region generating an open-access tool
that establishes a foundation for ongoing and future isotope research in the
region. The team uses this map to determine whether isotope values in remains
recovered from one ancient city are consistent with urban reliance on
immigration and specialized mobile pastoralism. The project thus (a) supports
regional multidisciplinary isotope research, (b) determines whether premodern
urban adaptations inherently encompass significant levels of mobility and
migration, and (c) creates scientific training opportunities while enhancing
global STEM engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.