* 2240372
* BIORETS: INterSPecies Interactions Research Experience (INSPIRE)
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Lauren O'Connell, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 02/28/2026
* USD 599,447.00

The INterSPecies Interactions Research Experience (INSPIRE) BIORETs site award
to Stanford University will create partnerships between Stanford scientists and
eight public school science teachers per year for eight weeks in the summer with
continued classroom support throughout the year. Three cohorts of teachers will
be recruited for the summers of 2023 – 2025 for a total of 24 teachers during
the award. Recruitment will focus on middle and high school teachers from the
Bay Area of California with special emphasis on teachers serving large
percentages of marginalized students. The goals of this program are to provide
research experiences to teachers that enhance their confidence and skills in the
lab with support to transfer aspects of the research experiences into their
classrooms to improve student learning. Teachers will conduct research on the
interactions between species, such as food web relationships or disease
transmission, which are important for human health and natural ecosystems.
Teachers will also participate in professional learning experiences that enhance
collaboration within the cohort and application of their research to classroom
settings. Participating scientists will visit classrooms to interact with and
affirm students in their science learning journey. Outcomes of this project will
be assessed through surveys, interviews, and assessments to determine if these
authentic science experiences for teachers resulted in changes in teaching
practice as well as improved learning outcomes and greater engagement for
students. The Bay Area of California has tremendous wealth inequity, where
enriching academic experiences are not equally available. This program will
enact and inspire increased distribution of lab-based experiences for teachers
and students in schools with more limited resources.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Species interactions are critically important for human
and ecosystem health. Preparing the next generation of scientists to understand
the interdependency of species will enable the US scientific workforce to tackle
some of society’s most pressing challenges, like disease, food scarcity, and
biodiversity conservation. The goals of this program are to enhance teacher
content and pedagogical knowledge, scientific skill sets, and confidence through
authentic research experiences in Stanford University’s Department of Biology
laboratories and professional learning experiences with Stanford’s Center to
Support Excellence in Teaching. Ethical conduct of research and harassment
prevention training are required of all project participants, including
laboratory mentors. The project will use www.nsfetap.org to recruit and document
participation, with targeted recruitment of teachers from districts serving
majority low-income, underrepresented populations. Teachers will conduct
authentic research in world-leading scientific laboratories and participate in
professional learning experiences focused on developing content knowledge,
pedagogy, and translating their experiences into lesson plans for their
classrooms through an Education Transfer Plan. Partnering scientists will
receive mentorship training and will visit these public-school classrooms to
interact with teachers and students throughout the academic year. Funding
includes a teacher stipend, conference travel for the teacher to present their
summer research, and classroom funds to implement their Education Transfer
Plans. Example research projects include ecosystem interactions like predator-
prey or tree-fungi relationships, infectious disease spread like COVID-19
transmission, and how organisms adapt to climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.