* 2240756
* Collaborative Research: Tracing ca. 4 billion years of volatile cycling in magmas and fluids: insights from halogens in synthetic and natural zircons
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Elizabeth Bell, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 04/30/2026
* USD 45,532.00

Halogens (e.g., chlorine and fluorine) are key ingredients encountered in
everyday life. They are found in consumer-based polymers (plastics), drinking
water, toothpaste, swimming pools, cleaning supplies, and table salt. In the
geosciences they represent one of the key components in ocean water; deeper into
our planet, their concentration can affect whether a rock is a molten magma or
crystalline at a given temperature. Halogens also affect the mobility and
transport of critical elements in the crust like rare earth elements, cobalt,
chromium, and copper etc. While researchers have some basic understanding of
halogen interactions between the solid earth and the ocean/atmosphere, there is
scant information about distribution and behavior of halogens during the very
earliest times of our planet. These early times are important to understand
because it is this information that serves as inputs into models that seek to
understand the present and future state of Earth. This research will help to
understand the complex connections between: (1) halogens inside of Earth’s rocks
and (2) the ocean/atmosphere, and the movement between (1) and (2) through time.
Since there is precious little information from the earliest Earth, the
researchers will rely upon a robust geochemical repository (the mineral zircon
which resists physical and chemical weathering with ages that extend back to 4.4
billion years), carefully designed laboratory experiments, and mass
spectrometry. This work will educate undergraduate/graduate students in
mineralogy, state-of-the art experimental geochemistry/materials science, and
mass spectrometry. These training opportunities have applications that extend
beyond the geosciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Halogen measurements of these
Archean and Hadean zircons will be combined with high-temperature and high-
pressure laboratory partitioning experiments to provide context for halogen-in-
zircon geochemistry. Together, this information will be used to explore
different halogen cycling models that may have prevailed on the early Earth, the
outcome of which would have direct consequences for the composition of the early
crust and possibly early Earth surface water chemistry. This research will yield
the first ever detailed F and Cl partition coefficients between zircon-melt and
zircon-fluid. Results will also be used to constrain the F and Cl contents of
early Earth igneous systems (zircon-melt). In addition, zircon-fluid partition
coefficients will be applied to a previously identified suite of ~3.9 billion-
year-old zircons, which crystallized below the wet granite solidus and may
record significant early Archean metamorphic or fluid-flow events. The
partitioning studies will enable a broad characterization of halogen exchange
between the crust-hydrosphere system and the mantle of the early Earth.
Diffusion studies for Cl and F in zircon will be carried out to better establish
the conditions under which zircon will retain primary Cl and F. Finally, new Cl-
and F-in-zircon analyses will be undertaken, to better characterize terrestrial
halogen cycling. The researchers will train a PhD student in high P and T
experimentation, electron microscopy, and mass spectrometry. Second, the course
“Principles of Experimental Geochemistry”, will be offered as an upper division
hybrid lecture- laboratory-based course designed as an active learning ‘studio’
format. Third, an undergraduate student will conduct laboratory research
directly related to the objectives of this proposal, leading to a senior
research thesis. And finally, the PI will design and build a simple petrographic
microscope to enable mineral viewing in plane polarized and cross polarized
light to develop a simple educational lesson, using the features of this
microscope, for 8-12th grade students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.