* 2240976
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Efficient Trustless Distributed Cryptography
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Ling Ren, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 04/30/2026
* USD 599,955.00

Distributed cryptography refers to the paradigm where different parties or
organizations jointly run a protocol for privacy or integrity. Prominent
examples include secure multi-party computation and distributed ledger
technology. A central goal in distributed cryptography is to avoid any
centralized trusted party or single point of failure. Many protocols and systems
today, however, still need to keep some degree of central trust, often in the
form of an initial trusted dealer or trusted setup phase. These central trust
assumptions go against the philosophy of distributed cryptography. The reason
why they are still common is efficiency and convenience. More often than not,
solutions without central trust are harder to construct and more costly than
ones using central trust. This project seeks to invent and promote distributed
cryptographic protocols without central trust by placing them on equal footing
with their trusted counterparts in terms of simplicity and efficiency.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will study a series of fundamental problems
including reliable broadcast, Byzantine fault tolerant consensus (the underlying
technology of distributed ledgers), verifiable information dispersal, verifiable
secret sharing, and distributed randomness beacons. For each of these problems,
the goal is to design new solutions that do not rely on any central trust and
can match the efficiency of their trusted counterparts, both in terms of
asymptotic complexity and practical performance. The project will also design
practical distributed key generation and setup generation protocols to help
remove central trust from existing distributed cryptographic protocols. A
crucial insight that inspired this project is that underlying all these
important problems is a simple yet overlooked problem known as data
dissemination. The project will systematically investigate data dissemination
and apply it to many areas of distributed
cryptography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.