* 2240028
* CAREER: Bacterial heterogeneity in stress survival
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Nicholas Butzin, South Dakota State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 03/31/2028
* USD 550,948.00

Bacterial persisters have an incredible ability to survive stress and are a
major cause of recurrent bacterial infections, failures in antibiotic drug
therapy, and evolution of antibiotic resistance. Most cells in a bacterial
population die when exposed to a major stress, such as antibiotics, but a small
fraction of cells survive for a long time. These survivors, also known as
persisters, appear to arise as a result of variability in cell behaviors across
the population. The goal of this project is to discover the mechanisms that
allow the formation, maintenance, and survival of bacterial persisters and thus
to help understand key features of bacterial survival. The work will involve
student researchers, including those from underrepresented groups, who will
participate in synthetic biology research experiences as part of the project's
educational objectives. In addition, the project will provide professional
development workshops for K-12 science teachers to enhance their ability to
integrate synthetic biology modules into their classrooms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this research is to identify the
mechanism that enables some bacterial cells to survive after exposure to stress.
One hypothesis to be tested is that survival depends on establishment of some
type of epigenetically-determined ‘memory’ of stress that results in higher
persister numbers after exposure to the stress. To understand the regulatory
processes that enable persisters to survive long-term, lethal stress, the
project will use a suite of experimental approaches, such as fluorescence
microscopy, microfluidics, and a modified Luria–Delbrück fluctuation test, with
synthetic biology and quantitative modeling. In addition, transcriptional
analysis, single-cell experiments, and high-throughput techniques will be used
to quantify epigenetic patterns in bacteria. The research will produce a
quantitative framework for understanding the mechanism responsible for the
phenotypic heterogeneity thought to serve as an inherent survival strategy of
bacteria. This work will impact fundamental knowledge of how bacteria survive
sudden lethal stress and how they deal with harsh environmental fluctuations.
The results are expected to offer new insights into the fundamental molecular
mechanisms of how cells revive from lethal stress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.