* 2240040
* CAREER: Exploring Robust Robot Manipulation through Compliance- and Motion-based Manipulation Funnels
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Kaiyu Hang, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Siddiq Qidwai
* 05/31/2028
* USD 600,000.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) award supports research in
general-purpose robotic manipulation in unstructured environments. Most real-
world manipulation tasks involve uncertainties, un-modellable physics, and
unknown parameters, where traditional approaches for precise planning and
control have been hitting a hard limit. This award supports research that seeks
to establish a novel paradigm that enables robots to handle uncertainties and
unknowns through the lens of “manipulation funnels.” The concept of manipulation
funnel is the same as that of an ordinary use funnel, wherein the idea is to
filter a large set of task possibilities through a restrictive neck, defined by
robot compliance or motion strategy, to a smaller set ensuring that the
subsequent robot actions are robust against uncertainties. This new paradigm
will improve real-world robot applications, such as those used in industrial
production, household services, and healthcare. The award will also support
several STEM initiatives, with focus on broadening participation to
underrepresented groups, including hands-on robotic manipulation tutorials and
an accompanying book, curriculum enhancement with research outcomes, and
research opportunities for undergraduate and K-12
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this project is to depart from
the traditional pipeline of perception, planning, and control for robotic
manipulation by generalizing the idea of geometric manipulation funnels in task
space to new classes of funnels based on robot compliance and motion strategy
for robust and dexterous manipulation against environmental uncertainties.
Within this context, the focus is on identifying the entries, shaping the necks,
and finding the exits in these new classes of manipulation funnels. For example,
by leveraging active or passive compliance, funnels that are initially blocked
can be can actively “opened” to precisely manipulate objects through self-
stabilizing task formations and facilitate contact-rich manipulation with
enlarged planning spaces and simplified control. Similarly, by leveraging
motions and task constraints, funnels can be actively created to cage the state
transitions in time to effectively reduce uncertainties or even directly figure
out the mapping from uncertain manipulation inputs to their possible outputs.
Furthermore, by transferring funnels through tasks and composing multi-modal
manipulation solutions via funnel concatenations, the proposed funnel-based
framework will enable complex manipulation tasks while firmly guaranteeing
robustness. As a result, this project will enable robots to manipulate through a
non-traditional but more reliable framework, allowing them to work in highly
uncertain scenarios that were traditionally
infeasible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the cross-
directorate Foundational Research in Robotics program, jointly managed and
funded by the Directorates for Engineering (ENG) and Computer and Information
Science and Engineering (CISE).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.