* 2240008
* CAREER: Epithelial Organization in Thin Bioprinted Hydrogels
* ENG,CBET
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Daniel Harrington, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston
* Continuing Grant
* Stephanie George
* 02/29/2028
* USD 466,388.00

Thin epithelia form robust barriers throughout the human body, aligning as
protective interfaces between interior and exterior environments. Epithelia also
organize with even higher complexity to form glands, like the pancreas, sweat
glands, and salivary glands. Glandular epithelia rely on a soft, layered
extracellular matrix with a directional organization to polarize these cells and
enable their secretory function. If damaged by severe injury or disease,
delicate branched tissues like the salivary gland often respond with a repair
(rather than regenerative) response, yielding a permanently dysfunctional,
disorganized array of scar tissue. The resulting loss of salivary function can
have dramatic impacts on oral health and quality of life. Researchers continue
to search for ways to regenerate these scarred tissues, and three-dimensional
(3D) bioprinting is one method that could have potential application to this
need. The research activities of this CAREER award will focus on applying a new
method of bioprinting to epithelial regeneration, with the intent of delivering
more precise deposition of cells, within supportive hydrogels, in 3D. In the
educational and outreach activities, multidisciplinary teams of dental students,
graduate students, and undergraduates will partner together to implement unique,
low-cost bioprinters toward these same problems. Larger groups of students will
be introduced to Houston’s growing culture of entrepreneurship and innovation,
gaining creative inspiration for their future careers. The program’s goal is to
recruit, train, and retain students with diverse backgrounds, to advance a
future cadre of multidisciplinary scientists in oral health.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator’s laboratory designs, synthesizes, and
characterizes polymeric and supramolecular biomaterials for clinical use, across
applications in tissue regeneration, drug delivery, and preclinical drug
screening. The goal of this CAREER proposal is to leverage recent advances in
biomaterials and coaxial microfluidic bioprinting to print ultrathin hydrogel
layers, with controlled gradients in biochemical composition and mechanical
properties, that drive cellular organization and phenotype display of co-
encapsulated epithelia and surrounding mesenchyme. The specific research
objectives are to: (1) tailor hydrogel composition to support concentric
epithelial/mesenchymal cell interaction, (2) quantify epithelial cell migration
and organization behavior within bioprinted hydrogel structures of varying
dimension, composition, porosity, and cellular partners, and (3) assess
differentiation and organization as a function of these same print parameters.
In tandem, the integrated education goal of this project is to develop a cohort
of experts at the interface of oral biology and biomaterials, across multiple
education levels, within a dental school setting. Specific education objectives
are to: (1) implement interdisciplinary bioprinting education for dental
students, graduate students in biosciences, and undergraduates in bioengineering
within a summer research program, (2) increase engagement for students from
historically underrepresented or excluded backgrounds, and (3) leverage
Houston’s startup ecosystem to expose students to STEM translation and
entrepreneurship, alongside didactic training in methods of
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.