* 2240180
* CAREER: Numerical Analysis for Meshfree and Particle Methods via Nonlocal Models
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Xiaochuan Tian, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 06/30/2028
* USD 87,940.00

Meshfree and particle methods are widely used in the computational studies of
partial differential equations (PDEs) with applications to many mechanical,
hydrodynamical and biophysical processes. They offer many advantages over
traditional mesh-based methods, particularly for problems with complex or moving
geometries, large deformations of materials, or other singular behaviors of
solutions. The goal of this project is to investigate an innovative approach for
designing and analyzing meshfree and particle methods through the study of
continuum nonlocal models and their robust discretizations. A central idea is to
design "asymptotically compatible schemes" with respect to the nonlocal/integral
relaxation scale of PDEs so as to advance the stability, accuracy and efficiency
of meshfree and particle methods. The proposed research will advance the
theoretical understanding of meshfree and particle methods and enhance their
practical performance and functionality. Central to the project is an integrated
plan of educational goals, and these include promoting the engagement and
retention of female and underrepresented groups in math and science, enhancing
applied and computational mathematics curricula, and disseminating new
scientific discoveries. The PI proposes a variety of activities that aim at
promoting computational thinking in middle/high school students and teachers,
inspiring and preparing undergraduates for early research experience, and
contributing to a more connected and inclusive intellectual environment.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project primarily focuses on three objectives. The
first is the development of monotone meshfree methods for elliptic equations via
nonlocal relaxation. This includes the study of linear and nonlinear elliptic
equations in Euclidean space and on manifolds. The central theme is to preserve
the monotonicity in the discretization while keeping a compact selection of
nearby points. The second subject is meshfree methods for systems of equations
via the study of nonlocal vector calculus. The study of well-posed nonlocal
models through nonlocal vector calculus is crucial for designing of stable
numerical discretizations, without which instabilities are often observed (e.g.,
in the SPH method and peridynamics correspondence model). In the last
subproject, we focus on improving the accuracy and efficiency of Lagrange type
particle methods for nonlinear time-dependent PDEs through nonlocal analysis.
The discussion includes aggregation equation, degenerate diffusion, and
convection-diffusion equation. The study of Wasserstein gradient flows will also
be needed for rigorous convergence studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.