* 2240327
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Intersectional Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Jakita Thomas, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 04/30/2024
* USD 204,324.00

Auburn University and Florida State University will collaborate to develop a
series of workshops to engage members of the Broadening Participation in
Computing (BPC) Alliances and Black, Latina and Native American women graduate
students to develop a community of support in computing disciplines. Native
American, Latina, and Black women are particularly underrepresented in computing
with representation at all degree levels significantly less than the
representation of these groups in the U.S. population. While prior work has has
championed new approaches to student recruitment and preparation, less research
has specifically focused on women of color and their lived experiences in the
field of computing. An intersectional focus is important because the needs of
women of color cannot be adequately addressed when interventions are designed
and analyzed along a single axis of race or gender. Working in collaboration
with the BPC Alliances, this project will serve as a step towards establishing a
more inclusive and actionable research agenda focused on women of color,
specifically Native American, Latina, and Black women in the field of computing.
The project activities will center the lived experiences of women of color in
computing and re-imagine efforts within and across the BPC-Aâ€™s while
establishing an actionable research agenda around women of color.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BPC Alliances are uniquely positioned to integrate
appropriate frameworks, approaches, and methodologies to transform computing
education for women of color at scale, this project will implement a series of
workshops to engage members of the BPC Alliances and Black, Latina and Native
American women graduate students to develop a community of support in the field
of computing. The resulting intersectional research agenda will be a resource to
the larger computing community, centering the lived experiences of Black,
Latina, and Native women within each of the BPC Alliances and women graduate
students enrolled in U.S. computing degree programs. Contributing to the
diversity of ideas and perspectives, the project activities will (1) generate
deep knowledge of the experiences of women of color; (2) explore the
similarities and differences across Native American, Latina, and Black women
populations in computing; (3) provide an analysis of the conditions under which
different groups of women of color thrive; and (4) examine the trajectories of
Native American, Latina, and Black women populations in
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.