* 2240848
* Computationally Efficient Methods for Control of Epidemics on Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Alexander Olshevsky, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 05/31/2026
* USD 352,394.00

The COVID-19 epidemic has brought the difficult tradeoffs of epidemic control to
the forefront of public attention. While epidemics can be mitigated through a
variety of interventions such as lockdowns, travel restrictions, mandated social
distancing, and vaccine allocations, many of these methods can be
extraordinarily costly, both in terms of creating hardship and unemployment as
well as in terms of reducing access to crucial services for vulnerable
populations. Furthermore, popular backlash against harsh epidemic control
interventions can make their long term sustainability impossible. This project
will address the problem of designing such interventions optimally. The goal
will be to design a mix of interventions such as those mentioned above to
achieve a target rate for how fast an epidemic should decay while imposing the
least hardship upon society at large. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will
develop interventions that are both spatially heterogeneous and coordinated
among different locations. Optimal epidemic control strategies will be obtained
by treating different locations differently, based both on the number of cases
at each location as well as the geographic importance of each location for
future epidemic spread. The methods developed for this purpose will be robust
across different epidemic models and likely applicable to future pandemics,
which may not share key features of COVID-19. The technical approach will take
into account uncertainty in disease parameters, which can vary not only
depending on location but are constantly evolving in time depending on
interventions and human behavior. Finally, solutions will also be developed that
respect certain fairness constraints, such as ensuring that locations with fewer
cases do not face harsher lockdowns, which is a counter-intuitive feature of
some optimal lockdowns. The newly developed methods will be guaranteed to work
in a number of operations that is polynomial, and often linear, in the size of
the spatial epidemic model, ensuring that the final results are applicable to
large-scale epidemic models in the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.