* 2240735
* Collaborative Research: The rheological behavior of gouge at high temperature
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Heather Savage, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Panero
* 06/30/2026
* USD 101,601.00

Major earthquakes are generated along faults in Earth’s tectonic plates as rocks
are sheared past each other. Assessing the hazard associated with a fault zone
requires understanding the conditions that promote earthquake nucleation.
Shearing on faults can occur in an unstable manner, where rapid slip allows an
earthquake to nucleate, or in a stable manner, where slip is steady and
suppresses earthquake nucleation. Although much work has been devoted to
understanding the conditions that lead to earthquake nucleation in the
relatively cold portions of Earth’s crust, there is still a considerable gap in
knowledge regarding the stability of faults in hotter regions. These hotter
regions include the conduits of explosive volcanoes and transform faults in the
oceans. Our work will determine the influence of temperature on fault stability
to enable accurate assessments of hazard and risk in these regions. This work
will also provide training to early-career researchers at the postdoctoral,
graduate, and undergraduate levels. The team involved in this research will also
work to introduce high-temperature experimental rock physics to groups typically
underrepresented in the sciences via international conferences, and they will
run a short-course on earthquakes and faulting to be offered to early-career
researchers around the world in an in-person and virtual
format.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will specifically answer three questions related
to fault stability at high temperatures. First, how do extreme temperatures
affect the strength and stability of fault materials? To answer this question,
we will conduct deformation experiments on fault materials over a wide range of
conditions. Second, what microscopic mechanisms control the strength of fault
materials, and how do they compete with one another? To answer this question, we
will use high-resolution microscopy to compare mechanical measurements with
theoretical models based on the microphysics of rock deformation. Third, how do
these mechanisms interact to determine fault stability, and what does this mean
for the depth range of earthquakes in natural settings? To answer this question,
we will assess the relationships among microscopic features, the macroscopic
strength, the observed stability, and the rate of deformation. The net result of
these observations will be a refined model for the stability of fault zones at
high temperatures, which we will then compare to available catalogs of
earthquake locations in relatively “hot” regions to test our predictions of the
depth range of earthquake nucleation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.