* 2240092
* CAREER: Imaging the Chemical Nature of Intracellular Phase Separation by Functional Stimulated Raman Scattering Spectro-microscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Lu Wei, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 03/31/2028
* USD 375,000.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program, and co-
funding from the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) Program and the Chemical
Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-B (CSDM-B) Program in the CHE Division and
the Molecular Biophysics Cluster in the MCB Division, Lu Wei and her research
team at the California Institute of Technology are developing new optical
imaging strategies that aim to improve our ability to study intracellular
phenomena such as those relevant to neurodegenerative diseases. The research
will result in new instrumentation, new imaging probes, and new labeling
methods, all targeting new chemical insights into the behavior of proteins and
RNA in live-cell settings. The highly interdisciplinary program will provide
research opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students. Outreach efforts
in the Wei group are planned to provide exposure to science to both K-12 and
undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The formation of liquid-liquid
phase separation (LLPS) and its role in biological function has been extensively
studied with many exciting new observations and discoveries. However, there is
much yet to be learned especially regarding the biophysical and biochemical
principles underlying the fundamental interactions among biomacromolecules,
particularly protein and RNA and their ability to form condensates. To
investigate key intracellular phase-separated condensates in live cells, the Wei
lab is developing new stimulated Raman spectral-imaging strategies that are
noninvasive and quantitative, and offer high spatial and temporal resolution.
Specifically, the research program aims to (1) develop functional vibrational
probes and labeling approaches to quantify the composition and sense the intra-
condensate interactions from the identified LLPS systems for both in vitro and
live-cell interrogations; (2) build new instrumentation modules to achieve up to
20-fold sensitivity enhancement for chemical mapping in live cells; and (3)
perform in-depth live-cell investigations with advanced data analysis to piece
together unknown chemical features and interaction principles in native and
complex cellular settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the
CMI, CLP and CSDM-B Programs in the Division of Chemistry in the Directorate for
Mathematical and Physical Sciences (MPS) and by the Molecular Biophysics Program
in the Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences (MCB) in the Directorate
for Biological Sciences (BIO).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.