* 2240063
* CAREER: Empirical Tests of the Fundamental Theorems of Evolution and Natural Selection
* BIO,DEB
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2028
* Matthew Wolak, Auburn University
* Continuing Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 01/31/2028
* USD 1,095,443.00

This project will be the first to experimentally test the long-standing theory
that change in average individual fitness within a population due to the effects
of natural selection sets the rate by which traits of organisms evolve and
populations adapt to their environments. Darwinian fitness, or individual
survival and reproduction, is a foundational concept in biology. Scientists have
hypothesized that the rate at which a population adapts is predicted by the
genetic inheritance of individual fitness. Such a hypothesis could enable the
forecasting of evolution and population dynamics, allowing scientists the
ability to predict how natural populations respond to future environmental
changes and if populations will persist or go extinct. The goals of this project
are to establish a research program to (1) improve evolutionary predictions and
(2) integrate education programs that train students and teachers to conduct
hypothesis-driven research. The education component will teach high school
teachers and students about evolution by natural selection while training them
to conduct their own scientific research through independent projects that will
further the project’s overall research goals. These plans target
underrepresented minority students at the high school and undergraduate levels
and seek to train high school teachers from rural Alabama. Through involvement
of several thousand students from rural Alabama, this project’s activities
address basic science literacy, engagement in STEM, and development of STEM
educators and educational resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fisher’s fundamental
theorem of natural selection expresses the rate of population mean fitness
change due to natural selection as a function of the additive genetic variance
for fitness. The fundamental theorem of evolution is a broader statement about
fitness change that includes the response due to natural selection and
additional forces acting on population mean fitness. Despite a long history of
theoretical development, there has been little empirical testing of either the
fundamental theorems of evolution or natural selection. This project is a first-
of-its-kind study to experimentally manipulate additive genetic variance for
fitness among replicate populations of seed beetles (Callosobruchus maculatus)
to test the theory that this genetic variance is the key quantity predicting the
rate of change in population mean fitness. The project will then connect
estimates of genetic variance in fitness with genetic covariance quantifying
environmental deterioration for fitness arising from conspecific interactions.
The impacts of conspecific competition and sexual conflict on fitness evolution
address a long-standing, but unresolved debate whether sexual selection provides
net costs or benefits to populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.