* 2240994
* Collaborative Research: Remote epitaxy on van der Waals materials: unveiling adatom interaction, growing single-crystal membranes, and producing unconventional heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Jeehwan Kim, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 03/31/2026
* USD 360,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;Science and technology have
developed alongside with discovery of new materials platform, such as carbon
nanotubes, or synthetic polymers. Instead of chasing after a completely new
materials, the research team targets a novel twist, making currently existing
materials to become flatter, thinner, and lighter. Back in 2017, the principal
investigator invented remote epitaxy, which allows growing nanoscale materials
on graphene-coated templates to be exfoliated afterwards. These thin
freestanding materials can become building blocks for lightweight, flexible
devices having unprecedented performance. Until now, studies on remote epitaxy
have been mostly limited to empirical observations on materials such as gallium
nitride and gallium arsenide typically used in semiconductors. To utilize remote
epitaxy as an ideal platform for growth and hetero-integration between various
materials systems, the research team aims to study the mechanism of remote
epitaxy at a fundamental level. By exploring the mechanism on various two-
dimensional (2D) and three-dimensional (3D) materials, the research team expects
to create a wider range of materials systems available for remote epitaxy. Also,
being able to combine different materials systems together can benefit the
physical sciences by discovering new functionalities, bringing advancements in
engineering sciences and industry by improving current device fabrication
techniques and their performances. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL
DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;The research team plans to focus on answering three major
questions to understand remote epitaxy further: (1) the nature of the adatoms
interaction with the underlying 2D/3D substrates, (2) the impacts of 2D
materials and interfaces on remote epitaxy, and (3) the dynamic processes
involved in adatom/nuclei migration and defect formation on 2D surfaces. To
answer these questions, the research team will first reveal whether the remote
epitaxy truly occurs in a ‘remote’ sense, which is the most fundamental
conundrum that precedes any other questions. This has been difficult to answer
because one can easily observe only the results of epitaxy, not the nucleation
of adatoms. This issue is tackled by intentionally patterning the 2D layer and
employing various materials with different growth properties as the epilayers.
Second, impact of 2D layers is explored by studying how the type, crystallinity,
and thickness of 2D interlayers alter the remote interaction of adatoms and
substrates. In order to show the intrinsic role of 2D layers, direct growth of
2D layers is attempted on various substrates having different ionicity. Third,
thermodynamics and kinetics of adatoms, their mergence to form nuclei, and
nucleus-nucleus interaction on 2D layers are studied by understanding the
nucleation mechanism, performing defect analysis, and exfoliating epilayers.
Based on these results, the research team plans to demonstrate high-quality
ultrathin films grown by remote epitaxy on directly-grown 2D layers with
engineered nucleation conditions. As remote epitaxy allows mixed dimensional
heterostructures, further study is done on 3D/various 2D/3D sandwiched
structures to investigate new physical couplings between electronic states and
magnetic properties. To the scientific community, these results are expected to
utilize remote epitaxy for studying multifunctional and coupled material
platforms that were not achievable by conventional
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.