* 2240414
* EAGER: Quantum Manufacturing: Three-Dimensional Printing of Meta-Photonic Elements for Chip-based Quantum Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2025
* Sourabh Saha, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 01/31/2025
* USD 299,861.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) Quantum Manufacturing
award will support research to generate scientific knowledge for the
manufacturing of light-based miniaturized quantum devices. The extreme
performance enhancements in computing, sensing, and communications that are
enabled by quantum effects have the potential to transform both science and
technology in various fields. Although many of these effects have already been
demonstrated in research laboratories, practical low-cost quantum devices are
not widely available. A major limitation is the need for bulky optical
components to manipulate light within these devices. It is possible to
miniaturize these optical components through nanoscale structures, but such
structures can neither be fabricated rapidly nor in the variety of shapes
required for extensive manipulation of light. This award supports fundamental
research to generate the knowledge required to rapidly print fine nanoscale
structures of various shapes and to convert these structures into functional
optical devices. Miniaturized optics can transform quantum devices from
expensive and bulky table-top systems into affordable and small palm-top
devices. This work can therefore make quantum technology widely accessible and
thereby improve national security, increase U.S. economic competitiveness, and
enhance the quality of life. By training students from different backgrounds in
the emerging area of quantum manufacturing, this project will help develop a
globally competitive and diverse STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanoscale
3D printing based on projection two-photon lithography can print polymeric
volumetric pixels (i.e., voxels) on the 100 nm scale for meta-photonics but
these voxels are limited in shape and do not have the desired optical
properties. Controlling the size and shape of the voxels is critical to
achieving the desired optical function, but the process parameter combinations
for achieving the desired geometries are unknown. Additionally, there is limited
knowledge on pattern transfer techniques for converting 3D polymeric structures
into optical materials as most techniques are optimized for 2D structures. This
project will fill these knowledge gaps and generate a set of meta-photonics
design rules and building blocks that optimally leverage the capabilities and
avoid the limitations of the manufacturing approach. The objectives will be
achieved through a combination of empirical studies and physics-based modeling
of the printing and pattern-transfer processes as well as through meta-photonic
device design, fabrication, and testing. This effort will provide the initial
step for the necessary roadmap for the design and manufacturing of the meta-
photonic devices that can enable wavefront engineering for quantum applications
using the approach, similar to the process design kits of the foundry-based
fabrication processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.