* 2240950
* The role of plasticity in the evolution of novelty in animal communication
* BIO,IOS
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2025
* Robin Tinghitella, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Susan Renn
* 01/31/2025
* USD 199,999.00

Understanding how new traits arise is fundamental to explaining the diversity of
life on Earth, but it is challenging to imagine how novel traits could arise in
animal communication because communication requires coordination between a
sender and a receiver. For example, if a sender evolves a novel signal, it may
not be perceived or recognized by the intended receiver as a signal. Yet we know
that novel signals do evolve. Plasticity has been suggested as a possible
explanation. Plasticity refers to changes in an organism in response to the
environment. For example, perhaps exposure to a novel signal plastically changes
the preferences of the receiver so that they are willing to accept senders with
this signal. In this proposal, the researchers capitalize on the recent
discovery of two novel signals (songs) that Pacific field crickets use to
attract mates. The researchers propose a large breeding experiment where male
and female crickets are exposed to different songs, including the two novel
songs, beginning at a young age. Researchers will then measure plasticity in
adult crickets for a suite of reproductive traits to uncover the role of
plasticity in the origins of novelty. This project also integrates education
aims to support young scientists in the LGBTQ+ community, mentoring diverse
undergraduate students in independent research, creating teaching resources that
use data from this research to teach about plasticity and novelty, and using a
web-based citizen science platform to allow the public to participate directly
in the research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Novelty is readily detectable on a
macroevolutionary scale, and novel traits can drive diversification, but
opportunities to observe novelty in real time are rare, so empirical examples
and opportunities to ask how novel traits arise are lacking. It is particularly
challenging to imagine how novelty could evolve in animal communication because
communication requires coordination between a sender and a receiver. It has been
suggested that phenotypic plasticity may facilitate the establishment of novel
traits, and developmental plasticity has been specifically linked to innovation.
Two novel signals (songs) recently evolved in Hawaiian populations of
Teleogryllus oceanicus, providing an unprecedented opportunity to test the
central hypothesis that plasticity facilitates the establishment of novelty. The
researchers propose a large breeding experiment with acoustic rearing treatments
to measure plasticity in receivers and senders for suites of reproductive traits
in ancestral and derived morphs. The work will reveal whether novelty can evolve
in the absence of plasticity or instead if novel communication signals are
facilitated by plasticity in receivers, senders, or both. The use of a genotype-
by-environment breeding design will also establish whether plasticity pre-dates
the origin of novel signal features and at what stages of the reproductive
process plasticity overcomes reproductive barriers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.