* 2240133
* CAREER: Extended Reality Meets AI: Designing Interactions for Novel Human-AI Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Misha Sra, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Cindy Bethel
* 08/31/2028
* USD 113,893.00

Research in human-computer interaction aims to develop user-centered systems
that provide access to effective lifelong learning across the full range of
knowledge domains and skills. A key area is learning motor or physical skills of
tremendous practical (such as training for surgery), scientific (such as
understanding motor memory) and cultural (such as music and sports) interest. To
learn new motor skills or recover them after an injury, people often need
intensive training or rehabilitation therapy with an expert who can instruct,
assess performance, provide feedback, support, and motivate. Working with an
expert can ensure learners achieve desired results, exercise correctly, avoid
injury, and gain insights into their own performance. But an expert may not
always be accessible or available, particularly in situations where demand for
experts exceeds supply or when people have personal, monetary, or geographic
limitations that prevent access. To deal with the absence of an expert,
alternatives for learning at home include books, videos, apps, and online
services (such as ClassPass, Peloton, Mirror). Although these options
successfully provide explanations and demonstrations, none of them can provide
meaningful real-time feedback to the trainees. This project leverages recent
advances in Artificial Intelligence (AI) and eXtended Reality (XR) technologies
to build new types of interactive motor skill training and rehabilitation
systems where users receive real-time feedback from AI agents represented as 3D
avatars. By building AI agents that emulate the real-time verbal and non-verbal
behaviors of a human expert, the project will provide foundational knowledge on
underlying principles that govern human-AI interactions in the context of motor
skill learning (specifically, rehabilitation therapy). The project has the
potential to broaden access to motor skill learning and rehabilitation at home
by reducing financial or psychological barriers at low cost, with low intrusion,
and at scale. Given that algorithms are increasingly making inroads into
societally consequential domains, understanding how humans and AI agents
interact has broad potential implications for the design of responsible and
explainable AI. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to investigate
the design of AI-XR (artificial intelligence - extended reality) systems for
motor skill learning and rehab. Specifically, the project advances a new human-
AI interface paradigm in which the AI is represented as a 3D humanoid agent in
XR that can mimic the real-time verbal and non-verbal behaviors of a human
trainer to support motor learning in the absence of a human expert. Human expert
trainers make use of multimodal feedback through visual, auditory, and haptic
channels when providing the necessary explanations, demonstrations, and
corrections of physical motion performance. To emulate natural interactions
between a trainee and an expert trainer, the AI agents will be designed to
recognize and respond to a userâ€™s physical actions in real-time to near-real-
time, appear and act human-like, and use verbal and non-verbal behaviors (such
as eye gaze, head nods, facial expressions, and gestures) to communicate.
Developing AI agents for motor learning therefore presents numerous technical
and generalizable research challenges, including (i) how to design effective
multimodal instruction and feedback mechanisms and (ii) how to enable natural
interactions between the user and an AI agent. To tackle these challenges, the
project will implement new (i) algorithms and AI models for comprehensive body
motion and error analysis; (ii) multimodal instruction and feedback techniques;
and (iii) applications for fitness training and rehab that demonstrate the new
human-AI interaction paradigm. The AI agent and system designs will be evaluated
by performing controlled experiments with users. The evaluation of this research
project will be through three applications for: (1) physical fitness, (2) sports
injury rehabilitation, and (3) facial paralysis rehabilitation. Implementations
of parts of this research in play- and peer-based educational activities for
middle and high school students will be designed to be interactive and engaging,
while eliciting problem solving and critical thinking. The goal is to guide the
next generation to think deeply about AI and its implications on human behavior
and by extension, on society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.