* 2240185
* EAGER: Quantum Manufacturing: Building In-Operando Quantum Emitters and Simulators with Dynamically Tunable Moire Interfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2025
* Xiaodong Xu, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 02/28/2025
* USD 306,000.00

This EArly-concept Grants for Exploratory Research (EAGER) award supports the
development and implementation of a research platform for use in quantum
computing and quantum networking. It focuses on studying and realizing quantum
bits (qubits) in a new materials platform: superlattices of atomically thin
transition metal dichalcogenides. In these materials, when one layer is rotated
relative to another and then stacked on top of it, a superlattice is formed,
which can act as a platform for realizing a 2-dimensional array of quantum dots
or qubits that could be used in quantum communication or for quantum
simulations. These quantum dots are amenable to optical readout, however, a
challenge this grant addresses is that the dots are closely spaced, making it
hard to address them individually. This project realizes a platform that
combines the ability to control the superlattice through rotation of interlayer
twist angle with a near-field scanning optical probe to address individual
quantum dots, demonstrating a uniquely scalable approach to synthesizing large
arrays of qubits. This project serves an important role of training a diverse
quantum workforce through its support of PhD trainees, through providing
internship opportunities for participants in local NSF traineeship programs, and
through opening opportunities for undergraduate
involvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To fulfill the promise of quantum-enabled
computing and communications, it is imperative to manufacture high quality, on-
demand single photon emitters that can be directly coupled to qubits. Beyond the
coupling, these emitters should be amenable to efficient read-out to enable
transfer of quantum information between disparate quantum nodes. Moiré
superlattices of 2D semiconductors, such as transition metal dichalcogenide,
feature unique capabilities beneficial for addressing these challenges. In a
moiré superlattice, the periodic alignment and misalignment of crystal lattices
produces an array of optically active quantum dots which host single emitters.
These emitters exist in a planar crystal and do not rely on crystal defects,
giving the advantage of scalability, electrical tunability, and optimized photon
extraction efficiency. This project develops an approach to manufacture moiré
quantum dot arrays by dynamic control of the layer twist-angle and efficiently
address individual dots via near-field optical read-out. A successful
demonstration of this quantum manufacturing platform positions moiré emitters as
ideal systems for single photon emitters and optical quantum
simulators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.