* 2240764
* Student &amp; Early Career Researcher Support for the 2022 U.S. Semantic Technologies Symposium (US2TS)
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2022,12/31/2022
* Cogan Shimizu, Wright State University
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 12/31/2022
* USD 14,950.00

This award provides travel support to ten students and five early career
researchers (e.g., postdoctoral researchers) at U.S. institutions, enabling them
to participle during the 4th U.S. Semantic Technologies Symposium (US2TS), held
March 9-11, 2022 in East Lansing, Michigan (http://www.us2ts.org). The Semantic
Web is an inherently multi-disciplinary field. Yet, the division between
computer science, natural science and social science limits the formation of a
coherent research agenda for exploring emerging trends in Semantic Technologies.
There is a need to sustain the U.S. Semantic Web community and maintain the
research network among Semantic Web practitioners in different domains, which
has only become more important since this series' inception. The increasing
demand of data-intensive research and the multidisciplinary characteristics of
Semantic Web applications make it crucial to maintain and expand the existing
workforce through outreach to students to foster future scientific innovation
across disciplines. Several activities will be organized for the student
participants during the symposium. The students, including underrepresented
groups (women and minorities) and undergraduates will have the opportunity to
network with each other and the experienced researchers attending the symposium,
gaining valuable experience that will enable them to foster long-lasting
interdisciplinary and national-wide collaborations among a new generation of
Semantic Web practitioners who will ultimately shape the future of Semantic Web
research and applications at all levels. Early career researchers will be
supported to enable travel to this important networking event in order to drive
scientific innovation, but as well grow possible networks of collaborators.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cross-disciplinary and cross-sectoral communication and
networking among Semantic Web researchers, students and practitioners is the
core of the US2TS. With an ever-growing dependence on the web, and the
continuously increasing importance of large-scale data sharing, integration, and
reuse, researchers in various disciplines, there is a need to strengthen these
efforts. US2TS has goal to stimulate community consolidation and the building of
a U.S.-based community research network. The symposium provides a forum by which
participants can share information and ideas, coordinate ongoing or planned
research activities, foster synthesis and new collaborations, develop community
standards, and advance science and education through communication and the
sharing of ideas. Student participation in US2TS is expected to improve
understanding and skills of open data and open science among the next generation
scientists, as Semantic Web technologies are closely relevant to those
topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.