* 2240943
* Structure and dynamics of the subcontinental lithospheric mantle over the Central and Eastern North American continent, constrained by numerical modeling based on tomography models
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Claudia Adam, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 04/30/2026
* USD 177,166.00

Most earthquakes happen near or along the edges of tectonic plates, and forces
causing them are reasonably well understood. Earthquakes in the Central and
Eastern United States (CEUS), far from any plate boundary, are a bit of a
mystery; scientists cannot agree on why they happen. Dr. Adam and her team will
investigate how convective motions in the Earth's mantle, hundreds of miles
below the surface, may contribute to forces in the brittle crust, causing at
least some CEUS earthquakes. Her study makes use of data from the USArray, an
NSF-funded national experiment in which a dense network of seismometers was left
out to record earthquakes for years at a time. In addition to a thorough
'catalogue' of CEUS earthquakes (size, timing and location), the US Array has
provided new information on the structure of the subsurface. Dr. Adam will use
this information to build detailed computational models and perform calculations
of mantle convection and forces in the crust (and earthquakes) this convection
might cause. She will also train a graduate student and participate in Kansas
State University's science education and outreach programs for girls, young
people from groups that are underrepresented in the sciences, and the broader
public. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data collected through the US Array and other
complementary networks have provided a much clearer and more accurate image of
surface deformation and seismic velocity structure of the crust and mantle in
the United States. Dr. Adam will use these data, together with ConvRS geodynamic
models, to assess the role of mantle dynamics on stresses and intraplate
seismicity in the Central and Eastern United States. A preliminary step will be
to sort through several published tomographic models using a systematic method
to remove spurious features. She and her team will interpret tomographic
velocity data with thermodynamic and anelasticity theory to infer mantle and
crust rheology and buoyancy forces, making geodynamic model inputs as compatible
as possible with geophysical observations. The effects of the Glacial Isostatic
Adjustment (GIA), based on previous studies, will also be represented. Model
outputs (stress axis orientation and geoid height) will be compared to
observations, and sensitivity of these results to parameter variations will be
assessed. The main questions Dr. Adam plans to address are (1) What are the
structure and dynamics of the sub-continental lithospheric mantle? (2) How do
they correlate with intraplate seismicity? and (3) Which part of the observed
seismicity is related to shallow crustal and lithospheric structures, which is
due to GIA, and which is due to deeper processes?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly funded by the NSF Geophysics Program and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.