* 2240728
* DDRIG: Automating Blackness: Race, Computing, and Politics in the Postwar United States
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2024
* Jason Ludwig, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2024
* USD 12,600.00

In the postwar United States, government officials and computer experts sought
to advance racial equality through computing. Data banks, databases, and other
computerized systems promised to transform how government agencies identified
American citizens and delivered services to them. Per this vision, computers
would serve as disinterested decision-makers, processing and acting on citizens’
personal data in a manner lacking subjective interpretation or racial bias.
However, citizens and racial justice activists warned that poorly designed
government computing systems could obfuscate and reify inequalities. This
research unpacks this debate and analyzes the systems that emerged from it. It
speaks to contemporary concerns about algorithmic bias and inequities in
computing and information technologies more broadly. By highlighting the
political forces and technical designs that have driven computational
inequalities in the past, the dissertation highlights different ways in which
the most harmful elements of computing technologies might be dismantled,
subverted, or retooled and will be of interest to lawmakers, computing
professionals, and scholars committed to creating more just data
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To this end, this project combines theoretical
frameworks from Science and Technology Studies with archival research to examine
the racial ideas that shaped the development and use of three different
government computing systems: the employment service’s Job Service Matching
System, law enforcement’s National Crime Information Center, and public health’s
Epidemiologic Surveillance Project. The project asks: how did U.S. government
computing systems and social scientific ideas about race complicate and mutually
shape one another? How were the technical practices of computerized
identification central sites for political and scientific struggles to explain
the causes of, and solutions to, various forms of racial inequality in postwar
America? How did civil rights activists, community researchers, progressive
government officials, and other marginalized technologists envision the
relationship between racial equality and government
computing?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.