* 2240337
* EAGER: Quantum Manufacturing: Robust Atom-based Silicon Quantum Devices
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Garnett Bryant, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 12/31/2024
* USD 292,392.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) Quantum Manufacturing
award supports research to expand manufacturing processes for semiconductor
electronic and quantum devices by advancing the science needed to manufacture
devices down to the size-scale approaching single atoms. The results of this
research will enable manufacturing of semiconductor devices at size scales not
possible today, advancing national prosperity and security. A scanning tunneling
microscope is used as a fabrication tool to deterministically place individual
phosphorus dopant atoms in silicon with near lattice site perfection. Atomic-
scale gates and leads for few atom transistors, dopant-based few-atom qubit
devices and dopant arrays for analog quantum simulation can now be fabricated
for scientific experiments. The exact positions of dopants play an essential
role in device performance, driving the need for atomic perfection. Current
imprecision in dopant concentration or dopant position still prevents robust
manufacturing. Atom-based silicon quantum devices have generated excitement
because they promise to provide the smallest, most dense quantum devices while
still leveraging the power of traditional silicon electronics. Robust atom-based
silicon quantum devices require advanced manufacturing with precise control over
the number and precision of dopant placement. The work here will push
traditional nanoscale manufacturing science toward robust atom-scale
manufacturing where silicon-based devices can be routinely fabricated atom-by-
atom. The research will accelerate manufacturing into the realm of atom-scale
devices. Developing robust manufacturing of atom-scale solid state quantum
devices will help address the critical national need for successful quantum
platforms that can be integrated with conventional
electronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Feedback-controlled lithography was developed
to allow atom-scale perfect placement of an individual phosphorus (P) dopant on
silicon (Si). This research will advance from one-time demonstrations of perfect
placement to robust precise placement of individual atoms that can be used to
manufacture atom-scale solid-state Si devices. Perfect placement will be
extended to acceptors like boron (B). This additional capability will provide a
wider class of quantum devices that can be manufactured and exploited. Density
functional theory will be used to simulate scanning tunneling images and
determine preferred adsites for B2H6 and its breakdown species. A similar
catalog of images will be generated for two-donor and two-acceptor structures.
The catalogs will be used to identify deposited structures and new feedback
control will be developed to ensure precise placement of B acceptors and multi-
dopant structures. Transport and related experiments on these devices will be
performed and compared to theory to verify the precision fabrication of atom
geometries as designed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.