* 2240227
* EAGER: Quantum Manufacturing "Scalable integration of ion-photon quantum information converters (IP-QIC) on fiber for networking and computing applications"
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Babak Seradjeh, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 05/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This grant will support research advancing the precision manufacturing of fiber
optic cables housing integrated quantum ionic processors for future applications
in a scalable network. To create such a network, existing state-of-the-art
information-processing quantum hardware, such as ionic processors, must be
accompanied by developing adequate interconnects to allow the scalable
integration of multiple processors as nodes in the more extensive cooperative
network. For this integration, fiber optics, the workhorse of digital
communication, needs to undergo a quantum-enabling transformation. This grant
will pursue the manufacturing of custom fiber that is capable of lossless
translation of quantum-coherent information from the stationary form encoded on
the ionic qubit processor into the flying qubits transmitted by photons through
the communication links and vice versa. This research will deliver the optimized
design for scalable manufacturing of a new class of fibers, in which linear ion
arrays are integral sections of the fiber light-guiding core. Such a contiguous
integration of the stationary-qubit processors into the optical path of the
flying-qubit streamline will enable the unification of isolated processors into
a synchronized network capable of performing information processing tasks of a
respectively scaled-up complexity. The project's educational component will
focus on outreach to attract underrepresented groups to pursue education in
Quantum Information Science and launch the internship program in Quantum
Manufacturing in industries focused on rekindling domestic
manufacturing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The grant will advance the manufacturing
engineering research of a high-fidelity Ionic-Photonic Quantum Information
Converter (IP-QIC) integrating ionic processors into a scalable quantum network.
It will explore the theory-to-practice optimization of the fabrication of fiber-
optic systems in which arrays of trapped ions replace sections of optically
guiding core. Combining a thermal draw of fiber, in which a quadrupole of
electrodes is concentric to the optical core, followed by selective etching of
axial gaps in the fiber cladding, and controlled reflow by a capillary
instability of the resulting gap-edges into micro-lenses, a fiber system in
which multiple Paul traps can be house axially along the fiber will be
fabricated. The Paul traps will be loaded in Ultra-High Vacuum (UHV) with linear
ion arrays concentrically aligned with the optical cores of the fiber,
integrating them into a single quantum-coherent system. The fiber-optic theory
claims no cut-off for the fundamental guided optical mode for any cylindrically
symmetric system of refractive index higher than its environment, such as that
of a linear ion array in a vacuum. Thus, a fiber system in which the ion arrays
are the integral sections of the optical core, forming an uninterrupted,
continuous lightguide, is possible. Such a seamless arrangement is expected to
boost interaction efficiency between the photonic and ionic qubits, resulting in
a conversion of quantum information back and forth between those two physical
forms. The project will classify the cutting-edge fiber manufacturing approaches
for precision in materializing the quantum-information systems of increasing
complexity. IP-QIC is a novel physical arrangement that opens for experimental
investigation hitherto unexplored correlation terms in the overall Hamiltonian
of the system, describing the coupling of the fiber's optical modes to the ion
array's phononic and excitonic states. Thus, IP-QIC will open a niche in quantum
algorithmics, exploring the behavior of complex quantum matter, such as strongly
correlated and topological, as well as data routing protocols for robust and
extensible software-defined quantum networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.