* 2240532
* CIF: Small: MoDL: Interpreting Deep-Learned Error-Correcting Codes
* CSE,CCF
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Gyorgy Turan, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 04/30/2026
* USD 599,970.00

The theory and development of error-correcting codes for channel coding is a
field with a long and distinguished history. Enormous progress has been made
through mathematical and algorithmic breakthroughs toward developing codes that
approach capacity. Powerful channel codes are crucial in ensuring reliable
communication for our connected society and its technological innovations.
Recently, a new paradigm has emerged in the development of error-correcting
codes: learn, using machine learning, the encoders or decoders in an end-to-end
fashion. While it has not been easy to outperform decades of work in coding
theory, some of these codes excel at practical blocklengths, some are able to
achieve similar performance while offering robustness benefits, and some are
able to dramatically outperform existing codes in channels with feedback. Such
advances are part of a larger picture: machine learning is playing an
increasingly important role in various pieces of the communication stack,
particularly in the wireless domain. While deep-learned codes are explicitly
given by the specific trained neural networks (often with a very large number of
trained parameters), they have been met with skepticism, some of which at least
stems from these deep-learned error-correcting codes being viewed as "black
boxes," with little so far beyond limited experiments to demonstrate when or why
they perform well. Our research will help engineers understand, interpret, and
trust the performance of deep-learned error-correcting codes. This project will
ultimately help intelligently and carefully integrate them into the extensive
body of theoretical research as well as practical systems. Further, it will
advance the use of deep learning in other scientific fields by providing tools
and algorithms that will enable the new machine-learned artifacts to be
interpreted and related to existing formalisms. It is important to train our
next generation of data-science engineers to critically interpret and understand
what their systems learn: the proposed research will do so from a new, rigorous
angle enabled by the quantitative nature of error-correcting codes, with precise
metrics and accurate modeling of distributions and statistics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We present a transformative research program that builds
upon promising preliminary work that will lay the foundation for interpreting
deep-learned error-correcting codes in a structured, formal manner. This
interdisciplinary line of work merges aspects of coding and information theory,
explainable artificial intelligence, deep learning, computational learning
theory, optimization, system identification, and Boolean function analysis
towards the following ambitious goals: 1) developing algorithmic tools for the
interpretation of deep-learned error-correcting codes, 2) using these tools to
understand deep-learned error-correcting codes, 3) providing a formal
characterization of deep-learned error-correcting codes based on the
experimental results, 4) using this to design improved deep-learned error-
correcting codes, and 5) using the insights to improve traditional codes.
Results obtained are expected to provide important new tools for explainable
artificial intelligence in general and will allow us to broaden the research
program to deep-learned codes for the network and joint source-channel coding
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.