* 2240879
* Standard Research Grant: A Complete Digital Edition of Newton’s Chymical Corpus
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* William Newman, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 08/31/2026
* USD 171,567.00

Isaac Newton is regarded by many as the founder of modern science. It was Newton
who unveiled the laws governing gravitational attraction, who proved that white
light is actually a mixture of unaltered spectral colors, and who co-discovered
the branch of mathematics that today we call calculus. And yet it was the same
Isaac Newton who spent countless hours in his laboratory over a period of some
forty years reading and testing the theories of the alchemical adepts. Newton’s
passion for alchemy raises serious questions and puzzles for the modern mind.
What were his aims in pursuing the transmutation of metals, a goal that has
since been discredited by modern science? Was Newton’s alchemy a reaction to the
extreme rationalism of his more mainstream pursuits, or was it somehow part of
his overall scientific project? Do Newton’s alchemical laboratory notebooks bear
witness to the same experimental rigor as his other writings on optics, for
example, display? And why did Newton persist in an endeavor that from today’s
perspective could only terminate in failure, for four decades - what products
did his laboratory yield that might have led him to believe that success lay
around the corner? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present project builds on nearly
two decades of previous editorial experience to complete the digital edition of
Newton’s “chymical” (alchemical/chymical) works in an online, freely available
format. The Chymistry of Isaac Newton project (www.chymistry.org) hosted by
Indiana University under the general editorship of William R. Newman, has edited
about three-quarters of Newton’s alchemical known alchemical manuscripts, and
will complete the task with the funding provided by this grant. The project will
also provide bibliographical and advanced searching aids to the user, along with
the results of digital tools for ordering the manuscripts chronologically. As a
result, end-users will be able to see for themselves how one of the greatest
minds in history employed alchemy as a tool of
discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.