* 2240245
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Quantum Manufacturing: Vertical Coupling and Cross-Talk Shielding of Superconducting Quantum Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Vlad Pribiag, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 05/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

One of the main challenges facing the development of next-generation
superconducting quantum devices is high-density three-dimensional (3D)
integration of large numbers of individual superconducting quantum bits
(qubits). While superconducting quantum devices have reached a high level of
maturity as a technology, coupling of qubits to one another to enable large-
scale circuits for practical computation still remains a challenge. This project
seeks to address this challenge by exploring a new approach for coupling
superconducting circuits using a thin electromagnetic coupler interposed between
qubit layers. The proposed work will be based on an innovative integration of
quantum elements that are by themselves well-established in the PI’s and Co-PIs’
labs. Successful performance of the proposed work will expand our knowledge of
quantum states in superconducting devices and will result in the development of
improved quantum manufacturing approaches of broad interest for practical
quantum information processing technologies. The team is committed to mentoring
graduate and undergraduate students and to broadening the participation of
under-represented groups in quantum engineering. In addition, the PIs will be
involved in outreach efforts aiming to raise awareness about physics, materials
science, and mathematics to school students. A substantial part of this effort
will reach out to school students from the local Native American community.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing new approaches to 3D integration of
superconducting qubits is of crucial relevance for realizing high-depth circuits
suitable for running practically relevant algorithms. Current coupling
techniques for transmon qubits typically involve relatively large (millimeter-
sized) coplanar resonators, while for phase qubits a variety of different
capacitive or inductive coupling approaches are being investigated. No optimal
solution has yet been identified for vertical expansion. Existing approaches are
typically planar, due in part to limitations stemming from the technology used
to create the qubit Josephson junctions (JJs) typically angle-deposition and
controlled oxidation of the tunnel barrier. This results in low spatial
densities for JJ circuits and coherence-limiting cross-talk. In order to address
this challenge, the PIs will fabricate high-quality JJ array chips and link them
vertically via waveguide arrays operating in the microwave frequencies. While
each enabling component and manufacturing method has been demonstrated, their
integration is a daunting task with high-risk and the co-PIs are uniquely
positioned to tackle this challenge. Intellectual significance: the team’s
vision of full-3D integration of JJs and cross-talk shielding is in its early
stages and untested experimentally, yet presents a potentially transformative
approach to solve, in a single stroke, the triple challenge of efficient
superconducting circuit coupling, high-density 3D vertical integration, and
cross-talk mitigation. Additionally, the project will train graduate students in
state-of-the art quantum device nanofabrication, advanced materials growth, and
quantum transport. The PIs will also develop courses on quantum information
sciences aimed at undergraduates and quantum engineering/manufacturing aimed at
graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.