* 2240087
* CAREER: Climate and connectivity as drivers of pathogen dynamics within and between urban plant populations
* BIO,DEB
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2027
* Rachel Penczykowski, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 12/31/2027
* USD 570,269.00

Urban life presents many challenges for animals and plants. Roads and buildings
divide the landscape into small patches of vegetation in parks, yards, and
gardens. Species in those habitats are in close contact with humans and
vehicles. Cities also produce and trap more heat than surrounding areas. Habitat
fragmentation, human activity, and warming can each impact the risk of disease
for organisms. However, it is unknown how these factors alter the spread of
disease in urban systems. This knowledge gap hinders prediction and management
of disease for urban wildlife and plants. To fill this gap, the project will use
mathematical models, field studies, and experiments. In models, disease spread
will be simulated under urbanization and climate scenarios. Modeling will also
be part of projects in an undergraduate Disease Ecology course. Field studies
and experiments will focus on common plants and their fungal pathogens. Diverse
undergraduate and high school students will participate in data collection on
climate and plant health across St. Louis, Missouri. In addition, K-12 students
in an urban public school district will engage with an experiment in school
gardens. Data collection and analysis activities will be aligned to school STEM
curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Urbanization involves habitat fragmentation and
warming that can impact the frequency and outcome of host-pathogen encounters.
Yet we currently lack a framework for predicting change in disease prevalence
with variation in climate and population connectivity across urbanization
gradients. The proposed research will resolve how macroclimate, microclimate,
and habitat connectivity shape urbanization-disease relationships. Flexible
metapopulation models will be used to study the influence of population
connectivity and multiple scales of climate variation on disease prevalence
across theoretical cities and their surroundings. The modeling will be
incorporated into a new course-based undergraduate research experience. In
laboratory and field studies, microclimate effects on plant host susceptibility
and foliar pathogen infectivity will be quantified across an urbanization
gradient. Pathogen genotypes will be analyzed to determine if more urban plant
populations have greater pathogen survival overwinter or greater rates of
between-population dispersal during the growing season. The empirical work will
be integrated with K-12 STEM outreach and field research experiences for high
school and undergraduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.