* 2240375
* Collaborative Research: Seismic cycles and earthquake nucleation on heterogeneous faults: Large-scale laboratory experiments, numerical simulations, and Whillans ice stream
* GEO,EAR
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Gregory McLaskey, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 04/30/2026
* USD 318,917.00

According to well-established theory, earthquakes may start with very slow
movement (or "slip") along a fault, which suddenly accelerates to the violently
rapid slip that can generate ground shaking. Slow slip has been seen before
large earthquakes, but it is usually different from what the theories predict.
Dr. McLaskey and his team will use laboratory experiments and computer models to
measure and understand slow slip and tiny earthquakes that happen along faults
before a large earthquake. In the laboratory experiments, a ten-foot slab of
rock with a cut (fault) embedded in it is compressed and sheared using a giant
press, making the fault creep and then slip suddenly in "laboratory"
earthquakes. The experiments can test how realistic, non-uniform fault
properties—like rough versus slippery sections, or bumps and bends—can play a
role in providing warning signs of an impending earthquake. Computer models will
be developed to understand and explain data collected during the laboratory
earthquake experiments. To check how well these computer models perform, they
will be tested against a large collection of data on slow pre-earthquake slip
and earthquakes that are ocurring beneath a glacier in Antarctica. As part of
this project, three graduate students and at least two undergraduates will
receive training in earthquake science (experiments, modeling, and data
analysis).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heterogeneous fault properties—bumps, bends,
differing lithology, and heterogeneous loading conditions that exist at a
variety of scales—are generally not considered in earthquake nucleation
theories, but have been shown to strongly influence the way an earthquake
initiates. On a heterogeneous fault, neighboring fault patches reach failure at
different times, often resulting in the propagation of slow slip fronts that may
only be detectable as a gradual decrease in seismic coupling, such as that
observed prior to the M 9 Tohoku Earthquake, or from the migration and
coalescence of microseismicity. This project explores the behavior of
heterogeneous faults late in the earthquake cycle including the propagation of
slow slip fronts and their interaction with strong/unstable asperities. These
mechanisms may transform models of the way earthquakes initiate and better
inform the interpretation of precursory activity. This project employs meter-
scale laboratory experiments, where heterogeneous fault properties are imposed
at specific locations and the effects on earthquake nucleation and triggering by
slow slip fronts are studied in detail. Additionally, theoretical and numerical
models for slow slip propagation on heterogeneous faults are developed to extend
the laboratory results to length scales and conditions more relevant to natural
earthquakes. The models are then tested against a field-scale glacial stick-slip
cycle at Whillans Ice Stream, an Antarctic glacier, where aseismic transients
affect 100 km-scale glacial stick-slip events and exhibit behavior similar to
that observed in the lab.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.