* 2240463
* Developing and Assessing Ideas for Social and Behavioral Research to Speed Efficient and Equitable Industrial Decarbonization: A Workshop
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Thomas Thornton, National Academy of Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Whitmeyer
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

Meeting US and international climate goals will require sweeping changes to the
global energy system through sustained and historic levels of innovation and
infrastructure deployment in a period of less than 30 years. While all sectors
of the economy must transition, the industrial sector is perhaps the most
challenging. This sector accounts for nearly a quarter of U.S. greenhouse gas
emissions and more than 16% of U.S. GDP. How can the social and behavioral
sciences help to accelerate this industrial decarbonization in an efficient and
equitable way from the perspective of both the economy and the climate? The
National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine (NASEM) will appoint a
committee to convene an expert group for a public workshop to explore and assess
an integrated social and behavioral science research agenda to address this
question. A proceedings will be published and disseminated to inform policy and
decision makers and the broader public of the presentations, discussions, and
outcomes of the workshop. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address how to advance the
social and behavioral tools for effective and equitable transition of key
industrial sectors (e.g., chemical manufacture, iron and steel, hydrogen
production, carbon capture and storage), high-level papers will be commissioned
by leading researchers and practitioners in the social, behavioral, and economic
sciences and industry. These papers will be presented in Part I of the workshop,
and debated and discussed in Part II, with the aim of advancing a priority
action research agenda for industrial decarbonization. The proceedings of this
workshop are expected to be of broad interest and impact to policy and decision-
makers in the public and private sector charged with moving the US industrial
sector toward decarbonization while maintaining a thriving economy and
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.