* 2240029
* CAREER: Understanding Spontaneous Internal Short Circuit Caused Thermal Runaway of Lithium-ion Batteries through In Situ Diagnosis
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Guangsheng Zhang, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Continuing Grant
* Carole Read
* 04/30/2028
* USD 485,524.00

Electric vehicles (EVs) are expected to account for more than half of passenger
cars sold in the U.S. by 2030. However, costly battery fires have become a
critical challenge for the burgeoning EV industry. What makes this challenge
most concerning is that, in some cases, the batteries suddenly caught fire when
the vehicles were not in use. These fires have been attributed to the internal
short circuit of lithium-ion batteries, which is also a major cause of battery
fires involving many other applications such as smart phones, laptops, and grid-
scale energy storage. This CAREER research seeks to understand how an internal
short circuit forms, evolves, and suddenly causes a thermal runaway event (and
potentially a fire) in lithium-ion batteries. Insights from the research will
advance the understanding of energetic failures of electrochemical energy
systems and the development of safer batteries for EVs and many other
applications. The integrated educational tasks include organizing a series of
seminars on state-of-the-art energy storage technologies, creating an energy-
storage club, developing a new course on battery basics, and mentoring
undergraduate students in lithium-battery research and senior design projects.
These tasks will be performed to train undergraduate students to meet the
growing demand of workforce development for the booming EV industry in the
Southeastern U.S. The integrated outreach activities include organizing hands-on
workshops in local high schools with majority low-income and minority students
focusing on battery basics and opportunities of battery-related emerging
industries, creating and teaching a module on batteries in the BEST (Be an
Engineering STudent) Experience summer camp program at the University of Alabama
in Huntsville, and showcasing energy storage research at local STEM events.
These activities will attract local K-12 students to STEM fields, preparing them
for opportunities in the EV industry and other emerging battery-enabled
industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research seeks to understand how an
internal short circuit (ISC) forms, evolves, and triggers thermal runaway of
lithium-ion battery cells through in situ diagnosis. The central hypothesis is
that the threshold for thermal runaway due to ISC is a critical energy barrier,
not a critical temperature. To test this hypothesis, the project will achieve
three objectives: 1. determine the threshold of thermal runaway caused by ISC
through in situ measurement of critical parameters, including ISC current,
temperature, and heat generation; 2. understand the formation and evolution of
ISC through in situ imaging and electrochemical characterization; and 3.
understand the effects of current-guiding and self-cooling on ISC behaviors and
risk of thermal runaway. The first objective will bridge the gap between
conventional ex situ experiments and numerical modeling to identify and
determine a reliable threshold of thermal runaway caused by ISC. The second
objective will reveal the mechanisms and behaviors of ISC to advance the
understanding of this highly localized and transient thermal-electrochemical-
coupled phenomenon. The third objective will confirm the threshold energy and
provide a basis for industrial engineers to develop future thermal runaway
protection strategies and techniques. Together, the research will provide
insight into ISC-caused thermal runaway of lithium-ion batteries and help ensure
the safety of batteries that are critical to the success of the exponentially
growing EV industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.