* 2240343
* Constructing Credible Knowledge and Expertise in Air Pollution Regulation and Monitoring: The Problem of Quantification
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2025
* Ember McCoy, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 02/28/2025
* USD 15,598.00

Policy initiatives that seek to address the disparate impacts of environmental
pollution in historically disadvantaged communities—known as environmental
justice (EJ) communities—are increasingly prominent at local, state, and federal
levels. However, such initiatives are often grounded in technical and
quantitative metrics produced without input from laypeople affected by
environmental disparities. Many residents in EJ communities assert that these
metrics do not properly capture their knowledge or experience nor address their
concerns. This research examines how lay people and technical experts measure
pollution differently and investigates how and why communities’ knowledge and
experience with pollution are not translated into policy action. The results of
this project will be widely disseminated to academic, public, and policy
audiences to provide actionable strategies to better incorporate lay knowledge
into the development of community-centered public
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research uses case study methods, including
semi-structured interviews, document analysis, and archival research, to
understand the concerns, perspectives, and practices around air pollution
monitoring and evaluation. It investigates novel questions raised in
environmental justice policymaking: What happens when technical ways of knowing
do not match the lived experiences of laypersons, particularly in historically
disadvantaged communities of color? What are the limitations of current policy
infrastructure to grapple with these disconnects? Why do they persist? This
approach creates space to investigate connections, patterns, and boundaries
between lay knowledge, technical policymaking, and strategies to achieve
environmental justice. This research builds on studies of how citizens and
policymakers work together to develop regulatory standards and examines what
happens when these collectively produced metrics don’t reflect affected
residents’ concerns. By analyzing debates over credible knowledge in this
context, this project will provide insights into how environmental policymaking
can take seriously the knowledge claims of affected communities. Beyond these
contributions, this study enhances scholarship on community-expert interactions,
environmental governance, and the democratization of science and
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.