* 2240514
* Collaborative Research: CISE-MSI: DP: CNS: An Edge-Based Approach to Robust Multi-Robot Systems in Dynamic Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Md Tanvir Arafin, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Subrata Acharya
* 03/31/2023
* USD 95,000.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multi-robot systems consist of
autonomous robots interacting in a shared environment to achieve common goals.
They are widely used in real-world application domains such as transportation,
disaster management, as well as warehousing and manufacturing. This project
develops an efÔ¨Åcient, robust, and secure multi-robot system, called EdgeRobot.
EdgeRobot establishes an edge computing based architecture and algorithmic
framework to facilitate multi-robot collaboration and coordination in dynamic
environments. This work provides new model, architecture, and theory for
coordinated multi-robot systems. In addition, this project builds research
capacity, sustainable for training underrepresented students via the partnership
of six geographically diverse minority-serving institutions in the United
States: the University of Houston-Clear Lake (South), the University of Michigan
Flint (North), CUNY-New York City College of Technology (Northeast), Morgan
State University (East), San Francisco State University (West), and California
State University Dominguez Hills (West). The cross-institutional collaboration
not only boosts research capacity in all six participating institutions but also
provides integrative research and education experience to their underrepresented
minority students. Ultimately, this project establishes and exemplifies an
effective collaboration model for training and educating underrepresented
students from geographically diverse minority-serving
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of the following three
research thrusts. First, the novel edge computing infrastructure provides
optimal and location-aware computing services for collaborative robots to
achieve their common goals. Besides, reinforcement learning-based algorithms
solve the multi-robot scheduling and routing problems, modeled as variants of
the prize-collecting traveling salesman problem. Second, in tasks requiring
collaborative actions, such as cooperative target tracking, multi-agent
reinforcement learning enables teams of robots to operate, learn, and adapt in
dynamic and human-populated environments robustly and safely. Third, integrating
modern cryptographic and security primitives secures the collaboration among
edge nodes in multi-robot systems. Consequently, the interface between EdgeRobot
and its human team members builds a shared autonomy
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.