* 2240265
* Structured Catalytic Membrane Reactor for Sustainable Hydrogen Production
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Michael Harold, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 07/31/2026
* USD 381,584.00

Development of sustainable routes to “blue hydrogen,” clean burning H2 that is
derived from fossil sources and is combined with CO2 capture and sequestration,
provides a technological bridge between a world mostly powered by coal,
petroleum, and natural gas to one powered by solar and wind. This research will
advance modular technology located at the natural gas well, extracting hydrogen
from the natural gas (methane), while enabling CO2 sequestration and boosting
natural gas production. This technology cost effectively utilizes the vast
domestic natural gas resources while minimizing emissions of greenhouse gases,
fortifying the nation’s energy security, and strengthening its economy. The
project subject aligns with ongoing activities for broadening participation of
students from underrepresented groups at the University of Houston, a serving
institution for Hispanic, Asian, and Pacific Islanders, in the emerging fields
of distributed conversion of natural gas and decarbonization of the chemical and
energy industries. Students working on this project will be well positioned for
employment in industry and academe during the energy
transition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will address fundamental membrane,
catalyst and reactor issues during coupled generation, separation, and
purification of H2 in a structured catalytic membrane reactor (SCMR). The
project goal is to overcome two fundamental barriers of this potentially
breakthrough technology: (1) Synthesis of a H2 transport membrane that reliably
meets target flux (&gt; 0.01 mole H2/m2 s) and permselectivity [H2/(CH4+CO2)
&gt; 100] at elevated total pressure and temperature, and (2) Design and
development of a compact, structured catalytic membrane reactor that meets the
targets for volumetric productivity (10 mol H2/m3 s) and purity (90% H2) for a
range of feed compositions and flow rates. The multi-layer catalytic membrane
reactor combines a catalytic layer (Pt-Pd/Al2O3 or Ni/Al2O3) with a H2
permselective microporous membrane (CoO-SiO2), both coated onto the porous walls
of a conductive, robust monolith substrate (SiC), to carry out steam reforming
of methane with in situ H2 separation and purification. The central hypothesis
is that the catalytic membrane reactor, so constituted, overcomes steam
reforming equilibrium constraints and kinetic inhibition through in situ H2
removal, producing a purified H2 permeate stream that serves as a low-carbon
energy carrier, and a pressurized CO2 retentate stream for localized
sequestration and enhanced gas production. The research deliverable entails
convergence to a membrane that has a feasible combination of permselectivity,
flux, and resilience under application-relevant conditions and a membrane
reactor that has the design attributes to couple natural gas reforming with H2
removal. The project scope spans membrane synthesis and characterization,
including membrane permeation measurements and bench-scale reactor performance
experiments, in parallel with reactor analysis and modeling. Project findings
will be incorporated into a course under development on hydrogen process and
reaction engineering. Several aspects of the proposed research has broader
application, including: (i) coupled catalytic reaction and membrane transport;
(ii) spatially-resolved concentration and temperature measurements; (iii) design
and control of reactors with coupled endothermic and exothermic reactions; and
(iv) analysis and design of modular reactors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.