* 2240106
* CAREER: Probing Quantum Materials Modified by Terahertz Quantum Fluctuations
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Hanyu Zhu, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 06/30/2028
* USD 242,630.00

Nontechnical description&lt;br/&gt;Vacuum is not truly empty but contains light
waves that are constantly fluctuating according to quantum mechanics. Similarly,
materials cooled to near-absolute zero temperature are not truly frozen but
contain constantly fluctuating atomic motions. Although these fluctuations are
usually negligible in daily life, theoretically they can grow large when a
standing wave is compressed into a very small volume, called a cavity, with
dimensions compared with the wave’s wavelength. Under such circumstances,
according to some recent theoretical and experimental research, the fluctuating
wave may be strong enough to change the properties of materials immersed in the
wave, including the atomic structure, electrical conductivity, and magnetic
properties. This research attempts to answer a few major open questions in this
new paradigm of cavity modified materials based on a specific system: the mixing
of electromagnetic waves and atomic vibrations that naturally happens in many
ionic crystals. Near the vibrational resonance, which is in the terahertz
frequencies, the wavelength of the mixed wave shrinks, so the quantum
fluctuation is expected to enhance. The research team plans to directly measure
the quantum fluctuation of the light and matter inside small cavities, and track
the modified energy evolution and materials properties. The results promise
insights into optimizing materials by harvesting quantum forces for free. The
project also supports the dissemination of the basic concepts of quantum
materials to audiences at different levels of education. The principal
investigator plans to formulate a modular graduate course to bridge the
knowledge gap between existing materials education and the societal need for
building quantum infrastructure, to offer an undergraduate research opportunity
targeting underrepresented groups in community colleges, and to work with high
school teachers in the Houston Independent School District to design a lesson
about materials in quantum technology. These efforts are part of NSF’s Big Idea
of Quantum Leap and the National Quantum Initiative to build a quantum workforce
for the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description&lt;br/&gt;Emerging
experimental evidence and theoretical models open a possibility for cavity-
enhanced quantum fluctuations of bosonic modes, including photons and phonons,
to significantly alter materials’ structural, transport, and magnetic behaviors
in both the excited states and the ground state. The quantum fluctuations thus
may serve as a control knob to transform quantum materials without the need for
active input. However, experimental validation is scarce about a possibility of
the amplified fluctuations in terahertz frequencies or the transfer of
properties between cavity-coupled bright polaritons and much more numerous
cavity-decoupled localized states. This research provides the much-needed
experimental knowledge on the magnitude and consequence of the quantum
fluctuations of ultra-strongly coupled phonon-polaritons in sub-wavelength
cavities, which may guide future efforts to realize various functional quantum
materials through cavity engineering, possibly including superconductors,
ferromagnets, ferroelectrics, and topological electronic materials. The
principal investigator and research team plans to develop sensitive electro-
optic microscopy in the terahertz frequencies to quantify the fluctuating
electric fields and atomic displacements. The measurements can provide a firmer
ground to the theoretical analysis of cavity quantum electrodynamics in
realistic, lossy quantum materials. The quantum microscopy combined with time-
resolved spectroscopy reveal the coherence and population dynamics of phonon-
polariton excitations, which shed light on possible cavity-induced structural
transitions. Finally, the acquired knowledge facilitates the design and
realization of hybrid terahertz cavity-materials systems to modify the spin and
charge states in two-dimensional layered materials and heterostructures, where
the electronic interactions are strong and externally
tunable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.