* 2240908
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Cold War Convergence: The Making of a Chile-California Scientific Network
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2023,01/31/2024
* Paul Sutter, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 01/31/2024
* USD 15,089.00

Mediterranean-type ecosystems (MTEs) represent two percent of terrestrial
landmass but possess a plant diversity that is second only to that of the wet
tropics. MTE regions—centered between thirty degrees and forty degrees north or
south of the equator, and characterized by cool, wet winters and warm, sunny
summers—demonstrate remarkable physical similarities, but efforts to study them
collectively are relatively new. In 1971, biologists hailing from the world’s
five MTE regions convened their first meeting. They collaboratively tested the
evolutionary theory of convergence, the notion that like environments shape like
life forms. In the process, they established a global scientific network based
on common concern for these analogous landscapes. Now, this decentralized group
of researchers represents a key body of expertise around urbanization, water
scarcity, wildfires, and more. This project seeks to unpack and explain the
connective success of a group of far-flung scientific individuals. Despite
having no legal charter or institutional affiliation, the MTE network has
endured—seemingly on the basis of strong personal and intellectual
relationships. Findings from this project will offer insights into how science
functions across national boundaries, and will be of interest to policy makers,
scientists, and environmentalists of many stripes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research
focuses upon scientific contact between Chile and California, the two MTE
regions often deemed most alike. The project draws upon archival research and
new oral history content from interviews with key historical actors to address
three related questions: What scientific and theoretical context influenced the
working relationships of these scientists? Within the Cold War context, how did
broad U.S. foreign policies designed to contain communism influence person-to-
person relationships? And did these relationships translate into management
decisions—did they influence conservation techniques, protected area boundaries,
fire management policies, or in other ways shape the landscapes of California
and Chile?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.