* 2240479
* EAGER: Quantum Manufacturing: Developing a Deterministic, 3D Printer for Quantum Defects
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Matthew Crane, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 12/31/2024
* USD 300,000.00

New devices based on quantum phenomena, like quantum computers and networks,
require new reliable and scalable manufacturing methods with extreme precision.
These devices are often comprised of discrete atoms or nanoscale structures that
must be exactly placed into desired locations. Existing methods to create these
devices are time-consuming, incompatible with many materials, lack atomic
precision, and, most significantly, are unreliable. As a result, scalable device
production, which requires interfacing networks of indistinguishable
nanostructures, is difficult. This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research
(EAGER) Quantum Manufacturing award supports fundamental research to develop a
robust and scalable manufacturing approach to incorporate nanomaterials into
devices with the atomic precision required for quantum technologies. The new
process enables the deterministic printing of nanomaterials with desired
qualities from solutions into precise locations with full orientation control.
This approach separates material synthesis from device manufacturing to improve
performance and enables quantum devices based on more precisely synthesized
materials. These capabilities address manufacturing limitations for not only
quantum devices, but also energy, communication, and medicine applications based
on nanomaterials. Thus, advances from this award benefit both the U.S. economy
and society by establishing manufacturing expertise in the emerging quantum
technologies market, by securing national defense in a new generation of sensors
and networks, and by advancing energy security (chemical catalysis and solar).
The multi-disciplinary research project incorporates fluid mechanics,
simulations, optics design, and materials science to provide unique training for
graduate and undergraduate students. The core knowledge, simulation tools, and
equipment designs will be disseminated so that the manufacturing approach can be
broadly adopted to accelerate research and development in these critical
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The successful production of quantum technologies
requires incorporating high-quality qubits into &lt;100 nm3 regions. Current
manufacturing approaches are stochastic, restricted to materials that can be
processed by lithography, and often lack this precision. This manufacturing
method involves an approach whereby nanostructured qubits are synthesized,
characterized, and printed via thermo-optic forces. Separating these processes
lifts compatibility restrictions, enables deterministic manufacturing, and
mitigates sources of decoherence. This project aims to achieve &lt;100 nm3
printing by assessing critical variables identified by first-principles
simulations. These include nanomaterial optical properties, such as their
geometry and refractive index, and the colloidal environment and forces, such as
solvent thermophysical parameters. These results will be incorporated into a
physics-based model to optimize printing precision. Leveraging this method, the
research team aims to develop structure-property relationships to establish how
enhanced printing precision and material properties influence device behavior,
including coherence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.