* 2240875
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Rivers of Milk: Dairy Science, Environment, and Technopolitics of Food Infrastructures
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2023,09/30/2023
* Koyna Tomar, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Christine Leuenberger
* 09/30/2023
* USD 15,750.00

Over the last several decades human taste for and dependence on dairy has become
a key area of concern in the debates about animal justice and the environment.
This doctoral dissertation project analyses universalist accounts of cattle-led
environmental degradation by highlighting how different actors–scientific
experts and lay breeders, dairy farmers and milk traders, colonial bureaucrats
and postcolonial politicians - conceptualized and connected dairy development
with economic and political projects in colonial and post-colonial contexts
between 1880-1970. These years constituted the peak of the British colonial
military’s experiments with organizing the milk supply, and they also mark the
beginning of the world’s largest dairy development program. By investigating
knowledge production about cattle, fodder, and milk, this project asks three
broad questions: 1) what values, politics and concerns drove scientific
experiments and public anxiety with purity, productivity, and the health of milk
and the livestock 2) what role did the politics of race and caste play in the
material organization of dairy infrastructures? and finally, 3) how did dairy
development projects affect the cattle, cattle herders and pastoralists, and
urban and rural environments?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project applies
historical and qualitative methods to archival material. Sources include popular
and scientific journals and outlets that focused on animal husbandry, dairying,
and agriculture as well as archival sources that focus on policies related to
dairying and dairy development in the twentieth century. By foregrounding
knowledge production about milk and cattle as a highly contested political and
social process, this project connects critical scholarship on science and
technology with histories of food, environment, caste, and
race.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.