* 2240780
* ANT LIA: Collaborative Research: Mixotrophic Grazing as a Strategy to meet Nutritional Requirements in the Iron and Manganese Deficient Southern Ocean
* GEO,OPP
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2026
* Natalie Cohen, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* William Ambrose
* 01/31/2026
* USD 379,674.00

Mixotrophs are essential components of the Antarctic planktonic community able
to photosynthesize and also ingest small particles like bacteria to meet their
nutritional needs. This project aims to understand the physiological response of
mixotrophs exposed to micronutrient limitation in the Southern Ocean,
specifically iron, manganese and simultaneous limitation of more than one trace
metal, or colimitation. Such environmental conditions are characteristic of the
Southern Ocean and can only be tested with local algae. The Principal
Investigators hypothesize that under trace metal colimitation, some mixotrophs
will have a competitive advantage by increasing their ability to consume
particles to obtain energy and trace metals from their prey. Given the lack of
understanding of how mixotrophs have adapted to the micronutrient limitation,
the researchers propose studies with microalgal cultures isolated from the
Southern Ocean; they will measure growth responses, consumption behavior,
changes in cellular chemistry and transcription of genetic material in response
to iron and manganese limitation. This project benefits the National Science
Foundation goals of understanding Life in Antarctica and adaptation of organisms
to this extreme environment. Society will benefit from the training proposed,
whereby students from rural colleges will be instructed in computer coding and
scientific data analyses. Furthermore, this work will support one graduate
student, two undergraduate summer interns, and two early career
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigators hypothesize that
under Fe-Mn colimitation, some mixotrophs will have a competitive advantage by
increasing their grazing rates to obtain energy, Fe, and Mn from their prey.
Given the lack of understanding of how mixotrophs have adapted to seasonal
changes in the availability of these micronutrients and how they influence
mixotrophic growth dynamics, the PIs propose culture studies to measure growth
responses, grazing behavior, and changes in elemental stoichiometry in response
to Fe and Mn limitation. Transcriptomic analyses will reveal the metabolic
underpinnings of trophic behavior and micronutrient stress responses, with
implications for key biogeochemical processes such as carbon fixation,
remineralization, and nutrient cycling. Results are expected to clarify the
ecological roles of Antarctic mixotrophs and elucidate the adaptations of
Southern Ocean organisms to their unique polar ecosystem following the 2015
Strategic Vision for Polar Programs. This work will support one graduate
student, two undergraduate summer interns, and two early career scientists. A
series of virtual coding and bioinformatic workshops will be organized, in which
basic principles of coding, and data processing used in the proposed analysis
will be taught to undergraduate students. Small colleges in rural areas will be
targeted for 8 modules on bioinformatics training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.