* 2240760
* Unfolding the elementary building blocks of dynamics and rheology of soft glassy materials
* ENG,CBET
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Fardin Khabaz, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 01/31/2026
* USD 345,410.00

Microgels are polymer networks swollen by the solvent (e.g., water) in which
they are dissolved. Soft solids are highly concentrated suspensions of such
microgels which are nontoxic, have high water content, and enjoy a reasonably
low cost of production. As such they have great potential for several
applications in drug delivery, tissue engineering, and wound dressing. The
production efficiency as well as the end-use properties (e.g., shelf-life) of
soft solids depend on microscopic-level understanding of mechanical properties
and their flow behavior. This award supports a joint computational, theoretical,
and experimental investigation to provide a fundamental understanding of the
properties of suspensions of soft solids. The outcome of this award will provide
engineering tools to design soft solids with targeted properties. This award
will provide resources to train graduate students in computational physics,
engineering, and experimentation. The educational activities will provide
professional training to undergraduate students from underrepresented groups to
work on an interdisciplinary research framework. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soft
particle glasses are yield stress fluids that are jammed beyond the random close
packing of equivalent hard spheres. Experimental studies show that the flow
behavior of these suspensions can be controlled by tuning the extent of
interparticle adhesion and repulsion. This award investigates the fundamental
connection between the microscopic dynamics at the individual particle level and
the macroscopic properties and builds an efficient computational tool for
predicting nonlinear rheological properties of soft particle glasses with
different interparticle interactions in bulk and at the interface. The effect of
contact forces, volume fractions, and flow strength on the yielding, flow
curves, and flow-induced dynamical heterogeneities will be determined. The role
of shear-driven localized dynamical events on the flow at low and high
deformation rates and their connection with the stress distribution will be
established. Scaling relationships between the length scale of the domain with
dynamical heterogeneities and shear rate will be provided. The effect of
mechanical history and residual stress on the start-up flow behavior will be
determined. Machine learning models will be developed to predict the yield
behavior from the microstructure of suspensions at
rest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.