* 2240125
* CAREER: Fundamental investigation of twin boundary engineering through cyclic cross-phase-boundary thermomechanical processing
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Lei Cao, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 06/30/2028
* USD 330,216.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Faculty Early Career Development
(CAREER) award supports research and education activities to develop material
processing strategies to manufacture stronger and/or more ductile titanium (Ti)
alloys. The mechanical properties of Ti alloys are significantly affected by the
defects and other fine structures present in the material, which are challenging
to predict or design. In this project, the principal investigator and her team
will develop models at different length scales to computationally predict the
evolution of fine structures in Ti alloys under thermal and mechanical loadings.
The research will lead to strategies to rationally produce fine structures in Ti
alloys, thus obtaining desired mechanical properties, which will benefit
aerospace, automotive, and other industries that have an increasing demand of Ti
alloys. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will tightly integrate research and
educational activities, including science exhibits, curriculum development,
research mentoring, online education, and research tool sharing, with an
overarching theme of “strong and ductile metal alloys” to train a diverse body
of students at the K-12, undergraduate, and graduate levels toward fostering a
scientific workforce with integrated knowledge of materials and mechanics. The
project will make the developed education modules and research tools accessible
to both online and in-person participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This CAREER award supports research and education
activities aimed at establishing physics-based thermomechanical processing
pathways to rationally create desired microstructures in Ti alloys. Mechanical
properties of Ti alloys are directly determined by their microstructures,
including twin boundaries, dislocations, phase boundaries, and grain boundaries.
It is, therefore, imperative to develop effective thermomechanical processing
strategies to control microstructures in Ti alloys. To achieve this goal, the PI
and her team will pursue three research thrusts that focus on (i) elucidating
microstructure formation mechanisms in Ti alloys using atomistic simulations and
first-principles calculations; (ii) upscaling the atomistic mechanisms of
microstructure evolution to macroscopic mechanics through phase-field finite
element modeling; and (iii) developing cross-phase-boundary thermomechanical
pathways to control the formation of microstructures in Ti alloys. The project
will advance the fundamental understanding and modeling of microstructure
evolution in Ti alloys, accelerating the development of thermomechanical
processing approaches and alloy compositions of Ti alloys.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will tightly integrate research and
educational activities, including science exhibits, curriculum development,
research mentoring, online education, and research tool sharing, with an
overarching theme of “strong and ductile metal alloys” to train a diverse body
of students at the K-12, undergraduate, and graduate levels toward fostering a
scientific workforce with integrated knowledge of materials and mechanics. The
project will make the developed education modules and research tools accessible
to both online and in-person participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the Division of Materials Research (through the Condensed
Matter and Materials Theory and Metals and Metallic Nanostructures programs) and
the Division of Civil, Mechanical, and Manufacturing Innovation (through the
Mechanics of Materials and Structures program).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.