* 2240141
* CAREER: Development of Catalytic, Sulfur-Free Chain Transfer Agents to Improve Mechanical and Material Performance of Crosslinked Photopolymers
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Brady Worrell, University of Denver
* Continuing Grant
* Tong Ren
* 02/29/2028
* USD 408,068.00

With funding from the Chemical Catalysis (CAT) and Macromolecular,
Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN) Programs of the Division of Chemistry
(CHE), and the Polymer Program of Division of Materials Research (DMR), Brady
Worrell of the University of Denver will develop a catalytic, sulfur-free chain
transfer agent (CTA) for efficiently creating photopolymers. An important subset
of plastics is photopolymer, or crosslinked materials created with light.
Photopolymers make up the polymer component of materials commonly used in 3D
printing, dentistry, and biomaterials, however, only a limited window of
mechanical properties can easily be accessed from available chemical feedstocks.
In the work proposed here, Dr. Worrell and his team will create catalysts that
have the potential to significantly alter the mechanical properties of
photopolymers while keeping &gt;99% of the chemical composition the same. Dr.
Worrell will also establish and run the Summer High school Internships: New
Experimentalists at University of Denver (SHINE @ DU) program, which aims to
offer local, under-represented high school students real-world research
experiences hosted in the Department of Chemistry &amp; Biochemistry. An
undergraduate led online journal detailing scalable, simple, and inexpensive
preparations of organic polymers is to be established as part of this CAREER
award effort.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The materials generated by
photopolymerization are inherently highly crosslinked and suffer from
significant shrinkage stress, are often brittle, and have a limited range of
material properties. Various classes of chain transfer agents (CTAs) have been
investigated and developed to reduce the crosslinking density of photopolymers.
Although CTAs are successful in manipulating the mechanical properties of
photopolymers, they are required in high loadings (up to 20 wt% of total
formulation) and frequently contain sulfur which is malodorous and can create
unstable formulations. Dr. Worrell and his research team are developing a
catalytic, sulfur-free CTA that can be added in ppm quantities to existing
commercial monomer feedstocks to create photopolymers similar to those prepared
using traditional CTAs, but at 10,000x lower loadings. Several analogs of the
macrocyclic cobalt(II) catalyst will be explored to improve resin solubility and
various ligands will be screened in a high-throughput fashion in the search for
potent catalyst:ligand combinations. These catalytic CTAs will be tested in
commercial 3D printing resins and liquid crystal elastomers to narrow and reduce
the glass transition temperature, reduce storage modulus, and alter other
pertinent mechanical properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.