* 2240888
* PlantSynBio: Deciphering the grammar of crop regulatory DNA for precise engineering of gene expression
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Christine Queitsch, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 02/28/2026
* USD 1,999,998.00

Plant researchers and breeders agree that technological advances are needed to
meet the future demands for agricultural products, especially in light of the
accelerating climate crisis. Although traditional plant breeding and fertilizer
application have produced large increases in agricultural yields in the past,
yields have plateaued in recent years. This project uses novel genome-scale
technology and advanced analysis methods to identity and characterize the tens
of thousands of genetic elements that drive growth and environmental resilience
in maize and tomato, crops that represent two major classes of plants. The large
size of the resulting data sets enables systematic computational analyses of
these elements and allows for design of synthetic elements with desirable
features. The applicability and safety of these designs for future crop
engineering will be examined in maize and tomato plants in the laboratory.
Today’s plant researchers and breeders need to be fluent in conducting genome-
scale experiments and applying advanced computational methods. This project will
provide funds for the training and the career development of several
undergraduate students and postdoctoral fellows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
limited understanding of plant gene regulation and lack of diverse, plant-
derived regulatory elements to drive transgenes have hampered plant synthetic
biology. To facilitate plant synthetic biology, this project will apply
massively parallel reporter assays and machine learning to decipher the grammar
of gene-regulatory elements in maize and tomato, including enhancers, promoters,
insulators and terminators, and their local interactions in response to four
common environmental conditions. The salient features of these regulatory
elements and element combinations will be identified by convolutional neural
network models, which will be used to evolve and design synthetic elements with
desired features. Designed promoter and enhancer elements, along with plant-
derived insulators and terminators, will serve as building blocks for synthetic
biology applications. Model inferences will be tested in transgenic crops with
engineered native regulatory elements and through the integration of multi-gene
reporter cassettes whose tunable and programmable activity is driven by
synthetic regulatory elements. This project’s results will propel plant gene
regulation and crop synthetic biology beyond current knowledge and tools, and
jumpstart crop engineering efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-
funded by the Plant Genome Research Program in the Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems and the Systems and Synthetic Biology cluster in the Division
of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.