* 2240326
* Establishing a Design Framework for Multi-functional composites by Leveraging Kirigami Cutting, Multi-stability, and Multi-level Optimization
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/15/2022,08/31/2023
* Suyi Li, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Jablokow
* 08/31/2023
* USD 187,220.00

This award supports fundamental research to establish a design methodology for
composite structures by taking advantage of Kirigami cutting principles and
snap-through multi-stability. Composite structures combine multiple materials to
achieve desirable properties and are vital for many engineering systems. Snap-
through multi-stable structures can quickly transition from one stable state to
another. They can bear weight and perform other functions such as shape
morphing, vibration control, and energy harvesting. However, the current-state-
of-art in multi-stable composites is limited in terms of the achievable shapes
and functionalities. This research uses Kirigami cutting principles to
fundamentally expand the performance space of multi-stable composites. The
design methodology synergizes with advanced layer-by-layer manufacturing
technology, enabling a two-dimensional build to transform into a complex three-
dimensional structure through the optimal design of fiber ply properties and
Kirigami-inspired cutting patterns. This will lead to novel structural designs
that offer sophisticated functionalities, such as shape reconfiguration and on-
demand mechanical property programming. These structures can benefit a number of
industries, including aerospace, automotive, and robotics, by enhancing system
performance and sustainability. This award will also support efforts to enhance
educational activities at Clemson University and nearby communities in South
Carolina. Research results will be used in existing outreach networks like
Clemson EMAG!NE to inspire the public via combining engineering and the art of
Kirigami paper cutting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will, for the first
time, systematically incorporate the Kirigami cutting principle in an
engineering-relevant optimal design framework. It is expected to create
significant leaps in adaptive composites, Kirigami applications, and multi-
level, multi-objective design optimization. The research goals will be achieved
by 1) deriving mathematical linkages between design variables and performance
outputs via a new reduced-order mechanics model using F?ppl-von K?rm?n (FvK)
shell theory and customized shape functions; 2) developing practical design
guidelines and constraints via extensive experimental testing; and 3) deriving
multi-disciplinary synthesis method based on bi-level optimization. Results of
the three tasks will be integrated into the design framework. Throughout the
course of this project, the research team will address many technical challenges
with broad relevance, including the complex non-free boundaries between
composite patches, fabrication uncertainties, and robustness in multi-level
design optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.