* 2240487
* SBIR Phase II:  A scalable platform to produce nematode pheromones for crop protection
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Fatma Kaplan, Pheronym, Inc.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Erik Pierstorff
* 06/30/2025
* USD 971,913.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project is to create a commercial manufacturing method for a new class
of environmentally friendly, sustainable biopesticides. Due to environmental and
human health concerns, many traditional pesticides are heavily regulated or
banned outright. Further, the demand for safe and reliable pest control is
increasing. One class of eco- and climate-friendly alternatives are
biopesticides; They are safe for humans and the environment, face few
restrictions on their use, and can be used for insect control in situations
where traditional pesticides cannot, such as near homes or schools. The project
scales a manufacturing platform for a new class of pheromones to enhance control
of insect pests of various commodities such as during growth seasons in the soil
and aboveground or postharvest, storage. The project could open up a new
industry as pheromone enhancers of pest control have not been previously
commercialized. Moreover, the project deliverables may enhance food security,
provide climate-friendly solutions to farmers, and enhance sustainable
agricultural practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project scales nematode
(roundworm) pheromone manufacturing using in vitro fermentation in bioreactors.
Currently, no commercial nematode pheromone production exists. Entomopathogenic
nematodes (EPNs) are natural enemies of insects and are used as biological
control agents for many economically important pests. Like many biopesticides,
EPNs have limitations, such as variable efficacy (ability to kill) in the field
and limited efficacy at temperature extremes. Nematode pheromone extracts
increase EPN efficacy for insect control in soil by up to 78%. There is big
commercial interest in EPN dispersal pheromones from EPN manufacturers and
distributors. Since there is no commercial production system for nematode
pheromones, new manufacturing methods are urgently needed. Previously, the
fermentation method for pheromone production was demonstrated in shaker flasks.
In the proposed project, the fermentation method will be scaled in bioreactors.
In concert, downstream processing will be scaled for stable, active pheromone
extracts. Field trials targeting important insect pests will be used to ensure
pheromone activity, and the residual pheromone effects on the soil microbiome
will be determined. Finally, methods will be developed to establish quality
control parameters, formulation, storage, and
packaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.