* 2240763
* The Historical Construction of Emotions in Robotics
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2024
* Yulia Frumer, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2024
* USD 224,966.00

What role do emotions play in the development of new technologies? Can
consumers’ emotions be manipulated through technological design? Can
technologies themselves be biased? Making Friends: The Historical Construction
of Emotions in Technology engages these questions by examining the history of
robotics engineering. The project shows that emotions inflected decision-making
at every stage of robot production: planning, securing funding, object design,
marketing, and the end uses of robots. It also reveals that the seemingly
subjective and individual emotions of key players in the development of robotics
technologies were shaped by long historical processes and social dynamics. These
conclusions demonstrate that historical literacy is crucial for designing
technologies that better address consumers’ needs, for identifying sources of
technological bias, and for spotting intentional emotional manipulation embedded
in technological design. The results of the study will be summarized in a
crossover book for academic and non-academic readers, academic articles and
newspaper op-eds, and public talks. Factual findings, data-sets, and theoretical
conclusions will be used to develop undergraduate courses and to train graduate
students. Project findings will also provide an evidential basis for public
discussions of ethics in technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Making Friends
centers on three research questions: What roles do linguistic, material, and
visual environments play in shaping emotional attitudes towards robots? What
emotional needs are addressed by technology policies that encourage the
development of robotics technologies? And, how do engineers’ design choices
—whether conscious or unconscious—shape users’ emotional responses to robotic
technologies? Combining archival research, oral history, and computational
methods, the project shows how engineers brought their own life experiences and
associations into the design process, how they capitalized on social dynamics to
appeal to funding agencies and policy makers, and how they shaped consumers’
experience of robots by physically modifying design to eliminate or to elicit
certain emotional triggers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.