* 2240126
* CAREER: Designing Robust Cyber-Physical Systems: Logics, Automata, Optimization, and Heuristic Methods
* CSE,CCF
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2028
* Vinayak Prabhu, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 03/31/2028
* USD 119,370.00

The project's impact is the engineering of more reliable, safer, and better
performing next generation Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) arising in domains
involving automotive vehicles, medical devices, avionics, power grids, and
autonomous agents. As these systems operate in environments that cannot always
be perfectly anticipated/modeled, it is crucial that robustness be a prime
objective right from the design phase. The project's novelty is the development
of scalable and rigorous formal algorithmic approaches for facilitating such
robust CPS engineering. These approaches advance classical discrete algorithmic
techniques for use in quantitative environments in which CPS operates. The
research aspect of the project is complemented with the creation of graduate and
undergraduate courses teaching core logical and algorithmic analyses skills to
scientists and engineers about to enter the workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
first step toward algorithmic analysis of CPS is a formal specification of the
expected correct behaviors of the system. Signal Temporal Logic (STL), the
signal variant of Metric Temporal Logic, is currently a popular formalism for
classifying good/bad CPS behaviors. Unfortunately, STL cannot specify many
properties of interest to engineers. The project is augmenting STL with other
temporal operators, such as the freeze operator, in order to have more
expressive specification formalisms, addressing the shortcomings of STL. This
augmentation is guided by, and done in tandem with, the development of efficient
algorithms, heuristic methods, and tools so that the new logics will be
tractable to use in industrial CPS contexts, for instance, in test generation.
The tradeoff between increased specification expressivity and resulting
increased algorithm complexity is being explored to find tractable classes of
new CPS logics. Of equal importance is the project thrust that builds a theory
of quantitative robustness over these new formalisms, both in the space and in
the time domain. Broad dissemination of results is being done by the research
team through peer reviewed conference and journal publications, conference
talks, and through research visits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.