* 2240615
* EAGER: Multi-objective generation of synthetic time series data to boost model robustness and data privacy
* CSE,IIS
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2025
* Diane Cook, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Yang
* 05/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

Machine learning models require a sufficient amount and diversity of training
data to ensure robustness and minimize bias. A dearth of data can negatively
impact the predictive performance of machine learning algorithms. Because
researchers recognize the surrogate role offered by synthetic data generators,
they have been creating methods to generate increasingly realistic data proxies.
Synthetic data can be automatically generated that balance the need to maximize
multiple objectives. The goal of this project is to design a synthetic data
generator that creates realistic individual and time series data to optimize
cooperating or competing objectives in an adversarial manner. Building on this
contribution, the algorithm will also be evaluated as a mechanism to increase
model robustness, improve privacy preservation, and decrease model
bias.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The outcomes of this project include the design of a
novel multi-agent generative adversarial network (GAN) architecture, called
HydraGAN, that balances multiple, possibly competing, data goals. While
researchers have investigated constrained versions of multi-criteria GANs, this
project will introduce a novel method that facilitates balancing any number of
data criteria using a multi-agent GAN. A second outcome of the project will be a
formal proof that the system will reach a Nash equilibrium during training.
Furthermore, the HydraGAN algorithm will be enhanced to not only explore a
traditional i.i.d. data generation format but also handle the more complex
nature of time-series data, representing one of the first efforts to create
multi-agent GANs for time series data. Multiple discriminator agents will be
defined for the multi-agent system. Exploring beyond the traditional criteria of
sample realism, cooperating or competing agents will address the underexplored
constraints of privacy preservation, distribution realism, and meeting of
diversity constraints. The project will demonstrate the utility of the created
synthetic data for tackling machine learning challenges including data sparsity
and representation bias. While traditional performance metrics focus on the
realism of individual data samples, this work will introduce an Area Under the
Radar Chart metric, or AURC, to evaluate the data based on an arbitrary number
of data quality criteria.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.