* 2240801
* Technology as Sovereignty: Open Hardware Politics and New Property Relations
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2024
* Lilly Irani, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Frederick Kronz
* 03/31/2024
* USD 15,750.00

This project will examine how citizens, including engineers and policy makers,
understand and pursue “technological sovereignty” today. Since the COVID-19
pandemic global supply chain breakdown, various governments have established
domestic high-tech supply chains policies as part of their sovereignty agendas.
To better understand the political effects of these emergent constructions of
technology as sovereignty, this project will examine how these claims affect
technology production regimes and the property relations. This research benefits
policy makers interested in technology, trade, and manufacturing policies and
their impact on industry and well-being. This research also benefits designers
and technologists engaged in innovative manufacturing practices by showing how
policy affects innovative capacity. Findings from this project will provide the
ground for developing a workshop to bring policymakers' and developers’
attention to the ethical dimension of component procurement and labor sourcing
in technology production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines
technological sovereignty and its varied impacts on workers, engineers, and
citizens via the study of open hardware practices. It uses qualitative methods,
including ethnographic observations, archival research, and semi-structured
interviews. Ethnographic observations at electronic workers’ organizations and
open hardware firms will show how technological sovereignty affects and is
created through open hardware practices. Archival research at institutional
archives will help track changes in these constructions over time. Ethnographic
and archival data will be supplemented by interviews with key stakeholders on
motivations, justifications, tensions, and contradictions surrounding open
hardware . Finally, this project will digitize electronic manufacturing workers'
archives, contributing to their organizing practices toward more ethical supply
chains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.