* 2240960
* Conference: Undergraduate Spectrum Workshop
* MPS,AST
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Robert Marks, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Jon Williams
* 07/31/2024
* USD 99,999.00

The Undergraduate Spectrum Workshop (USW) is a 3-4 day invited workshop hosted
by Baylor University that focuses on recruiting new undergraduate students into
future training and career opportunities in electromagnetic spectrum research
and electromagnetic spectrum management. The fields of spectrum research and
spectrum management are of increasing importance to the nation as next
generation communications and device-connectivity networks are becoming a
greater part of our everyday lives. To remain a global leader in next generation
communications and to ensure the health, prosperity, and welfare of the nation
that will be enabled by future generations of increasingly connected devices, it
is critical to develop a workforce talent pipeline that is aware of the critical
role that spectrum research and spectrum management play in our lives and that
is expertly trained to lead the academic, industrial, and federal labs of the
future that will produce continued advances in this area. This conference
addresses these goals of high national importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop will recruit students and faculty from small regional colleges nearby
Baylor that have a high composition of underrepresented minority students. The
workshop is based on and borrows experience from a similarly designed and
successful workshop previously hosted at Baylor University with similar goals to
recruit students into training and careers in chemistry. The goal of the
workshop is to introduce students to spectrum career paths and to recruit them
into spectrum training programs and a potential future spectrum career. The
activities during the 3-4 day workshop will include content delivery from
academic and industry experts and will also have a strong focus on interactive
activities for students. The students will be arranged in small groups of 5-10
participants to maximize the individual impact. Activities will be cross-
disciplinary including a mock spectrum trial, a spectrum filter design and
measurement exercise, and testing of homemade radar systems. Post-activity panel
sessions will discuss spectrum career paths, graduate school options, and other
topics of practical interest to students. Participants will be housed at Baylor
during the workshop and have a chance to interact with potential future faculty
mentors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.