* 2240155
* CAREER: Connecting biology and mechanics through a multiscale modeling of pubertal mammary gland development
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Uduak George, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Amina Eladdadi
* 06/30/2028
* USD 268,468.00

This research will advance our understanding of the mechanism that governs the
emergence of complex biological networks. It proposes novel approaches for
combining laboratory experiments and multiscale mathematical modeling to
characterize branching morphogenesis in the mammary gland. Branching
morphogenesis is a process by which the female mammary gland develops its tree-
like structure during puberty. It governs the formation of other tree-like
organs such as the lungs, salivary gland, and kidney. Defects in branching
morphogenesis can lead to hypertension, chronic kidney failure, and poor lung
function. Mechanisms that control branching morphogenesis are circumvented or
altered during the development and progression of breast cancer. Understanding
the mechanisms that generate branched organs may identify novel ways to treat
breast cancer, regenerate organ function, or design artificial organs to combat
diseases. At puberty, branching morphogenesis generates an extensive network of
mammary gland epithelium ducts. The epithelium ductal network is connected at
its base to the nipple and plays a key role in milk synthesis and secretion for
neonates. Molecular and mechanical factors in the tissue environment are
important for normal branching morphogenesis. Majority of the research in this
area has focused on identifying key molecular factors and the mechanisms by
which they regulate branching morphogenesis. How mechanical signaling regulates
branching morphogenesis remains largely unknown. The mathematical models
proposed in this research will contribute to bridging this gap. This project
will build novel multiscale mathematical models to predict how the interactions
between mechanical and cellular signaling regulate the formation of the mammary
ductal network. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Branching morphogenesis occurs through two
stages: the first stage is via successive rounds of elongation and splitting of
the tip of individual ducts (i.e., tip bifurcation) and the second stage is via
budding along the sides of existing ducts (i.e., side branching). Increased
extracellular matrix (ECM) stiffness is known to increase the sites for
epithelium ductal branch initiation. However, how the mechanical signaling
originating from the ECM affects branch elongation, tip bifurcation and side
branching is not fully understood. This project will (1) combine optimal
transport theory, agent-based models, and data from laboratory experiments to
predict how interactions between ECM and epithelium cells regulate ductal branch
elongation and tip bifurcation in the mammary gland, (2) apply topological data
analysis and multifractal analysis to predict the role of tensional force and
ECM stiffness on ductal tip bifurcation and side branching in the mammary gland.
Findings from this research will improve our understanding of how biomechanical
forces affect ductal network formation. This CAREER project will contribute to
the training of undergraduate and graduate students at San Diego State
University (SDSU), a Hispanic Serving Institution. It will integrate
mathematical biology research activities in the undergraduate curriculum at SDSU
and train students early in their career to approach scientific inquiry in a way
that crosses scientific disciplines. Furthermore, this project will provide a
summer workshop to guide local teachers-leaders in creating teaching modules
that integrate quantitative research and foster critical thinking in high school
students in high-need urban schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is jointly
funded by the MPS-DMS-Mathematical Biology program, BIO-MCB-Cellular Dynamics
and Function program, and MPS-PHY-Physics of Living Systems (PoLS)
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.