* 2240140
* CAREER: Realizing next generation light-material interactions via directional, collective photoluminescence and energy transport of surface-sensitive nanocrystals
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Carissa Eisler, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 05/31/2028
* USD 343,613.00

Nontechnical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Electronic devices are everywhere,
and drive increasing demands for energy. Energy-efficient devices will play an
important role in addressing these needs through renewable energy generation and
reduced energy consumption. One example of energy efficiency comes from light-
emitting diodes (LEDs), widely used for displays and lighting. Light emitted in
the forward direction escapes the device and is seen. Light emitted at a wide
angle can be trapped inside the device and is wasted. Thus, controlling the
direction of light emission can increase the efficiency of an LED. This CAREER
project focuses on understanding the fundamental electronic and photonic
processes of nanoscale materials that can exhibit highly directional light
emission. Discoveries in this work could enable ultra-high efficiency lighting,
displays, and solar cells. They also will provide the foundation for novel
technologies such as optical computing and data storage. The investigator will
also address the technological and social challenges in sustainability by
training women and underrepresented minorities to be leaders in STEM. Planned
activities include case study projects, undergraduate research opportunities,
and a solar industry-focused Technical Academy.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this CAREER project is to
understand the photophysics of cesium lead halide nanocrystals, a high-
performance nanomaterial with extraordinary optical properties such as
superfluorescence, single photon emission, and energy and spin funneling. The
three research objectives are to correlate the tunable, directional
photoluminescence to superfluorescence of these nanocrystals by studying angular
lifetime; determine the limit of exciton and spin directionality in these
materials; and quantify the effect of surface charge and applied voltage to the
exciton transport and light emission pathways of individual nanocrystals. The
research team will quantify how light and energy transport depends on the size,
shape, composition, and local environment of individual nanocrystals and
superlattices using an array of optical characterization techniques. Because
extraordinary optical properties exhibit strong angle dependence, the research
team will use time-resolved back focal plane imaging to quantify the temporal
properties of light emission and energy transfer as a function of angle and
momentum. The work operates at the intersection of chemical approaches to
materials synthesis and surface chemistry and photonic design principles that
dictate light propagation in materials, creating a perspective that will be
necessary to understanding nanoscale light-matter interactions. This work will
shed light on other nanomaterial systems and has the potential to enable novel
quantum information technologies and optoelectronic technologies with
efficiencies approaching thermodynamic limits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.