* 2240255
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Why Vigilance Declines Over Time
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Yusuke Yamani, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Simon Fischer-Baum
* 03/31/2025
* USD 158,962.00

Tasks such as baggage screening, military surveillance, and long-haul driving
require people to remain focused and attentive over long periods of time. But
sustaining attention is difficult and people often start making errors within a
half hour or less of starting a monotonous task. This project combines
behavioral experiments with statistical modeling in order to determine the kinds
of errors people make when the task requires sustained attention and to
understand the causes of the errors. Experiments in a high-fidelity driving
simulator examine the ways that automated vehicle control affects drivers’
sustained attention. Other behavioral experiments examine factors that reduce
people's ability to remain attentive. The project trains graduate and
undergraduate students in experimental psychology, cognitive modeling, and human
factors engineering. Findings help develop techniques for improving human
performance in sustained attention tasks, like providing opportunities for rest
and recovery or reducing opportunities for
distraction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Monitoring and surveillance tasks are
challenging, and operators’ performance drops over the course of 1/2 hour or
less. This decline is termed the "vigilance decrement." Despite many years of
research and the clear importance of this topic, the processes underlying the
vigilance decrement remain the subject of debate. This project uses novel
experimental and analytic methods to identify the nature and causes of vigilance
failures. The central goal is to isolate the roles of response bias, internal
processing noise, and attentional lapses on the vigilance decrement. To do this,
the project analyzes psychometric functions, curves that display signal
detection rates task as a function of signal intensity, and are described by
parameters that directly correspond to bias, noise, and lapse rate. The project
examines how the form of the vigilance decrement varies with task
characteristics that are believed to influence sustained attention, including
task difficulty, mental rest, stimulus information format, and dual-task load.
Performance is examined in laboratory tasks and in a simulated driving task. The
project delivers empirical data to resolve longstanding debates on the
mechanisms of the vigilance decrement, and provides experimental methods and
analytic tools to enable future vigilance research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.