* 2240434
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Sources of argument role insensitivity in verb processing
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2024
* Colin Phillips, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jorge Valdes Kroff
* 12/31/2024
* USD 16,878.00

Humans generally understand utterances quickly and accurately, even in noisy or
degraded environments for listening or reading. Many researchers have attributed
this success to people’s ability to rapidly predict upcoming words. Previous
studies have demonstrated various kinds of evidence for prediction mechanisms,
e.g., more predictable words are read more quickly. But less is known about the
mechanisms by which predictions are generated. This project investigates these
mechanisms, by focusing on situations where people appear to make inappropriate
predictions. A useful test case is “role reversed” sentence pairs, such as “the
customer that the waitress had served” and “the waitress that the customer
served”, in which who did what to whom is reversed. Some psycholinguistic
measures of prediction, particularly those involving comprehension, suggest that
the verb “served” is equally expected in both sentences, despite being
inappropriate in the second. This has been taken as evidence that humans ignore
the roles of nouns when generating expectations. However, some other measures of
prediction suggest that humans generate appropriate expectations in those same
sentences, making full use of role information. This project seeks to resolve
this discrepancy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project combines computational and
experimental methods to investigate why different measures indicate a greater or
lesser role for semantic roles in moment-by-moment prediction in language. The
project will develop a computational model of linguistic prediction that seeks
to capture how a shared set of cognitive processes maps onto different
experimental measures. The model will be extended based on results from new
experiments. In order to understand the time course of predictions and the
contributions of different task elements, the experiments will systematically
vary whether or not participants are shown anomalous continuations, and what
kind of response participants are required to give. The project also develops
and refines a scalable pipeline for semi-automatic analysis of spoken language
data in psycholinguistic experiments, which can be used by other
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.