* 2240032
* CAREER: Fast Radio Bursts Illuminating the Unseen Universe
* MPS,AST
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2027
* Vikram Ravi, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Zoran Ninkov
* 12/31/2027
* USD 347,617.00

On a dark night, the stars appear unchanging and immeasurably remote. But if one
could see the sky with radio eyes, it would appear like a never-ending fireworks
show. Bright flashes would occur once every few seconds, somewhere in the sky.
Unlike the stars we are used to, however, these “fast radio bursts” (FRBs) are
from distant galaxies. Little is understood about the sources of FRBs, or about
the billions of light-years of mostly empty space through which they travel
towards the Earth. The physics of how FRB sources release more energy in
milliseconds than the Sun releases in months is unknown. Perhaps more
mysteriously, most matter in the Universe has not yet been observed, and so we
do not know how what structures it forms in the space between galaxies. To
tackle these problems, this project will gather and analyze data for FRBs
discovered with a new telescope, the Deep Synoptic Array (DSA-110). In parallel
these FRB host galaxies will also be observed with large optical telescopes. The
project will leverage this research program to enrich a modern, active-learning
education program that impacts students from high school to graduate school. The
education program will be centered on a student-led experiment to find the
nearest, brightest FRBs by building and operating radio Burst Detectors (BuDes).
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Fundamental questions on FRBs and the nature of the
medium through which the radio pulses propagate will be investigated using
arcsecond-localized of FRBs obtained with DSA-110, and optical observations of
the host and intervening galaxy systems. First, FRB dispersion measures probe
the medium out of which galaxies form, in which they evolve, and which they
enrich. Such measures will address the baryon occupation fraction of halos of
different masses, a quantity where galaxy formation simulations are in strong
disagreement. Second, FRB sources likely represent heretofore unknown classes of
neutron star. The proposed education program will address three goals: (a)
effective university teaching in a modern context, (b) broadening participation
and the diversity of backgrounds in STEM fields, and (c) expanding the career
options for astronomy and physics students. The education program will initiate
a new annual class to involve undergraduate students in the commissioning of the
all-sky BuDes detectors that will be able to detect brighter FRBs. High-school
students will be involved in the program on an annual basis through the Summer
Research Connection to implement web-based tools to display and analyze data
from the BuDe network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.