* 2240291
* EAGER: Quantum Manufacturing: 3D Microfabricated Ion Traps
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2025
* Sara Mouradian, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Ale Lukaszew
* 02/28/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Engineered quantum devices promise to revolutionize communication, sensing, and
computation, but these systems must increase in size by orders of magnitude if
they are to be useful for real-world problems. In particular, trapped atomic
ions are a leading platform for quantum information processing. These ions are
trapped in dc and rf electric potentials, controlled with lasers, and measured
optically. However, current approaches to ion trapping face a tradeoff between
scalability and trap quality (e.g., the depth and uniformity of the trapping
potential). This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) Quantum
Manufacturing award supports development of a new ion trap architecture
providing both electrical and optical control, without sacrificing
manufacturability. Silicon fabrication techniques will be explored to create
electrodes that increase optical access, a multi-wafer alignment and bonding
process will improve trap quality, and thin focusing optics will be directly
fabricated and aligned with the trapping electrodes. These advancements will
enable trapping, controlling, and measuring thousands of individual ions across
a centimeter-scale device. This work represents the first steps towards defining
the manufacturing process for a trapped ion quantum computer. Additionally, the
growing quantum industry will need a trained workforce to design, build, and
test these next-generation devices. By participating in the research, students
will be trained in pertinent skills and develop a quantum literacy. Special
effort will be made to broaden participation of underrepresented populations by
joining with existing efforts at the University of
Washington.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop a manufacturing
process capable of reliably integrating electrical and optical components
necessary for high fidelity, scalable quantum computing with trapped ions,
closing the gap between the trapping characteristics and the scalability of the
design. Research will focus on development of a reproducible fabrication process
for ion traps with simultaneously high trap depth, voltage efficiency, and
optical access. Research in and development of advanced Silicon fabrication
techniques will achieve overhanging electrodes and backside routing. Multi-layer
wafer traps will provide high quality trapping potentials, and electrostatic
simulations will inform manufacturing tolerances. Finally, planar focusing
optics for improved collection and control will be designed and lithographically
aligned to electrodes by direct patterning of handle wafer on either side of the
wafer trapping electrodes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.