* 2240399
* EAGER: Quantum Manufacturing: Manufacturing Integrated Quantum Sensing and Quantum Photonic Technologies Through Direct Bonding of Diamond Membranes
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2025
* Alexander High, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 01/31/2025
* USD 299,861.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) Quantum Manufacturing
award supports development of diamond-based heterogeneous quantum materials
platforms. Diamond is a unique material relevant to quantum information
technologies. Unfortunately, the development of diamond -based integrated
quantum technologies remains challenging due the inability to directly grow
high-quality diamond on other materials. This research creates new diamond
device platforms by the direct bonding of crystalline diamond membranes to
functional material platforms. The bonding process will be optimized to preserve
the surfaces of the materials and prevent degradation of the delicate quantum
states within the diamond. This research will benefit the ongoing US leadership
in these fields and further expand national science capabilities in the quantum
technologies. The research will have broad and significant impact by vastly
improving the scalability of diamond-based quantum technologies, including
quantum sensing and quantum communication. This project will also focus on
training the next generation of quantum scientists through student-led research
while involving multidisciplinary contributions from surface, materials,
quantum, and growth sciences. This multi-disciplinary approach will help broaden
participation for underrepresented groups in research while positively impacting
high level materials science research and education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heterogeneous quantum material platforms that incorporate
diamond will be manufactured by leveraging wafer bonding techniques. The
research will focus on determining the surface chemistry and processing
conditions necessary to controllably bond diamond membranes to other functional
materials while preserving the properties of quantum states within the
membranes. The processing will primarily explore low-temperature surface-
activated bonding. In this method, the diamond and substrate interfaces are
exposed to an optimized atmospheric plasma which leaves the surfaces atomically
clean and hydrophilic. Strong covalent bonds can form when the two activated
surfaces are brought together and can be further strengthened with annealing.
The interface should be defect-free and maintain the quality of the diamond for
quantum applications. This project will develop methods to automate the
processing and bonding workflow, with a broader vision of developing a quantum
materials assembly line. The developed bonding methods will be utilized to bond
diamond to (1) to lithium niobate photonic circuits to realize electrically
reconfigurable quantum photonics and (2) to glass substrates to generate
integrated quantum sensing platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.