* 2240021
* CAREER: Confinement Effects &amp; Emergent Reactivity in Multifunctional Metal-Organic Framework (MOF)-Based Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Tendai Gadzikwa, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2028
* USD 518,974.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Tendai Gadzikwa of Kansas State University is studying materials whose
physical and chemical structure are modeled after the active sites of enzymes.
Enzymes are our most efficient and selective catalysts, accelerating reactions
by many orders of magnitude and producing a single product out of many
possibilities. By studying the properties and reactivities of synthetic
materials that share structural features with enzymes, Dr. Gadzikwa’s laboratory
will ascertain structure-function correlations as they relate to catalysis. The
insights gained will be applied to the design and construction of more efficient
catalysts, thereby reducing energy consumption and waste generation from
chemical reactions, two major sustainability goals for the chemical industry.
Dr. Gadzikwa supports broadening participation in the chemical sciences, with a
focus on the retention of underrepresented minority students in STEM programs at
Kansas State. Efforts in this regard include faculty mentorship, professional
development opportunities, outreach activities, and the fostering of community
and leadership in the local NOBCChE chapter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These studies
are directed at exploring unexpected reactivity within, and upon,
multifunctional metal-organic framework (MOF) materials, with the goal of using
the insights gained to design and construct more efficient enzyme-inspired
catalysts. Enzymes operate via multiple, precisely located, chemical
functionalities immobilized within confined space, acting synergistically to
activate, orient, and stabilize reacting species. The multiple functional groups
in close proximity are known to perturb each other’s physical properties,
thereby affecting reactivity. With the aid of machine learning, the Gadzikwa Lab
will elucidate the molecular origins of unexpected reactivity that has been
observed in multifunctional MOFs. The structure-function relationships that are
determined from these investigations will inform the design of multifunctional
MOF-based confined catalysts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.