* 2240322
* SBIR Phase II:  Autonomous active safety systems for verifiably safe operation of ground vehicles
* TIP,TI
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2025
* Jeffrey Johnson, MAPLESS AI, INC.
* Cooperative Agreement
* Peter Atherton
* 05/31/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project will result from addressing the gap between the ride hail and
vehicle rental markets via the creation of a new, more accessible “car hailing”
mode of transportation. Based on technical advancements in vehicle safety and
fleet logistics, car hailing technology offers the potential for direct and
desirable social impacts, including: more equitable transportation that can
improve quality of life and decrease cost of living; less personal vehicle
ownership and less pollution as a result of more efficient vehicle fleet
utilization; centralized, managed parking, which could free land for
pedestrians, housing, and businesses precisely where it is needed most; and
significant job creation due to the need for remote human vehicle operators.
These societal and environmental benefits also directly translate into increased
economic competitiveness of the United States: more equitable and available
transportation for workers enables businesses to compete more successfully in
the global markets, and improved quality of life and wage opportunities leads to
more productive workers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project will help enable scalable commercial deployment
of vehicle teleoperation technology and services by further developing and
improving previous advances in robotics control, perception, and safety
engineering. There are two primary objectives for the Phase II research. The
first is to develop new techniques and methodologies in safety engineering that
will enable the systematic testing and safety assurances necessary for large-
scale public road deployments of vehicle teleoperation technology. The second is
to revise and improve the novel control and perception technologies developed
during the Phase I project to satisfy new requirements derived from the
company’s safety engineering advances. The results of the Phase II research will
include robotics control and perception capabilities that significantly advance
the state of the art, as well as a new set of safety engineering practices and
methodologies that could serve as a foundation for the emerging industry of
vehicle teleoperation and autonomous vehicle safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.