* 2240170
* CAREER: Additive Manufacturing with Acoustically Assembled Multi-Scale Composite Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Tyler Ray, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 07/31/2028
* USD 518,834.00

This Faculty Early Career Development (CAREER) grant focuses on understanding
and advancing a new processing pathway for the additive manufacturing of the
next-generation functional materials. Additive manufacturing technologies have
rapidly matured in pursuit of geometric complexity, scalability, and
reproducibility; however, similar advances in customized, application-specific
engineered materials are limited. Innovations to control printed architectures
across both microstructural and component levels enable the realization of
advanced multi-functional, multi-material composites. Such capabilities are
critical to addressing the demanding material requirements of transformative
technologies including high-capacity energy storage, clean energy, and quantum
computing. This research project seeks to develop, understand, and validate the
application of external fields, such as acoustic fields, within additive
manufacturing processes and discover the fundamental process mechanisms that
enable precise spatial control over micro- and nanoparticle constituents. The
cross-disciplinary nature of this research expands opportunities for
interdisciplinary training and positions this project for enhancing interest
K-12 students in science, technology, engineering, arts, and mathematics
(STEAM). This project establishes education and outreach activities directly
integrated with research outcomes including: (i) an annual Additive
Manufacturing Make-a-thon focused on innovative distributed manufacturing
technologies, (ii) a culture-based engineering outreach program to promote
careers in STEAM to Native Hawaiian students, (iii) mentored research
opportunities to support STEAM education and workforce development, and (iv)
curriculum innovation at the undergraduate and graduate levels.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal of this research is to discover the
scientific foundations for the additive manufacturing of acoustically assembled
multi-scale composite materials with engineered properties resulting from
deterministically ordered microstructures. A central challenge to creating
nanoparticle-based composite materials is the control of the spatial
distribution of nanoparticles across multiple length-scales. External fields,
such as acoustic fields, have been shown to enable spatial control over
microscale particles during a direct deposition additive manufacturing process.
The research project proposes an acoustophoretic additive manufacturing method
that combines three mechanisms to enable the continuous hierarchical assembly of
bulk materials: (i) surface functionalization to create ordered/disordered
micron-scale nanoparticle aggregates in solution, (ii) acoustic fields to
assemble microscale aggregates into mesoscale structures, and (iii) direct
deposition of these mesoscale structures into bulk components. The project
combines theoretical and experimental studies to systematically investigate and
reveal the fundamental principles governing the mechanics of flow-based, field-
assisted additive manufacturing across multiple length scales. A key focus is to
obtain a better understanding of the processing-structure-property relationships
governing the use of acoustic fields to fabricate multiscale composite materials
with specific, functionally-graded properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.