* 2241495
* Quantification of energy cascade of internal gravity waves with varying spectral slopes
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2026
* Brian Arbic, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2026
* USD 523,335.00

Vertical density differences in the ocean support 'internal' waves (waves in the
ocean's interior) that have different periods. The energy of these internal
waves often trickles down to smaller waves that eventually dissipate, a process
known as the energy cascade. The cascade process can lead to mixing, and
determines the heat and salt balances and general circulation of the ocean. This
project will investigate this energy cascade through theory, modeling, and data
analysis. The existing theory of the energy cascade, based on the turbulence
produced by internal waves, will be improved in this study (with existing
controversies resolved) and extended to more realistic situations. Subsequent
validation of the improved theory will be done with high-resolution regional
model simulations. The project will also apply this improved theory to a global
model simulation and establish a geographic map of dissipation . Broader impacts
include enhancements to global climate models and regional models. The
theoretical improvement will inform a range of physical applications and
mathematical studies of internal wave turbulence. Annual presentations are
planned for the turbulence community. The work supports an early career PI, a
postdoc, and teaching and public outreach through the Coastal Ocean Environment
Summer School in Ghana and public lectures on the history of fluid mechanics
through programs at the UM Museum of Natural History.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project will establish a comprehensive understanding of the downscale
energy cascade of IGW spectra with variable spectral slopes, from both
theoretical and computational considerations. Research tasks include: 1)
Development of theoretical formulations of energy cascade for spectra with
varying slopes in the wave turbulence theory framework, which will be guided and
confirmed by simulations of the kinetic equation. 2) Further improvement of the
regional MITgcm simulation of 24-32 degrees N, 193-199 degrees E to better match
the spectra from McLane profiler measurements (through adjustment of model
resolution and K-profile parameterization), computation of the modeled energy
cascade with comparison to theoretical results obtained from task 1. 3)
Application of the traditional/new finescale parameterization to a global MITgcm
model to establish a geographic map of turbulent dissipation rate, and
comparison of the results to those from microstructure measurements. The new
finescale parameterization formulation from spectra that more closely match
spectra from measurements, together with improved regional models through tuning
of K-profile parameterization, will lead to fundamentally improved diapycnal
mixing parameterizations in ocean models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.