* 2241982
* Mass Media Access and Indigenous Communal Engagement
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Carolyn Smith-Morris, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 05/31/2026
* USD 483,845.00

Open and free mass media provide important information, connection, and
protections to communities in rural and remote areas. Many Indigenous
communities have utilized radio strategies to protect their language, to
preserve cultural lifeways and heritage, and to communicate within and across
Indigenous groups about issues distinctive to these uniquely marginalized
communities. As a counterweight to outside social and economic forces that
advance individualism and commodity-driven lifestyles, Indigenous mass media
programs have a dynamic position in the tides of culture change. Better
anthropological research on the impact of Indigenous radio on traditional,
communal values is important to our understanding of positive, self-determined
culture change. Such work will also build collaborative ties with Indigenous
communities and researchers, so that Indigenous capacity for self-governance,
self-sufficiency, and informed engagement is ensured. The project trains a
postdoctoral researcher and includes several collaborators from underrepresented
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores what impact of publicly
accessible and free media has on communalism and engagement in Indigenous
communities. It specifically examines radio-based mass media communication
within Indigenous communities to understand what role communications
infrastructure might have in understanding pathways for Indigenous legal
protections and sovereignty. Research will focus on five communities with
varying levels of radio access and coverage and will include surveys (n=47 for
each community), interviews with a smaller subsample from each community, and
community-based methods. Content analysis will include collaborative development
of codes and validation of the findings. The strategies and targets of this
research will substantially improve anthropological understanding of
communalism. The collaborative and community-based methods will contribute to a
more respectful, equitable science of anthropology, fostering ownership of
research data and co-production of knowledge by Indigenous
scholars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.