* 2241230
* The mechanistic basis of slow-fast phenotypic diversity and its functional and evolutionary significance in social groups
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Dhruba Naug, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Colette St. Mary
* 12/31/2026
* USD 626,680.00

Why some animals are fast as hares and others as slow as tortoises is a question
that has not only intrigued biologists but also philosophers and the public at
large. Sometimes referred to as the pace of life, these slow-fast differences in
physiology, behavior and life history, integrated into a set of contrasting
characteristics, can distinguish different species or different individuals
within a species along a slow-fast axis. Since the rate of energy use, or
metabolic rate, can have a large impact in defining the overall lifestyle of an
animal, this project will take advantage of two genetic lines of honeybees that
have been bred for their low and high metabolic rates, to understand the
fundamental basis of slow-fast differences. Even more importantly, since
honeybee colonies are superorganisms, they allow one to ask how a collective
slow-fast phenotype can emerge from the diversity among colony members and
define performance at the group level. Slow-fast differences are also seen among
the different species of honeybees such that the ones which nest in cavities
have a faster tempo than the ones which nest in the open. This project will also
undertake a comparative study of the four different species to understand how
ecology shapes slow-fast diversity. The results of this study will add to our
understanding of slow-fast differences and how it contributes to the evolution
of social behavior. With the current concern about anthropogenic changes,
understanding these differences in behavior and life history has implications
for honeybee health and management. This project will also contribute to modules
for use in the Science for School program which supports K-5 science curriculum
and establish a student mentorship program for undergraduates with interests in
animal behavior. It will also provide students with opportunities to travel and
participate in research internationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Slow-fast
differences in physiology, behavior and life history is a classic and
fundamental concept in behavioral and evolutionary ecology, owing its history to
r- and k-selection. More recently, metabolic rate (MR) and cognitive style have
been cited as the primary drivers of these phenotypic differences, modeled as a
set of correlated traits under the pace-of-life framework. Such slow-fast
diversity is especially interesting in the context of a social group where the
phenotypic expression at the group level is an emergent outcome of the
phenotypic diversity of its members, which also makes it possible for the group
to potentially override some of the constraints that might be imposed by the
covariance among the different traits at the individual level. Using the
experimental leverage of the genetic lines of Slow (low MR) and Fast (high MR)
honeybees (Apis mellifera) that were bred, this project will take an integrative
approach modeled on Tinbergen’s four questions to understand (1) the mechanistic
and developmental bases of slow-fast differences, (2) the functional
consequences of slow-fast phenotypic diversity at the group level, and (3) the
evolutionary basis of slow-fast phenotypic differences and its ecological
drivers using a comparative approach integrating the work with A. mellifera with
that in the other three honeybee species, A. cerana, A. dorsata and A. florea,
the first two being cavity-nesters and the latter two being open-nesters.
Together, these studies will provide a comprehensive understanding of the
significance of slow-fast phenotypic diversity that characterizes different
levels of biological organization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.