* 2241353
* OPUS: A Computational Theory of Biodiversity
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2024
* Jorge Soberon, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Fujita
* 04/30/2024
* USD 139,114.00

Biodiversity can be defined as the patterns of distribution of species, genes,
and ecosystems on the planet. It is amply documented that the activities of
human societies are substantially increasing the extinction rate of species, the
loss of genetic variation, and the degradation of ecosystems. This loss imperils
many of the services that biodiversity offers such as pollination, pest control,
cleansing of water, promoting soil health, and providing resources for
innovation in industry and health. Thus, forecasting how the distribution of
species change through time is of urgent and critical importance to conserve the
remaining biodiversity on this planet. This project will make important
contributions to this goal by synthesizing publicly-available data and decades
of previous research to develop novel computational models that will
realistically predict changes in the distributions of species, communities, and
ecosystems. Applications of these models will provide insight into the expansion
of invasive species, emergence of human and agricultural diseases, and the
impacts of climate change on threatened and endangered species. Results of this
project include visual and dynamic maps that will form interactive displays at
the University of Kansas Natural History Museum. An important training component
is the involvement of a graduate student in the development of the dynamic
mathematical models of species distributions as well as the writing of the book
and software.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The synthesis of decades of research and
data will culminate in a book and software that will be accessible to the
evolution and ecology research community so that the new models developed in
this project can be used broadly and extensively across many species and
ecological communities around the world. Currently, most models of species
distributions are static and based on presence-absence data; this project will
incorporate additional data sources such physiology and species interactions to
generate dynamic distribution models for those species. Furthermore, this
project will use these models from multiple species to represent ecological
changes of whole communities and environments through time and to predict
biodiversity patterns over entire landscapes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.