* 2241801
* P-T-D-t paths for Mesoproterozoic supracrustal rocks: a new window into the elevated geotherm and intraplate deformation of the ca. 1.4 Ga Picuris Orogeny
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Chloe Bonamici, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 06/30/2026
* USD 408,180.00

Most of Earthâ€™s mountain belts have formed at the boundaries of tectonic plates,
where the stresses from plate motions are powerful enough to fold, break, and
pile up rocks. However, a few mountain belts have formed far away from high-
stress plate boundaries, and they suggest that tectonic plates are not always
entirely strong and rigid. This project will investigate one of these unusual
plate-interior mountain belts to better understand how strong tectonic plates
can be weakened and deformed from the inside out. The Picuris Mountains of
northern New Mexico contain sedimentary and volcanic rocks that were deposited
around 1.5 billion years ago and then rapidly deformed and metamorphosed,
capturing a record of a rare plate-interior mountain building event. By studying
the structures, minerals, chemistry, and radiogenic isotopes of the Picuris
rocks, investigators will determine how heat, stress, and time worked together
to warp the North American plate interior. This research will use state-of-the-
art analytical approaches and instrumentation to address long-standing tectonic
mysteries, as well as train up to five graduate and undergraduate students in
conducting high-level earth science field and lab research. The investigator and
student researchers will also create a field trip for members of the public with
mobility challenges highlighting the geology, mineral resources, and landscapes
of a plate-interior mountain belt.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Intraplate orogenesis
challenges the paradigm of rigid tectonic plates and provides clues to the long-
term, nonlinear evolution of continents, cratons, and plate strength. This
project will focus on the Picuris Mountains of New Mexico, where mountain-
building occurred far inboard of the presumed active Laurentian continental
margin 1.4 billion years ago. Investigators will extract the Pressure-
Temperature-Deformation-time (P-T-D-t) record of the Picuris Orogeny preserved
in rare rocks with Mesoproterozoic protoliths as a means to elucidate the
mechanism(s) of the ca. 1.4 Ga intraplate orogenesis. The Principal
Investigator, two graduate students, and one or more undergraduates will perform
field work; construct detailed P-T-D-t paths for Mesoproterozoic supracrustal
rocks using modern petrologic and structural approaches; perform U-Pb titanite
and zircon dating to establish the absolute timing of Picuris metamorphism and
deformation; and use whole-rock and zircon trace-element geochemistry to
determine the tectonomagmatic setting of Mesoproterozoic volcanic rocks.
Additionally, the Principal Investigator and a graduate student will build a
digital field guide to Precambrian outcrops for Wisconsin geoscience-curious
community members, especially including those with mobility challenges. Lessons
learned from developing this accessible field experience will be shared with UW-
Madison faculty to inform efforts toward making field-based geoscience education
more inclusive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.