* 2241766
* Empowering Youth in STEM and Technological Careers through AI-Enhanced Sustainable and Community-Focused Urban Gardening
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* George Barnett, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Alicia Santiago Gonzalez
* 05/31/2026
* USD 1,299,256.00

This Developing and Testing Innovations (DTI) project will engage high school
youth from historically excluded groups in Massachusetts and Louisiana in
transdisciplinary learning of computational science, artificial intelligence,
engineering, and plant science through the installation of automated urban
gardening robots called restorative gardens. These gardens offer an opportunity
to bridge traditional gardening and 21st-century technological skills while
fostering community engagement by supporting youth in using emerging
technologies to address critical issues such as food security. Drawing upon an
emancipatory community design and research approach, the program involves youth
participatory action research in which young people use research methods to make
sense of and address social problems of community food insecurity by building
and programming restorative gardens in their local communities. These gardens
will serve as a bridge where youth, community, and younger peers can come
together to learn and share how emerging technologies can be used to support and
advance improvements in urban farming. The career development component features
near-peer mentoring to engage youth in exploring a wide array of related STEM
career opportunities. This project offers a much-needed approach to support
youth in examining careers across fields of agriculture and computation, rather
than a specific field, which is valuable for youth who are beginning their
career explorations. The outcomes of this project will reveal valuable insights
regarding how to integrate restorative gardening, near-peer mentoring, and youth
participatory action research to increase youth STEM self-efficacy and re-engage
youth who are opting out of STEM career paths. This project is funded by the
Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program,
which supports projects that build understandings of practices, program
elements, contexts, and processes contributing to increasing students' knowledge
and interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and
information and communication technology (ICT) careers. This project is also
funded through the CS for All: Research and RPPs program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will use an emancipatory community design and
research (ECDR) framework in which youth and community member voices are central
to the project's implementation. They will identify locations for restorative
gardens, share and conduct research with the local community on what should be
grown in the gardens, establish strategies for sharing knowledge about gardening
to and from the community, and lead community workshops on the underlying
technologies of restorative gardens. The project is guided by the following
research questions: (1) How does participating in the restorative garden project
(and peer mentoring) impact youth's desire and self-efficacy to pursue and stay
in STEM career fields? (2) How does participating in the restorative garden
project impact youth's understanding of STEM (coding and AI) concepts and
systems thinking skills? (3) How does participating in this project impact
youth's place identity and STEM identity? (3)(a) How does participating in youth
participatory action research around restorative gardening contribute to youth's
ideas of environmental responsibility, food sovereignty, and global citizenship?
The research and evaluation will employ a mixed-methods approach to investigate
the project's impact on youth's STEM learning, identity, and career aspirations,
as well as support their conceptualization of place identity, environmental
responsibility, food sovereignty, and global citizenship. One hundred and eighty
youth will be tracked over time to evaluate what aspects of the program are
critical to their success and STEM identity. This information will be used to
better understand how to blend and mesh the robust mentoring network of young
people participating in the project, with the goal of developing youth's STEM
career awarenesss and adaptability. Project deliverables include restorative
gardens equipped with automated urban gardening robots; reports and publications
documenting the research findings and best practices developed through the
project; near-peer mentoring resources and tools that could be adapted and used
by other organizations; educational materials to teach youth about emerging
technologies; and youth-generated content such as photovoice stories that
showcase the impact of the project on the participating youth and their
communities. Project findings will be disseminated through academic conferences
and publications, community events, and local media
outlets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.