* 2241805
* Supporting Rightful Presence in Museum Spaces: Youth as Participatory Designers of Indigenous Mixed Reality Science Exhibits
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Vincent Medina, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Fengfeng Ke
* 05/31/2026
* USD 1,292,298.00

This project will address the ongoing marginalization of Indigenous communities
in informal science learning spaces by developing and studying a model that
strengthens Indigenous youths’ disposition toward, and capacity for STEM
pathways. Science centers and museums play an important role in promoting
science learning outside of schools. However, they are often perceived by
communities historically and chronically marginalized in science as unwelcoming
and/or culturally irrelevant. Merely increasing access for Indigenous
communities is insufficient to promote equitable, affirming, and just engagement
with science learning. Instead, asset-based approaches that center nondominant
cultures are needed to advance more expansive and transformative models of
science that promote rightful presence: the idea that visitors will experience a
sense of belonging and respect. Building on a partnership between University of
California’s Lawrence Hall of Science and mak-’amham, an Indigenous Ohlone
cultural organization that empowers Ohlone people with a rich cultural identity,
the project will engage Ohlone youth (ages 10-16) in iterative cycles of
participatory design and prototyping to create immersive Indigenous science
exhibit experiences using mixed reality technologies. In centering Indigenous
perspectives within science and technology learning experiences and highlighting
connections between Indigenous cultural identities and contemporary STEM career
pathways, the project aims to reframe STEM learning to increase Indigenous
youth’s rightful presence in informal STEM learning spaces, with the potential
to lead to a more diverse STEM workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project team
will employ participatory design-based research methodologies to investigate the
following three research questions: 1) What are the outcomes of youth
participation in the design of mixed reality exhibits? a) How do youth develop a
sense of belonging, science identity, and STEM career interest, and in what ways
do these make visible and amplify their rightful presence in informal science
education spaces? b) How do youth deepen and construct new STEM knowledge
through Indigenous Science-based participatory design? 2) How can a
participatory design model be developed in ways that center Indigenous Science
and contribute to Indigenous rightful presence in informal science education? 3)
How can informal science educators be supported to make sense of and center
Indigenous Science? In collaboration with an Ohlone Research Advisory Committee,
the project team will analyze the following data: interviews with focal youth;
artifact-elicited focus groups; ethnographic observations of design workshops
and reflective conversations; and design artifacts gathered from youth design
teams. By engaging a total of 70 Indigenous youth directly, project research
will investigate the impact of the participatory design model on youths’ STEM
learning, science identity, and interest in STEM careers, and advance
understanding of design practices that contribute to rightful presence for
Indigenous youth. The research will also generate insights into how to support
informal science educators in facilitating Indigenous-centered learning
experiences. Project findings will be disseminated to informal science and
technology learning communities to support principled adaptation of the
Indigenous Science youth participatory design model in informal science
education contexts. This project is funded by the Innovative Technology
Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects
that build understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and processes
contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.