* 2241694
* Demand Manifolds for Empirical Industrial Organization
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Eugenio Miravete, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 06/30/2026
* USD 319,134.00

There has been a public debate over the effect of increased industrial
concentration on income inequality and price increases, inspiring a more
interventionist antitrust policy that prevents further market consolidation.
This approach ignores the role of the nature of demand in producers’ ability of
producers to shift cost increases unto consumers. This research will use three
projects to study what role the curvature of the demand plays in firms’ ability
pass increasing cost unto consumers in the form of higher consumer prices. This
research will show that the degree to which producers can shift cost increases
on to consumers depends on the shape of the demand curve. The research also
provides a new and better way of measuring the shape of the demand curve as well
as under what conditions producers can shift cost increases to consumers. The
results of this research project will provide a better understanding of how
supply chain disruption affect price changes and inflation dynamics. The results
also provide a better guide to US anti-trust policies as well as help to
establish the US a global leader in anti-trust policies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research uses three projects to address
demand curvature in discrete choice models. Economists have favored the use of
mixed logit to accommodate idiosyncratic preferences over product attributes and
price because it allows for unrestricted substitution patterns. However, the
curvature properties of this model remain unknown. The first project explores
how different elements of consumer preferences condition demand curvature and
shows that only price random coefficient has any influence, and that the
distribution of price random coefficients is key to expanding the range of
estimable curvature in discrete choice models. The results show that the key to
identifying demand curvature is the pass-through rates of common cost shifts at
different price levels for multi-product firms. These results can be extended to
accommodate demographic- and other price interactions in quasi-linear
preferences models. The second project applies this methodology to study the
impact of updating alcohol taxes on the noncompetitive liquor industry to show
how the methodology leads to more accurate predictions of the effects of supply
chain disruptions. The third project applies the flexible modelling in the first
project to evaluate whether changing preferences affect demand curvature, hence
secular markups. The results of this research project will provide a better
understanding of how supply chain disruption affect price changes and inflation
dynamics. The results also provide a better guide to US anti-trust policies as
well as help to establish the US a global leader in anti-trust
policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.