* 2241365
* Conference: An International Conference on Engineering  Synthetic Cells and Organelles
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Kate Adamala, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 03/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The International Conference on Engineering Synthetic Cells and Organelles,
SynCell 2023, will be held in Minneapolis, MN on May 22-24, 2023. The conference
focuses on synthetic biology, establishes the state-of-the-art of synthetic cell
technology, and identifies grand challenges and opportunities for future work in
this field. It features world leaders in synthetic cell technology from premier
US and international universities and national laboratories. The meeting
addresses the mission of NSF, which has been increasingly committed to
integrating the engineering sciences with the life sciences, encouraging
research and development in multidisciplinary areas, educating the next
generation of young scientists, and supporting cutting edge science to answer
current and future challenges as well as making sure US-based scientists are
globally engaged. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Topics of the conference will focus on
development of foundational technologies for creating synthetic cells. The
conference will hold sessions on five topics over 2.5 days in a single-track
format. The topics will be (1) cell-free translation systems; (2) education,
outreach, ethics, and biosafety; (3) containers and cytoskeletons; (4)
metabolism, gene replication, membrane synthesis, ribosome assembly; (5)
synthetic cell applications in medicine and manufacturing; and (6) minimal cells
as a living chassis. The conference proceedings, and companion white papers,
will be published.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.