* 2241759
* Disentangling mechanisms of sociality and mating tactics
* BIO,IOS
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2027
* Alexander Ophir, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Lynch
* 02/28/2027
* USD 1,000,000.00

Public Award Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Across vertebrates, males use a
diversity of tactics to gain access to reproductive females, and these tactics
may be associated with variation in sociability. For example, males that form
highly selective pair bonds with one female might be less generally social
whereas males that are highly social may express an alternative mating tactic,
where they court and mate promiscuously with many females despite being bonded.
This project proposes that understanding new and distinct mating tactics that
emerge in some males requires understanding the interaction of brain-behavior
relationships that underlie high sociability (known as prosocial behavior) and
selective social behavior that leads to pairbonding. By exploring brain-behavior
relationships of these two social behaviors, the project aims to understand the
neural sources for behaviors that can only be studied by indirectly exploring
the neural sources of other behaviors within the social brain. In this case,
understanding male fidelity to a pairbonded partner requires understanding the
neural basis of variation in sociability. This project explores the novel idea
that some social behaviors are indirectly rooted in neural circuitry that serves
a distinct but similar function. The aims of these studies represent a shift in
thinking about the function of the social brain. In doing so, we will train
undergraduate students in advanced techniques in neuroscience, and formally
train them to engage in science outreach with a population of underserved
(mostly refugee) elementary school-aged children.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sociality and
mating systems are interdependent classes of behavior that govern distinct
elements of reproductive decision-making. This project will disentangle the
aggregated effects of general and selective prosocial behavior to study
variation in alternative reproductive tactics. The hypothesis is high
sociability creates opportunities for sexual infidelity via social access. The
lateral septum (LS) is highly networked and impacts both sociability and mating
system. Focus is placed on prairie voles, a socially monogamous species where
pairbonded males vary in sexual fidelity, in spite of maintaining strong
pairbonds. A key prediction is that social promiscuity (i.e., non-specific
social approach) is gated by the connections between the medial bed nucleus of
the stria terminalis (BSTm) and the LS. High sociability should create
opportunities for animals to engage in extra-pair courtship and copulation
independent of bond strength. The project will determine: [1] the role of BSTm-
LS neuronal activity in regulating social monogamy using retro-Cre chemogenetic
neural manipulations, [2] how vasopressin and GABA in the LS modulate social
approach and sexual infidelity using pharmacological manipulation and
visualizing neural activity, and [3] if LS neural activation via chemogenetics
affects social approach and mating decisions in a complex social context. This
research will exploit the intersection between prosociality and monogamy to
broaden understanding of social brain function by manipulating neuronal function
in one domain of social behavior to observe the consequences in another
(reproductive decision-making). The project will leverage a strong record of
training URM students at all levels in advanced methods in neuroethology, and
community engagement with underserved and marginalized K-12 aged children in a
community classroom environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.