* 2241193
* PurSUiT: Uncovering bacterial and archaeal diversity in Great Basin hot springs
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2023,11/30/2025
* Anne Wood, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Katharina Dittmar
* 11/30/2025
* USD 399,999.00

Microbes are the most ubiquitous, most ancient and most resilient form of life,
exhibiting several unique metabolic capabilities and remarkable adaptations to
extreme environments. These properties have led to the use of microbes in a
variety of industrial processes, ranging from biofuel production and wastewater
treatment to bioremediation of oil spills and drug production. Despite their
ubiquity and importance, only a minuscule fraction of microbes has been
characterized and taxonomically classified so far, resulting in a large
underutilization of their industrial potential and a major gap in our
understanding of life. This project aims to reduce this gap by exploring
previously undiscovered microbial diversity in hot springs across the US Great
Basin, which are some of Earth's most extreme and least understood environments.
Our rationale for targeting Great Basin hot springs is four-fold. First, hot
springs exert strong selective pressures on organisms, thus increasing the
potential for discovering novel species. Second, hot springs likely resemble
some of the earliest life-harboring environments on Earth, thus yielding insight
into the origins of life. Third, prokaryotes found in hot springs are known to
exhibit strong degrees of endemism, and hence hot springs can be considered
"isolated islands" from a microbial perspective, each with unique diversity.
This "island"-nature is expected to be particularly pronounced in the largely
arid desert-like Great Basin. Fourth, the Great Basin is rich in geothermal
features that nevertheless remain poorly studied. Our data will be made publicly
available, thus serving as a valuable resource to society. The discovery of new
species from a large number of poorly studied taxonomic groups will assist in
the future cultivation of new microorganisms and their physiological
characterization, based on predicted nutrient requirements. Increasing the
coverage of the microbial tree of life will also facilitate reconstruction of
the timing and order of various evolutionary events believed to have shaped our
planet's surface chemistry and climate. The project will provide hands-on
training to students in field work, lab work and bioinformatics, through
participation in the research activities as well as through a microbiology
summer course. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project aims to recover
novel microbial (bacterial and archaeal) diversity in 40 hot springs across the
US Great Basin at whole-genome resolution, using culture-independent genome-
resolved metagenomics. The hot springs have been chosen such that the potential
for discovery of new microbial diversity is maximized. Recovered genomes will be
taxonomically classified and functionally annotated through comparison to
reference databases. In addition, material from each sample will be archived via
cryopreservation as well as lyophilization, to facilitate follow-up
investigations of the recovered microbial diversity. The project is expected to
lead to the discovery of 1000-1500 new prokaryotic species, many of which from
new classes and even phyla. The project will also collect rich geochemical
metadata, such as ion concentrations, pH and temperatures, to provide
environmental context for the recovered genomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.