* 2241809
* Creative Computing Cookbook: Grounding Artistic Computing in the Learning Sciences
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Yoav Bergner, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Leilah Lyons
* 04/30/2026
* USD 1,165,014.00

Artistic computing learning environments have the ability to stimulate K-12
learners' interest in STEM fields and support inclusivity in computing. This
project, named Creative Computing Cookbook, investigates the co-design and
implementation of instructor- and learner-facing resources to support equitable
art and computing learning experiences. Recipes in the Creative Computing
Cookbook guide learners in developing mastery of concepts and practices derived
from the Computer Science Teachers Association K-12 Computer Science Standards
as they construct their own artistic computing artifacts and performances. The
students will learn to use algorithmic components such as control structures,
nested loops, and compound conditionals, while also developing problem
generalization skills that allow them to reuse existing code, emulating how
professional programmers work. The project’s partners include two arts education
organizations, Community Word Project (CWP) and STEM From Dance (SFD), which
serve over 4000 students in the New York City area from groups that are
historically underrepresented in technology. The project’s co-design with art
educators and students will create authentic opportunities to engage in
computing and artistic practices grounded in cultural and disciplinary
knowledge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will add to the body of work
studying how code remixing can support learning computational skills and
practices, and how that remixing can be scaffolded. Specific scaffolding
strategies will be tested, like worked examples (wherein learners are provided
with an expert’s problem-solving model via a problem statement and a procedure
for solving the problem), Parsons problems (wherein learners arrange blocks of
mixed-up program code into the correct order), and case-based reasoning (a
constructivist theory of problem solving that will be used to inform how
activities should be designed to help students process, index, reference, and
apply prior cases to accomplish their current artistic goal). Data to be
collected will be qualitative and includes meeting notes, design artifacts,
curricular resources, and recordings of pilots, observation notes, student
artifacts, interviews with students and instructors, cognitive walk-through
recordings, critiques, student reflections on artifacts, and teacher artifacts.
Analysis will entail qualitative coding and the construction of case studies.
The project will contribute broadly to the understanding of how to support
interdisciplinary learning while preserving youth agency and embedding equity
practices, and specifically to the understanding of how to scaffold creative
computing endeavors. The cookbook and other supporting materials will be made
freely available to other similar organizations, increasing their capacity to
enact and support creative coding activities that can encourage underrepresented
learners to develop computational skills and affinities. This project is funded
by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST)
program, which supports projects that build understandings of practices, program
elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing students' knowledge
and interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and
information and communication technology (ICT) careers. This project is also
funded through the CS for All: Research and RPPs
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.