* 2241007
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Sulfur-Carbon-Solid Electrolyte Interface of Lithium/Sulfur Solid-State Batteries
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Candace Chan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Carole Read
* 05/31/2026
* USD 400,932.00

In recent years, there has been a significant movement towards using electric
vehicles (EVs) as a more sustainable form of transportation. Continuous
innovation of rechargeable batteries that supply power to an electric motor is
required to boost the adoption of EVs since the battery significantly affects
the driving range, safety, and cost of EVs. A lithium/sulfur (Li/S) battery
consisting of a lithium metal anode and sulfur cathode is a promising candidate
for EV applications as it has the potential for a five-times longer driving
distance at a given weight of the EV battery compared to conventional lithium-
ion batteries. The major challenges towards the development of reliable and safe
Li/S batteries are 1) the need to mitigate problematic issues associated with
chemical compounds called lithium polysulfides, which are formed in the organic
liquid electrolyte during battery operation, and 2) the flammable ionic
conductor used as electrolyte. A Li/S solid-state battery is a promising system
for overcoming these issues because it uses a solid-state electrolyte which is
non-flammable and can prevent polysulfide formation better than liquid
electrolytes. However Li/S solid-state batteries suffer from poor energy
storage/delivery performance due to an insufficient understanding of the
electrode-solid electrolyte interface. This project will conduct fundamental
studies on the interfaces in Li/S solid-state batteries, advanced materials
characterization methods, and implement rational electrode design to address
these challenges. The results from this project will create new knowledge that
can enable energy storage solutions to meet the U.S.’s mission toward
decarbonizing the global automotive sector and shaping the sustainable energy
future. Comprehensive education and workforce development plans are laid out
through a seamless partnership between Arizona State University and the
University of Michigan Ann Arbor. Training graduate and undergraduate students
via this research project will significantly contribute to the mission of both
universities mission to become a hotbed of energy
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of this project is to
improve the understanding of the electrochemical processes taking place in Li/S
composite cathodes employing garnet-type lithium lanthanum zirconium oxide
(Li7La3Zr2O12, LLZO) as a solid electrolyte. The research will focus on: 1)
Obtaining an improved understanding of the reaction mechanisms in Li/S composite
cathodes using model systems, electroanalytical techniques, and in operando/ex-
situ X-ray analyses, 2) Elucidation of fundamental thermodynamic and kinetic
parameters influential in the electrochemical processes of sulfur, and 3)
Investigation of design parameters such as particle size, morphology, surface
properties, and mass loading of components in the sulfur/solid state electrolyte
composite cathode. Enabled by the collaborative research team’s expertise in
Li/S cell chemistry, solid-state battery technology, and synchrotron-based in-
situ/operando characterization, this project will result in a comprehensive
methodology for investigating and designing sustainable, next-generation energy
storage systems. The results of the project will lead to the innovative design
of S-LLZO composite cathodes, which is favorable for fast and sustainable
electrochemical processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.