* 2241039
* Into the icehouse: Dramatic changes at the Devonian-Mississippian Climate Transition (DMCT)
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Ethan Grossman, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 02/28/2026
* USD 586,098.00

Reconstructions of ancient ocean temperatures give important clues to the limits
of future global warming, the causes of climate change, and the impact of
climate change on biodiversity. This project will test whether tropical ocean
temperatures were extremely warm (35-40 °C or 95-104 °F) during the time of
early animals and examine the role of rapid cooling in triggering biotic crises.
The study will also explore how climate change impacted the cycling of calcium
and whether linkages between the calcium and carbon cycles play a role in
climate change. Proxy data for paleoenvironments will be combined with
sophisticated mass balance models to further test links between calcium, carbon
dioxide, and climate. The project will broaden geochemical education through (1)
training of three graduate students and members of underrepresented groups in
cutting-edge techniques, (2) development of exercises and independent research
projects for undergraduate and graduate classes, and (3) K-12 activities at the
annual TAMU Chemistry Open House. The project will enhance research and
education infrastructure by supporting two cutting-edge mass-spectrometry
systems and by sharing the mass balance model
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will feature clumped isotope
paleothermometry, a recent advance that measures the co-occurrence of 13C and
18O in carbonate molecules (e.g., Ca13C18O16O2). Analyses will be performed on
well-preserved brachiopod shells from North America (US and Canada) and Eastern
Europe (Russia) spanning the Late Devonian to Early Mississippian (383 to 348
million years), a time of rapid climate and ocean chemistry change (“calcite” to
“aragonite” seas), and multiple biological crises. Clumped isotope measurements
will be combined with measurements of calcium, carbon, and oxygen isotopes and
comprehensive numerical modeling to examine the interplay between calcium,
carbon, and crustal cycling during this major climatic shift in Earth’s history
and foster better understanding of the consequences of climate change in our
near future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.