* 2241466
* Cartographic and Geographic Information Science (GIScience) Conference and Early-Career Scholar Development
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2023,11/30/2024
* Patrick Kennelly, Long Island University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 11/30/2024
* USD 25,500.00

This award supports early career scholars in developing research and
professional networks in cartography and geographic information science
(GIScience) through participation with the International Cartographic
Association. This project targets the professional development of early career
scholars who are currently completing a graduate degree or are in the first five
years of their academic or professional career. Cartography is advancing quickly
with new research opportunities afforded by the availability of crowdsourced
data. There are also important research challenges related to the general topic
of map design and map quality given the prevalence of cartographic
representation in different forms of media. There is a newfound attention on
geographic routing with the widespread use of mobile devices for real-time
navigation. The International Cartographic Association advances these research
arenas through collaborative opportunities and dissemination of cartographic
research while supporting of the next generation of cartographers and spatial
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Cartographic Association
(ICA) advances research and scholarship at the forefront of cartography, data
science and Geographic Information Science. In particular, the ICA advances
research that addresses the role of cartography in data science and citizen
science; the role of map in mobility research and autonomous driving; research
at the intersection of cartography and cognitive science; and the role that maps
play in preserving the world’s cultural heritage. New research agendas are
developed to scientific advances that tackle key societal challenges;
disseminate new research in cartography and GIScience through workshops,
seminars, and peer-reviewed publications. The ICA also develops valuable
training through pre-conference workshops, mentorship and scholarly exchange.
Opportunities for new collaboration are created for early career scholars
working on cartographic research from the perspective of disparate disciplinary
foundations fostering new transformative and transdisciplinary research in
cartography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.