* 2241777
* Puffins: Exploring how narrative, data science, and artificial intelligence enhance the study of ecology in middle school
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Janice Mokros, TUMBLEHOME, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 12/31/2025
* USD 499,938.00

The study of puffins can provide a fascinating subject area for the integrated
learning of data and ecosystems. Once hunted to local extinction, puffins have
made a dramatic yet fragile comeback and been re-established to historic nesting
islands in mid-coast Maine. This project combines a scientific adventure story
about puffin restoration with student-directed data investigations about the
relationships between puffin health and environmental factors. Students will
examine trends and correlations in several decades of curated National Audubon
Society data about puffins, using an accessible open-source education data tool
to examine relationships among variables including sea surface temperature,
hatch island, fish in the puffin diet, fledgling weight, and survival to
breeding age. They will use present-day data from puffin webcams and sound
recordings to supplement their work with historical datasets. Students will
train an artificial intelligence (AI) system to distinguish among puffin
vocalizations, learn concepts of data biases, and examine how patterns of puffin
calls associate with other aspects of puffin behavior and health. Students also
will install their own webcams at school to generalize their study on the
behavior of local birds and learn how scientists use webcams. Finally, students
will interact with former interns from diverse backgrounds who have worked on
Maine’s puffin islands to learn how data are being used to study ornithology and
climate change. The project will enable Maine’s rural and urban students,
students whose first language is not English, new immigrants, and students who
do not consider themselves science-oriented to experience place and community-
based authentic data and perform their own research on a charismatic species.
This project is funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and
Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings of
practices, program elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing
students' knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT)
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to explore how data
science and AI, combined with the scientific narrative of a nonfiction book
about puffins, enhances middle school students’ learning about an ecological
system. The project addresses three research questions: 1) How do students use
data tools to make sense of large ecological datasets?; 2) How do students
organize and use data gathered from webcams, such as images of puffins engaged
in various behaviors or the sounds puffins make, and how do they use AI to
extend their observations?; and 3) What is the impact of using data tools,
combined with a nonfiction book, on students’ learning about puffin ecology and
ecological systems more generally? The project will use a design-based research
approach in which several middle school teachers co-design a three-week
curriculum module in conjunction with project staff. These teachers will also
provide input to the research plan, which is based on classroom observations as
well as case studies of a small number of students from each of seven
classrooms. The case study research will provide a deeper analysis of students’
understanding of puffin data, and will involve the collection of student work as
well as individual interviews in which students will be asked to explain their
findings. In addition, we will collect survey data from all 500 students who
participate in the project to determine how their overall STEM interest,
engagement, career knowledge, and interest in data science and ecology have been
impacted. Project deliverables include the puffin curriculum module and a
modified version of an Audubon dataset about puffins that will be made freely
available for all educators. We will publish the project’s findings for
researchers, educators, and the general public. Teacher workshops, including one
focused on attracting under-represented students to data science, will be
presented to national audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.