* 2241730
* Solid-liquid Interactions and Interfacial Water Structuring Determine Slip and Drag in Turbulent Boundary Layer Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2026
* Seong Kim, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 02/28/2026
* USD 490,868.00

Fluid friction and drag are ever-present phenomena, and particularly important
issues in transportation systems. Fluid drag is an energy consumption barrier
that must be continuously overcome by carriers transporting people and goods
across the globe; thus, reducing fluid drag translates not only into more
effective and viable transportation systems, but also in more ecofriendly ships.
Increasing fluid slip at solid surfaces in contact with water is a potential
drag-reduction mechanism. Surface engineering can be used to generate slip-
surfaces; however, the fundamental mechanisms of slip in turbulent flows are not
well understood. Therefore, the main objective of this project is to conduct a
fundamental investigation into the mechanisms of hydrodynamic slip using a
combination of sophisticated modeling techniques and experiments. This project
will also create a general-public-oriented podcast where the investigators will
present their findings to the public in a candid and accessible manner. Graduate
and undergraduate students will be involved in the research and outreach
activities of the project, where the promotion of equity and inclusion of
underrepresented populations will be set as a mission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to bridge the knowledge gap between experimental
observations and numerical/theoretical calculations of hydrodynamic slip in
high-shear rate flows. Similarly, through the combination of surface
characterization techniques and numerical simulations at different length
scales, the conceptual mismatch between the microscopic mechanisms of slip and
macroscopic drag calculations will be addressed. To achieve these goals: (i)
molecular dynamics simulations and theory will be used to create physics-
informed models of solid-water interfaces able to calculate hydrodynamic slip
and interfacial water structuring; (ii) sum frequency generation vibrational
spectroscopy and atomic force microscopy will be used to validate not only the
slip calculations, but also to verify the interfacial liquid property relation
to slip calculations; and (iii) direct numerical simulations and wall modeled
large eddy simulations will be used for the first time to model drag using
physics-informed boundary conditions to further contribute to the design of
engineered surfaces with low drag. The research output from this project will
advance the fields of fluid dynamics and surface science, particularly in areas
where drag reduction is paramount for the reduction of energy
consumption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.