* 2241004
* Conference: Symposium Support for the 2022 AIChE Annual Meeting Biomaterials Area:  Broadening Participation in Biomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 12/15/2022,07/31/2023
* Adrianne Rosales, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Abraham Joy
* 07/31/2023
* USD 5,000.00

Non-Technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a symposium at the
2022 American Institute of Chemical Engineers (AIChE) Annual Meeting, entitled
“Biomaterials Area 8B: Broadening Participation in Biomaterials”. The event will
be held November 13-18, 2022, at the Phoenix Convention Center in Phoenix,
Arizona. The AIChE 8B Biomaterials area serves to provide a forum for
researchers from academia and industry to share recent advances on the design,
synthesis, and engineering of materials that interface with live, biological
elements. This research area has applications in tissue engineering, drug
delivery, wound healing, and disease modeling. This area of the AIChE Annual
meeting will host approximately 120 oral and poster presentations, from a
combination of graduate students, post-doctoral scholars, faculty, and industry
scientists. In this context, NSF funds will support the development of a new
research forum to promote excellence in biomaterials research and enhance
participation of undergraduate students from minoritized groups. The symposium
will host an informal meeting at the full conference to develop future
initiatives for broadening participation at all levels. These efforts align with
the IDEAL (Inclusion, Diversity, Equity, Anti-Racism, and Learning) initiative
recently adopted by AIChE. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;This award will support a symposium at the 2022 American
Institute of Chemical Engineers (AIChE) Annual Meeting, entitled “Biomaterials
Area 8B: Broadening Participation in Biomaterials,” to be November 13-18, 2022,
at the Phoenix Convention Center in Phoenix, Arizona. The objectives of the
annual meeting are to: 1) communicate current and emerging progress in
biomaterials design and properties, 2) provide a venue for biomaterials
researchers to connect and exchange ideas from a chemical engineering
perspective, 3) promote opportunities for graduate students and post-doctoral
scholars to share their work and advance their professional goals, and 4)
interface with other chemical engineering-oriented subfields to enhance the
scientific depth of biomaterials research. Research contributions include
biomaterials development for controlling cell behavior, interacting with
microbes, engineering nascent tissues, and controlling release of therapeutics.
Relevant material platforms include hydrogels, particles, macroscopic platforms,
polymers, peptides, and biomimetics. These technical areas will foster advances
in biomaterials research for applications in health that serve diverse
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.