* 2241463
* RAPID: Psychological distance and risk perception related to the 2022 monkeypox outbreak
* SBE,SES
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2023
* Janet Yang, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 10/31/2023
* USD 198,092.00

This project assesses public risk perceptions of the 2022 monkeypox outbreak. By
late summer 2022 there were over 13,000 monkeypox cases in the U.S., and the
White House declared this outbreak a public health emergency on August 4, 2022.
Limiting spread would seem to require a comprehensive, international vaccination
strategy targeting high-risk groups. There is still much unknown, however, about
this outbreak. This research examines unique attributes of the monkeypox
outbreak that shape public risk perceptions. Further, this project examines the
extent to which risk perceptions influence Americans’ intention to engage in
preventive behaviors and support public health response measures. These research
questions warrant attention now because they will provide important insights for
health and risk communication that can potentially shape the progression of this
outbreak.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of the proposed research are: 1)
integrate the psychometric paradigm, secondary risk theory, and construal level
theory to evaluate whether uncertainty is key to secondary risk appraisal; 2)
evaluate the relationship between psychological distance, mental construal, risk
perceptions, discrete emotions, and risk mitigation decisions; 3) identify
unique attributes of the monkeypox outbreak that influence the public’s support
for response measures and intention to engage in preventive behaviors. These
objectives will be achieved through a large-scale survey (N = 1,000) based on a
nationally representative sample. Results can be generalizable to the entire
U.S. population. As media coverage is shaping public risk, and members of the
public are negotiating their internal and external uncertainty related to the
outbreak, it is crucial to conduct this research immediately because it is not
too late for high-risk groups to make decisions about preventive behaviors.
Identifying unique attributes of the monkeypox outbreak that may motivate people
to engage in preventive behaviors will offer crucial insights for risk
communication messaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.