* 2241629
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Social and Reproductive Ramifications for Men Supporting Gender equity Efforts
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2024
* David Lawson, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2024
* USD 25,175.00

Much effort has been made toward attempting to improve our understanding of what
variables inhibit and aid gender equity efforts. Studies of what drives social
change in gender norms have tended to focus primarily on measuring women’s
experiences; little is known about why certain men opt to support equity efforts
more than others. This doctoral dissertation project addresses this gap,
documenting variation in men’s beliefs about gender equity, and the consequences
they face for violating patriarchal norms. This project trains a graduate
student in methods of scientific data collection and analysis. The results of
the project will be shared in scientific publications and with relevant
organizations, highlighting implications for the improved design of culturally
sensitive equity initiatives. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will be
conducted in a rural community undergoing rapid socioeconomic changes associated
with urbanization. The researchers will use focus groups and interviews to first
capture local understandings of what it means for men to support women’s equity
across multiple dimensions (i.e., economic, social, sexual, and reproductive
autonomy), and provide in-depth knowledge of men’s personal experiences
challenging the status quo. From this foundation, survey data will be used to
estimate the consequences of men violating traditional norms for their
relationships with other men (e.g., community respect, capacity for leadership)
and women (e.g., desirability as a partner, control of reproductive decision-
making). The project will also examine how men’s age and education modify their
experiences. Through this in-depth study, the research will provide insights
into the costs and benefits of gender norm violation, evaluating and enhancing
anthropological theory regarding the drivers of cultural change and gender
relations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.