* 2241787
* Collaborative Research: Embodied Interactive Environment for Advancing Data Sensing and Computational Thinking Skills in the Built Environment
* EDU,DRL
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2027
* Yewande Abraham, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Fengfeng Ke
* 02/28/2027
* USD 298,351.00

As the construction industry gears toward adopting data sensing technologies,
there is a demand for creating and sustaining a workforce with skills for
implementing the technologies and analyzing the resulting data to support
decision-making. It is also essential to improve awareness of this Science,
Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) career option among all K-12
students, develop their understanding of the applications of data sensing
technologies and improve their computational thinking skills in manipulating and
using data. This project aims to investigate an immersive virtual reality-based
learning environment for developing middle school students’ computational
thinking skills necessary to address construction challenges and improving
students’ engagement and attitudes towards STEM-related careers in the
construction industry. This project is funded by the Innovative Technology
Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects
that build understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and processes
contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research will
develop a DAta Sensing Learning EnvironmenT (called DASLET) to investigate how
students’ computational thinking can be developed in addressing construction
industry challenges with data sensing technologies and improve their engagement
and attitudes toward STEM-related careers. Within DASLET, students can learn how
to safely work with different data sensing technologies on a virtual
construction site, translate sensor data into computational rules and extract
meaningful information to support decision-making. The research will first
develop a virtual reality-based learning environment that can facilitate
tangible interaction with data sensing technologies to equip middle school
students with skills for addressing construction risks. Next, working closely
with middle school teachers, strategies will be developed for adapting
applications of data sensing technologies in construction and the proposed
learning environment to the middle school curriculum. Using mixed methods and
multilevel modeling, the research team will implement DASLET with approximately
40 teachers and 120 students, and develop theories to explain how embodied
interaction within the learning environment can enhance students’ computational
thinking, improve engagement with data sensing technologies, and interest in
data sensing and STEM-related careers in the built environment. The development
of DASLET will involve industry practitioners and teachers from diverse groups
including females and underrepresented minorities. It will be implemented in the
schools and summer camps that serve students from groups that are
underrepresented in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.