* 2241754
* Exploring extreme vertical currents in the Western Mediterranean Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* James McWilliams, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 06/30/2026
* USD 506,356.00

The goal of this project is to explore motions that connect the surface and the
bottom of the ocean with the interior, the so-called ‘submesoscale currents’,
which influence the variability of biogeochemical properties in the ocean. These
motions span between hundreds and thousands of meters in the horizontal, between
tens and hundreds of meters in the vertical, and they vary over several hours to
days. Aspects investigated in this project are the spatial structure of the
motions, their dynamics, and how their associated vertical velocities connect
the surface and bottom layers with the ocean’s interior. The exploration will be
done combining multiple computer simulations focused in the Alboran Sea, the
westernmost region of the Mediterranean basin. The study will extend the
investigators’ own results that scrutinized submesoscale motions in this region.
Those results illustrated that vertical transports occur near surface fronts
(the boundary between water masses of different properties) and at the bottom
near topographic obstacles. This project intends to expand on the previous
results by scrutinizing the evolution of submesoscale motions. The study is
based on the hypothesis, based on previous results, that the largest vertical
velocities in the study area are associated to surface fronts and to
interactions of the currents with bottom topography. Results from this study
should contribute to better understanding of the vertical transport of materials
in the ocean. The project will provide opportunities for Spanish PhD students to
visit UCLA and acquire experiences in computational fluid dynamics, data
analysis, and scientific communication. It will also involve high-school student
outreach activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to explore
the role of submesoscale currents in promoting vertical currents that connect
the surface and bottom layers with the ocean interior. The study will be based
on numerical simulations of the Alboran Sea, in the western Mediterranean basin.
The work builds on a recent, realistic, high-resolution numerical model study by
the PIs that analyzes submesoscale flows in this region. Those results
illustrate that rapid and deep vertical displacements are associated with
surface fronts and with interactions of the currents with bathymetry. The PIs
will conduct extensive numerical simulations with a series of realistic, nested-
model experiments at increasing time and spatial resolutions, in combination
with idealized process-study simulations and Lagrangian approaches. This
combination of realistic-process strategy will describe the spontaneous
emergence and subsequent evolution of submesoscale currents. The project will
advance understanding of the mechanisms that trigger vertical currents in the
ocean, which have relevant physical and biogeochemical
implications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.