* 2241407
* Recent Changes of Sea Level and Circulation around the Grand Banks: Local Dynamics and Broader Connections
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2026
* Ke Chen, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2026
* USD 795,643.00

This project will examine large anomalous sea surface height (SSH) seen in
satellite altimetry between the U.S. northeast coast and the Gulf Stream, using
analyses of observations, data-model results (reanalysis products), realistic
and idealized model simulations, and a simplified 2-layer process model. For
example, the sea-surface height seen over the Grand Banks was about 7-8 cm
higher in 2008-2018 than in 1993-2007. But still unknown are its causes and
potential effects on the regional water motions, including the continuity of the
Labrador Current and shelf and slope currents. Sea-level changes have broad
impacts on coastal habitats, coastal hazards, and wetland ecological systems.
The identified sea-level anomaly is accompanied by a rapid rising of water
temperature on the shelves, which is known to have adverse impacts on the
fishing industry and aquaculture. The project would: 1) investigate forcing
mechanisms of this large sea level anomaly in the shelf-slope region; 2) examine
how sea-level change on the continental shelf is connected to that in the open
ocean; and 3) investigate whether and how the sea level changes on the
Newfoundland and Scotian shelves may have affected coastal circulations and sea
level off the Northeast US. Project PIs will keep NOAA Northeast Fishery
Sciences Center, the Commercial Fisheries Research Foundation, and the wider
fishing industry communities informed of relevant results, and engage in a range
of outreach and educational activities, including efforts to engage
underrepresented minorities. The proposed work is aligned with US CLIVAR Science
Plan Addendum "Research Challenge on Climate at the Coasts," and is expected to
generate broad interest from both the scientific community and the general
public.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project identifies seven hypotheses covering
the three areas of interest identified above. For the first, concerning forcing
mechanisms: H1A - changes in western boundary currents related to a weakening
AMOC or changing wind-driven gyres in subtropical and subpolar basins contribute
to the observed SSH anomaly; H1B - a change in surface wind-stress curl forces
the observed SSH anomaly; H1C – an increase in the number of warm core rings
contribute to both mass and steric heat fluxes associated with increased WCR
activity contribute to the observed SSH changes. For the second, concerning the
cross-shelf connection of SSH variability: H2A - the cross-shelf transport in
the bottom Ekman layer plays an important role in the cross-shelf SSH
connectivity; H2B - the surface wind-driven Ekman layer plays an important role
as well; H2C - eddy PV flux increased and contributed to enhanced cross-shelf
connectivity in SSH anomaly. For the third, concerning connections between Grand
Banks and Cape Hatteras: H3A - the SSH anomaly on the Newfoundland and Scotian
shelves have impacted the along-shelf flows considerably, likely enhancing the
equatorward flow from Newfoundland to Cape Hatteras. Both modeling and data
analysis will be used to address these hypotheses. The fairly wide range of data
used will include: gridded SSH altimetry, global ocean and atmosphere
reanalyses, observation-based heat fluxes, evaporation and wind stress, and
local multi-year in-situ data from the OOI Pioneer Array and the Oleander line.
Modeling will utilize a new Northwest Atlantic Regional Circulation Model, which
encompasses the entire shelf and slope region of the Labrador Sea and the Middle
Atlantic Bight with a submesoscale-permitting horizontal resolution of 2-km and
40 vertical layers. A two-layer model will be used in parallel with the
realistic regional circulation models for process modelling, to help guide
analyses and interpretations of data analyses and NWA model simulations, as to
help isolate key processes and mechanisms. This model uses realistic bathymetry
and forcing and resolves the barotropic and the 1st baroclinic modes. The study
will lead to a better understanding of how dynamical processes interact in a
rapidly changing climate system, how coastal oceans respond to climate-induced
changes in the open ocean, and inform predictability of the Northeast US shelf
circulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.