* 2241715
* Collaborative Research: Using Flow-Based Music Programming to Engage Children in Computer Science
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2027
* Wanli Xing, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Leilah Lyons
* 05/31/2027
* USD 391,717.00

Achieving the goal of broadening participation in the computer science (CS)
workforce will require that children have access to early opportunities to
engage with CS. However, the reality is that most underrepresented children in
elementary schools do not have access to CS at all. To remediate that lack of
access, this project seeks to create a deeply engaging music-based CS education
program and curriculum, M-Flow, that can be easily adopted by elementary
schools. Computer music provides an excellent opportunity to broaden engagement
in CS, as music is intrinsically connected with student identities, and it
shares so many structural and historical connections with computing. M-Flow is a
flow-based programming platform geared toward children in fifth grade. In flow-
based programming platforms, lines of code are replaced by a graphic flowchart
that uses boxes and arrows to represent process and connections. This project
will explore the conjecture that a flow-based programming platform may be well-
suited for novice coders to rapidly develop applications and for non-specialized
teachers to implement in classrooms. Outputs of the project will include a 10
hour curriculum, teacher professional development, career awareness videos, and
a browser-based programming platform accessible to anyone with internet
access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will engage a team of teacher-leaders
and curriculum experts to co-design learning modules, employing an iterative
Design-Based Research to investigate how the program engages underrepresented
elementary school learners in computing and music learning. The team will also
develop career awareness videos and video tutorials, recruiting young
underrepresented professionals to feature from San Diego Chapter of the Society
for Hispanic Professional Engineers. With a larger population of teachers and
students the project will study how the revised flow based music programming
platform is perceived and used by students and teachers, and where scaffolds are
needed; how flow-based music programming influences teachers' dispositions
towards CS and interest in adoption of CS activities in the classrooms; and how
flow-based music programming influences students learning of CS and interest in
CS careers. Data includes video recordings and observations of classroom use,
pre and post interviews and think-alouds, focus groups, semi-structured
interviews, performance assessments, attitude surveys, and clickstream data. The
intellectual merit of the research lies in its exploration of the utility of a
flow-based programming approach for engaging young novice learners with computer
science. The project has the potential to make large broader impacts via its
web-based distribution model, which would allow teachers to readily adopt the
curriculum, potentially engaging thousands of young learners in Computer Science
activities. This project is funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build
understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and processes
contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers. This project is also funded through the
CS for All: Research and RPPs program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.