* 2241668
* Collaborative Research: NSF OCE-BSF: Coupling organic nutrient cycling to methane production in the oligotrophic North Pacific Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Oscar Sosa, University of  Puget Sound
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 06/30/2026
* USD 410,518.00

Open ocean surface waters are natural sources of methane to the atmosphere. As
recently as a decade ago the source of this methane was a mystery, because
methane production was only known to occur in certain environments without
oxygen. Recently, the discovery of several metabolic pathways that enable
microbes to transform organic matter into methane in the presence of oxygen has
led to a shift away from the idea that methane can only be produced in anaerobic
(oxygen-free) environments. The investigators propose that the pathway microbes
use to make methane depends on the nutrient conditions that prevail in open
ocean surface waters. In the North Atlantic Ocean, phosphorus limits microbial
production, and microbes produce methane as a by-product of getting the
phosphorus they need from organic compounds that contain phosphorus. In
contrast, nitrogen limits microbial production in the North Pacific Ocean. The
team proposes that in the North Pacific Ocean microbes produce methane as a by-
product of organic nitrogen degradation. To test this hypothesis, they propose
to compare the results of geochemical and biological measurements previously
made in the North Atlantic with a parallel set of geochemical measurements they
propose to make in the North Pacific Ocean. The award will support
collaborations between an early career professor at a primarily undergraduate
institution (PUI) and a senior scientist, and between US and Israeli scientists.
Undergraduate students will participate in interdisciplinary research spanning
oceanography, isotope biogeochemistry, and genome science and will conduct
research at sea. The microbiology and genomic research will be integrated into
course-based undergraduate research experiences at the University of Puget Sound
enabling diverse students to participate directly in authentic research. Results
will also be integrated into a graduate level course in marine organic
geochemistry available on-line through the MIT Open Courseware website. This is
a project jointly funded by the National Science Foundation’s Directorate of
Geosciences (NSF-GEO) and the Israel Binational Science Foundation (BSF) in
accord with the language in the Memorandum of Understanding between the NSF and
the BSF. This Agreement allows a single collaborative proposal, involving US and
Israeli investigators, to be submitted and peer-reviewed by NSF. Upon successful
results of the NSF merit review and recommendation by the cognizant NSF Program
of an award, each Agency funds the proportion of the budget and the
investigators associated with its own country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The guiding
hypothesis of this study is that although surface seawater in the North Atlantic
and North Pacific Subtropical Gyres are both sources of methane to the
atmosphere, the underlying microbial processes that produce methane in the two
basins are fundamentally different. Microbial production in the Sargasso Sea is
chronically phosphorus-limited. To mitigate this limitation, some microbes
degrade methylphosphonate that is incorporated into the high molecular weight
fraction of dissolved organic matter (HMWDOM) into methane and phosphaote.
Bacteria expressing the carbon-phosphorus (C-P) lyase enzyme pathway for
phosphonate catabolism dominate the Sargasso Sea microbial community and mediate
this form of methane production making it the principal route through which
excess methane is produced in the Sargasso Sea. In contrast, microbial
production in the North Pacific Subtropical Gyre (NPSG) is chronically nitrogen
limited and the proposal postulates that nitrogen acquisition through the
degradation of methylamines in HMWDOM is a major route through which excess
methane is produced. Methylamines are twenty-fold more abundant than
methylphosphonate in marine HMWDOM and the aminotransferase gene linked to the
conversion of methylamine into methane in freshwater lakes has closely related
sequences in marine bacterial genomes. These sequences are abundant and
widespread in marine metagenomes. Although the cycling of methylphosphonate and
methylamine in oligotrophic surface waters both produce methane, the study
postulates that the two processes will yield methane with distinct and
characteristic carbon isotopic values. To test this hypothesis, the team will
measure the stable carbon isotope value of the methane produced from HMWDOM
methylamine and methylphosphonate. The team will also conduct laboratory
experiments that test the capacity of diverse oligotrophic and copiotrophic
marine bacterial isolates to convert HMWDOM methylamines to methane. This
objective is complemented by a field study in the NPSG northwards from Hawaii
along 158°W, the longitude of Station ALOHA, to 25-28°N to conduct geochemical
and biological measurements associated with each methane production pathway. The
team will obtain water column profiles of methane and ethylene concentration
(two products of C-P lyase), methane carbon isotopes, and concentrations and
carbon isotope values of HMWDOM methylamine and methylphosphonate. The
investigators will quantify the rates of methane production from methylamine and
methylphosphonate using stable carbon isotope tracers, C-P lyase activity, and
the ratio of C-P lyase to aminotransferase gene abundance and expression in the
NPSG. Lastly, the team will compare the bioavailability of HMWDOM methylamine
and methylphosphonate to natural microbial communities in the NPSG using a
metatranscriptomics approach to examine changes in microbial metabolic functions
in response to HMWDOM additions. Together, these data will resolve the relative
contribution of the methylamine and methylphosphonate pathways to aerobic
methane production in the NPSG and the microbial groups and ecosystem properties
underlying methane production. Through this interdisciplinary approach, the
study will enhance our understanding of processes controlling aerobic methane
production in the environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.