* 2241601
* The Oleander Project: High-resolution observations of the dynamic ocean between New Jersey and Bermuda
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2026
* Magdalena Andres, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 02/28/2026
* USD 572,111.00

For nearly three decades, a commercial container vessel, CV Oleander, has served
as a volunteer oceanographic observing ship during weekly round-trip voyages
between Port Elizabeth, NJ and Hamilton, Bermuda. The vessel’s route crosses the
Mid Atlantic Bight (MAB) shelf and slope as well as the Gulf Stream and Sargasso
Sea – a diverse set of regions that bring together subpolar and tropical waters
and critically influence ocean circulation, heat transport, biological
productivity and the marine carbon cycle in the western North Atlantic.
Measurements made from the ship include current velocity from Acoustic Doppler
Current Profilers (ADCP) and temperature from expendable bathythermographs
(XBTs) and thermosalinograph. The most recent vessel replacement, however,
necessitated changes in the installations of the oceanographic instrumentation
and subsequent reduction in data return from the ship-mounted ADCPs. This
project is focused on resolving the instrument performance issues and returning
the Oleander to routine return of oceanographic data. Observations of partial
pressure of carbon-dioxide (pCO2) are also made in-line with the
theromosalinograph and there is a continuous plankton recorder for sampling
plankton.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will bring the newest Oleander’s
scientific sensors online, and to continue and enhance the in situ measurements
made possible by this commercial vessel’s regular service along a single route.
These measurements are essential for studies of ocean circulation, heat
transport, biological productivity and the marine carbon cycle in the western
North Atlantic. Interannual to decadal variability in the Gulf Stream system has
both regional and basin-wide implications. Gulf Stream meandering impacts
exchange processes with surrounding waters. In addition, climate models point to
rapid change in the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC), whose
warm limb is carried within the Gulf Stream, and suggest that AMOC variability
also drives changes observed on the shelf and coast. To understand the
underlying processes and to validate or refute the model-based hypotheses, there
is a need for in situ multidecade records of the Gulf Stream and surrounding
waters. The Oleander Line with its coverage of shelf, slope, Gulf Stream and
Sargasso waters is well-suited to directly measure fluxes associated with the
AMOC and to compare with AMOC estimates from other latitudes to examine
meridional coherence. Increased understanding of the drivers of both the long-
term changes and the event-scale processes on the shelf and slope off the
Northeast US has implications for the phenology and health of the shelf
ecosystems along the highly populated coast with commercially important
fisheries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.