* 2241269
* Ocean Surface Skin Temperature Measurements using an Optimal Spectral Band
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Andrew Jessup, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 03/31/2025
* USD 299,423.00

This project is to develop a novel technique for measuring the ocean skin
temperature from a radiometer. Normally skin temperature measurements from
radiometers have been made from ships and have required in situ two-point
calibration, a separate sky measurement to account for downwelling radiance, and
entail uncertainty in the emissivity. The PI is already developing a radiometer
that utilizes a single point calibration scheme. This project will leverage the
ongoing radiometer development to eliminate the need for a sky measurement and
reduce the effect of emissivity uncertainty. The result will be that practical
and accurate skin temperature measurements can be made from unmanned surface
vehicles and buoys as well as oceanographic research vessels. The availability
of accurate skin temperature observations could lead to improved models for
near-surface stratification and validation of satellite
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project leverages an ongoing NSF project
by the PI to develop the InfraRed In situ Skin Sensing (IRISS) radiometer for
the further development of a technique that eliminates the need for separate sky
measurements in measuring ocean skin temperature and provides a significant
reduction in the effect of emissivity. The technique uses an optimal spectral
band in which the reflected sky radiance is from the atmosphere within a 1-2 km
of the ship. The combined simplification of a single ambient temperature
calibration and no sky measurement will significantly increase the practicality
and accessibility of ocean surface skin temperature measurements. As a result it
will be possible to make practical and accurate skin temperature measurements
from a variety of observation platforms, including USVs, buoys, and ships. The
goal is to facilitate skin temperature measurements with accuracies comparable
to those currently made from oceanographic research
vessels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.