* 2241893
* Collaborative Research: CAS-Climate: Reservoir dead pool in the western United States: probability and consequences of a novel extreme event
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Jordan Kern, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 04/30/2026
* USD 128,930.00

In 2021, 645 MW of power from Oroville Dam (California) were unavailable to the
electric grid for five months due to drought conditions that resulted in “dead
pool”—the condition at which reservoir elevations are too low to produce power.
Projections of dead pool at Glen Canyon Dam (Colorado) in 2022 prompted major
water resources operational changes to avoid this event. Yet there is currently
no answer for the question: In a warming climate, what is the probability that
large quantities of power production capacity in the western U.S. will go
offline due to dead pool? The answer to this question has fundamental
consequences for a decarbonizing grid, as hydropower is a low-emissions,
dispatchable energy source whose operational flexibility facilitates the use of
variable renewable energy, such as wind and solar. This project will evaluate
the probability of synchronous dead pool conditions across multiple reservoirs
in the western U.S. and produce estimates of the power capacity reduction,
duration, and frequency of dead pool events. The project will evaluate the
impacts of such events on reliability failures, electricity costs and air
pollution emissions. The project will investigate how dam operators respond to
dead pool risk, and evaluate the impacts of these adaptations. Policy-relevant
research results will be disseminated through peer-reviewed journal
publications, iterative feedback with dam operators, and ongoing collaboration
with a stakeholder advisory committee to engage water and energy managers and
policy-makers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will specifically
evaluate: (1) the probability of widespread dead pool events in future climates,
(2) the consequences of these events for decarbonizing electric grids, and (3)
the potential for reservoir management modifications to reduce the frequency of
dead pool events. These research products will be coupled with ongoing
collaboration with dam operators and energy-water system stakeholders to co-
produce scientific results and enhance their utilization by water and energy
managers. To achieve these research objectives, the project will apply a
process-based modeling toolchain that incorporates extant downscaled climate
data from the sixth coupled model intercomparison (CMIP6), land surface
hydrology, and river routing and data-driven reservoir management with electric
grid models that simulate capacity expansion and hourly production, along with
qualitative interviews with dam operators to allow simulation of management
adaptations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the Hydrologic
Sciences, Environmental Sustainability, and Human-Environmental &amp;
Geographical Sciences programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.