* 2241940
* The Biomedicalization of Advanced Maternal Age
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Emily Mann, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 06/30/2025
* USD 141,833.00

The number of women giving birth for the first time at age 35 or older has
increased dramatically over the last 50 years. This project investigates a
paradox involving the risks associated with advanced maternal age. Medical
experts regard pregnancies at older ages as high-risk for genetic anomalies,
pregnancy complications, and adverse pregnancy outcomes. Nevertheless, older
first-time mothers are more likely to be socially and economically advantaged,
which can improve outcomes associated with high-risk pregnancies. Using a
combination of interviews and text analysis, this project examines how
biomedical researchers, clinicians, and women interpret and negotiate the risks
associated with advanced maternal age. The project will expand and enhance
scholarly and public understanding of advanced maternal age and its significance
for women who pursue biological motherhood later in their reproductive
lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses multiple qualitative approaches to
examine the production and dissemination of biomedical knowledge about advanced
maternal age and its reception among women who have had first births at age 35
or older. In-depth interviews target samples of clinician experts and mothers.
The research also includes a critical discourse analysis of texts, including
published medical, public health, and social scientific research, clinical
guidance from professional medical associations, and popular advice books and
media coverage of advanced maternal age. The project advances sociological
theorizing about biomedicalization, health, and reproduction, and addresses
pressing medical and social concerns about reproductive
risk.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.