* 2241885
* Collaborative Research: State Health, Institutions, and Politics Survey (SHIPS)
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Matthew Baum, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Brian Crisp
* 05/31/2025
* USD 332,169.00

The State Health, Institutions, and Politics Survey (SHIPS) project will give
the research community access to large-scale state-by-state survey data
collected at multiple points in time. SHIPS will enable scholars, policymakers,
and citizens to explore the evolution of public attitudes about state and
federal policies; trust in institutions, policymakers, and experts; economic,
social, and psychological well-being; perceptions of domestic and international
threats; and a wide variety of other topics. Researchers from heterogenous
geographic locations, institutions, career stages, and demographic groups will
get access to the project’s infrastructure and data. Investigators will be able
to use SHIPS to identify variations in outcomes due to state institutions,
history, and policies, as well as employing cutting-edge social science methods
to identify causes of public beliefs. The scale of the project will allow
researchers to examine public opinion not only across states, but also among
specific subgroups that often evade study (e.g., people with low income or
education). The project will engage students as part of the research team, as
well as offering curriculum development and hands-on training. SHIPS will
generate academic papers, public-facing reports, and make data trends easily
digestible with interactive visualization and online
dashboards.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of The State Health,
Institutions, and Politics Survey is to provide high-quality state-level
longitudinal data on public opinion, allowing researchers to track and document
cross-country trends. The research team has developed and validated an approach
that allows for the regular collection and post-stratification weighting of
large census-balanced samples from every state and Washington, DC. Large-scale
survey waves with up to 25,000 respondents will be fielded at regular time
intervals. The sample size will enable exploring heterogeneous effects and
examining outcomes for small, difficult to study population subgroups. The
project will also be flexible and reactive to sudden events that could prompt
the need for immediate data collection. SHIPS will give scholars access to
survey modules and results via a competitive application process. Half or more
of the survey content fielded in each wave funded by this grant will be designed
by applicants whose peer-reviewed proposals have been accepted. Successful
applicants will have exclusive access to the collected data for one year, at
which point it will be made public. The project thus aims to democratize access
to high-quality, original multi-wave survey data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.