* 2241382
* Community Network Practices to Cultivate Resilient STEM Educators
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Scott Zinzer, Aurora University
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Soto
* 04/30/2028
* USD 889,860.00

The project aims to serve the national need to prepare high-quality secondary
STEM teachers to fill major shortages. Recognizing that students often have
multiple, overlapping identities that impact interest in and preparation for
STEM education careers, the project will recruit, prepare, and support high-
achieving secondary STEM education students from area institutions with diverse
student populations and neurodiverse students in a College Pathways program,
providing scholarships to increase interest in and access to STEM teaching
careers. The project will use culturally relevant practices and academic
supports to increase the graduation of secondary STEM teachers, including
Hispanic and neurodiverse teachers, to serve in high-need districts. Innovative
hackathons will involve students in “hacking” solutions to issues faced by early
career teachers, building collaborative and problem-solving skills as well as a
STEM educator community. Conference attendance and summer STEM experiences will
also enrich student development. The project will continue to support graduates
as they gain experience in the classroom and help to build and maintain a
community network of STEM teachers. The project has the potential to increase
and diversify students pursuing and succeeding in STEM teacher certification,
particularly students from culturally and linguistically diverse backgrounds and
those who are neurodiverse.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Aurora University project
includes partnerships with two high-need school districts, West Aurora and East
Aurora, and Elgin Community College, a two-year Hispanic serving institution.
The project will recruit 24 undergraduates in biology, chemistry, and math
majors over five years, using culturally relevant lesson plans and academic
supports to build success in early STEM courses and broaden the capacity of all
students to increase secondary STEM licensure. The project uses a theoretical
framework of intersectionality to help identify and support student needs, and
to teach prospective teachers to do so in their future classrooms. Project goals
include 1) increasing enrollment, retention, and graduation in STEM secondary
education, 2) increasing awareness of STEM secondary education careers; 3)
Decreasing drop/ fail/ withdrawal rates among STEM majors using STEM content
supports, tutoring, and faculty interventions; and 4) Monitoring and mentoring
new STEM teachers using an online resource hub, mentoring, and hackathons. The
project team will generate knowledge on the impact of intersectionality among
STEM teaching students and of encouragement, supports, and intersectionality on
neurodivergent students pursuing STEM teaching. The project evaluator will
review activities and collect and synthesize data to evaluate success meeting
goals and objectives and conduct interviews and surveys to determine the
effectiveness of participants as teachers in high-needs schools and Hispanic
populations. Dissemination of results through the project website, academic
journals and conferences will allow broader impact through adaptation and
replication at other institutions. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends
project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program
(Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and
professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary
K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It
also supports research on the effectiveness and retention of K-12 STEM teachers
in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.