* 2241846
* The Unequal Toll of COVID-19 Deaths in Prisons
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Naomi Sugie, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 04/30/2025
* USD 509,968.00

This project takes an in-depth look at mortality in U.S. prisons during the
COVID-19 pandemic. COVID-19 has taken a devastating toll on prison populations
across the United States. Incarcerated people have experienced a risk of
infection five times higher and risk of death three times higher than people in
the general population. Recent national data collection projects lack both
demographic information on deaths and facility-level details about the
characteristics of places where deaths have been concentrated. Such data
collection gaps around prisons leave open questions about both the unequal
repercussions of COVID-19 and the mechanisms by which people in some
institutions fared better than others. Findings from this project provide the
first systematic accounting of the total mortality toll in prisons across the
United States—a necessary foundation for future planning for resiliency
efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three research questions are investigated. First,
did the risk of facility-level death in prison—from COVID-19, other natural
causes, and unnatural causes—during the pandemic (2020-2022) differ
significantly from the facility-level risk of death in prisons in prior years
(2013-2019)? Second, how are demographic characteristics associated with deaths
in prisons, and did these associations differ during the pandemic from prior
years? Third, how are state- and facility-level characteristics (including
COVID-19 mitigation responses and carceral deprivation) associated with deaths
during the pandemic? These questions are addressed by collecting (via state-by-
state public records requests) and analyzing monthly facility-level data on all
deaths among people in custody of each state Department of Corrections and the
Federal Bureau of Prisons between 2013 and 2022. These data are supplemented and
verified with 2013 data available through ICPSR, 2014-2019 count data available
through the Bureau of Justice Statistics, and 2020-2022 data available through
the National Death Index (NDI), vital statistics, and medical examiners’
offices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.