* 2241350
* Making Mentors: Enhancing Access to STEM Careers for Autistic Youth through Mentorship Programs in Makerspaces
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Wendy Martin, Education Development Center
* Standard Grant
* Amy Wilson-Lopez
* 08/31/2026
* USD 1,299,525.00

Autistic youth and young adults often possess numerous skills that have the
potential to substantially contribute to the STEM workforce of the future.
However, autistic people remain underrepresented in STEM careers due in part to
a lack of transitional supports between high school and college. This project
will address this critical gap by providing these transitional supports through
a comprehensive, person-centered, near-peer mentorship program in the context of
maker clubs attended by over 135 autistic youth and undergraduates. In this
program, autistic college students who major in STEM fields will act as near-
peer mentors to autistic high school students as they engage in self-directed
projects in maker clubs. In partnership with college and high school counselors,
the mentors will connect the STEM interests of the high school students with
relevant STEM careers and career pathways, while sharing practical advice about
resources, networks, and practices that foster self-advocacy and self-
determination in post-secondary STEM education and employment. Research will
explore whether and how the transition program fosters increased STEM
identities, self-advocacy skills, and greater quality of life among the high
school students and their mentors. The resulting field-tested and empirically-
based transition program will be disseminated widely to makerspaces and other
settings, ultimately providing increased access to STEM careers for autistic
youth. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Autistic high school students and autistic
undergraduate STEM majors will co-design a STEM mentorship program, embedded
within maker clubs, which will support the transition between high school and
college. Diverse mentors and youth will be paired based on attributes that they
identify as important to their mentorship experience, including but not limited
to race, ethnicity, gender, language, autistic traits, and STEM interests.
Participatory, mixed-methods research will investigate whether the co-designed
mentorship program is associated with greater quality of life, self-
determination, self-efficacy, self-advocacy, and STEM identity among the high
school students and undergraduates. Additionally, this research will examine how
and why specific aspects of the mentorship experience have an impact on the
effectiveness of the program. To achieve these research purposes, statistical
analyses will be conducted on pre- and post-surveys, including the Autism
Specific Quality of Life Survey and a STEM Self-Efficacy and Career Interest
Survey that has been adapted for and validated with autistic youth. The findings
from these data will be triangulated with qualitative analyses of pre- and post-
interviews with the mentors and youth. The resulting research will advance
knowledge of how strengths-based, participatory approaches can support autistic
youth in pursuing STEM career pathways. This research will be disseminated
widely through conferences and journals for autism researchers and educators, in
addition to STEM education researchers and educators. The co-designed,
mentorship-based transition program will be shared through a digital Making
Mentors Toolkit. Because this toolkit is based in the experiences and expertise
of autistic youth and undergraduates, it is likely to support the accurate and
authentic translation of research into practice for autistic people. This
project is funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and
Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings of
practices, program elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing
students' knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT)
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.