* 2241380
* NeuroVivid: Developing and Testing a Maker Experience to Build Interest in Careers in Brain-Computer Interfaces Among Neurodivergent Youth
* EDU,DRL
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Jodi Asbell-Clarke, TERC Inc
* Standard Grant
* Amy Wilson-Lopez
* 03/31/2026
* USD 1,297,760.00

Neurodivergent youth, including those with autism and attention deficit
hyperactivity disorder, possess cognitive assets that underlie core mechanisms
for STEM innovation. However, neurodivergent youth often do not have access to
learning environments in which they can reflect on their cognitive strengths and
identify them as offering critical skills and valuable contributions to the
future STEM workforce and to society. To increase access to this type of
learning environment, this project will develop and test a suite of materials
for makerspaces, including curricula and facilitator guides, called NeuroVivid.
NeuroVivid will provide neurodiverse youth with opportunities to build simple
electroencephalogram (EEG) headsets using low-cost and widely available
materials; to view and interpret data related to their brain activity; and to
interact with these data in playful ways. As examples, youth can use sensor data
to play music, control robots, or operate simple machines. Within this context,
neurodivergent youth will learn about neuroscience with a focus on
neuroplasticity and cognitive assets. NeuroVivid will be iteratively co-
developed and tested with makerspace facilitators and with approximately 85
racially, ethnically, and socioeconomically diverse and neurodivergent youth
(age 10 to 14). Research will explore which design elements are essential for
brain-computer interface (BCI) learning materials that enhance neurodivergent
youths’ interest in STEM, with a particular focus on their interest in BCI
careers. This empirical research, as well as the NeuroVivid materials, will be
disseminated widely through makerspace networks as well as through educational
research venues. This project is funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences
for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build
understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and processes
contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
result in a suite of maker curricula and materials, titled NeuroVivid, intended
to counter deficit models of cognitive differences through highlighting the
cognitive assets of neurodivergent youth. Youth will be selected to co-develop
and use these materials, as they work collaboratively with the project team and
with makerspace facilitators, if they score in the bottom quartile on an
amalgamation of the following four tasks related to executive functioning:
n-back task (associated with working memory); flanker task (associated with
visual attention); go/no-go task (associated with inhibition control); and a
card sort task (associated with cognitive flexibility). The research team will
use mixed methods research to identify the design elements that are essential to
BCI learning materials that build interest in STEM among neurodivergent
learners. This research will also explore how intersections of race/ethnicity,
gender, and neurodivergence affect the development of interests and identities
in STEM in the context of this curriculum. To achieve these research purposes, a
neurodiverse project team will generate data sources such as transcripts from
interviews and focus groups from racially and ethnically diverse youth who
participate in NeuroVivid. Pre- and post-surveys that measure STEM interests and
identities will also provide indicators as to NeuroVivid’s effectiveness among
neurodivergent youth. NeuroVivid will be disseminated widely through digital
platforms and conferences used or attended by makerspace personnel. Ultimately,
this project will advance practice in makerspaces through generating knowledge
about how these spaces can more explicitly affirm a broader range of cognitive
strengths, while increasing neurodivergent youths’ interest in STEM careers of
the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.