* 2241575
* Partitioning-Based Learning Methods for Treatment Effect Estimation and Inference
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Rocio Titiunik, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2026
* USD 453,195.00

As large data-driven technologies continue to be used in high-stakes decision-
making, the need for fast, easily interpretable algorithms for large data
analyses has become more important. A common approach in large data analyses is
to use what is commonly called adaptive partitioning in which the large data set
is partitioned and recursively used in the analyses. However, the rationale
behind these partitioning methods is not well understood as the broad adoption
of machine learning methods in applications has not always been supported by
development of theoretical and methodological tools to understand their
properties. This research project will study the rationale behind algorithms
used in machine learning and other methods for large data analyses. The research
will then develop new and improved methods for machine learning and other large
data analyses and apply these methods to several economic problems. The results
of this research will not only significantly improve machine learning and other
large data analyses, but it will also improve decision-making generally,
increase economic growth, and help establish the US as a global leader in large
data analyses and machine learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A technical challenge
in formally studying adaptive partitioning and other flexible learning methods
is that the randomness introduced by the often-recursive partition scheme is
difficult to account for. This research will provide an array of theoretical and
methodological results for adaptive partition-based and other flexible learning
methods, providing both positive and negative results. The research will develop
new treatment effect estimation and inference methods, and guide practice in
program evaluation and causal inference. One of the main results shows that many
popular recursive partitioning methods for heterogeneous treatment effect
estimation can be pointwise (uniformly) inconsistent over the support of the
conditioning variables. Other results show that adaptive oblique decision trees
can have accuracy on par with neural networks. The research also studies non-
linear partitioning-based methods with applications to quantile regression and
treatment effects. Spin-off projects on causal inference and program evaluation
will also be undertaken as part of this research. The results of this research
will improve the analyses of large scale data, such as those used to make
decisions and thus improve program evaluation. Besides improving economic
decision making and economic growth, the results will also establish the US as a
global leader in program evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.