* 2241180
* Paired Radical States in Molecular Wires: 1D Topological Insulators and Beyond
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Latha Venkataraman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Yaroslav Koshka
* 08/31/2026
* USD 450,000.00

Nontechnical description:&lt;br/&gt;Significant efforts have been invested to
develop molecules that can transport charge efficiently at nanometer scale,
driven by their important for electronic application, photovoltaics and
artificial photosynthesis. However, most molecules that act as conducting wires
show an exponential decrease in conductance as their lengths increase, thus
limiting their potential applications. The objective of this research project is
to develop molecule-based electronic circuits that can conduct charge over long
distances using molecular wires with un-paired electrons (radicals). This
research will therefore address the challenge of developing long and highly
conductive all-organic molecular wires. Further, this project will provide new
design strategies to stabilize radicals within molecules; these strategies are
likely to have impact in the emerging area of molecular qubits and quantum
computing. Beyond advancing applications in nanoscale electronics, this project
seeks to excite K-12 children and undergraduate students and attract them in
STEM fields, particularly those who are underrepresented minority students and
women, which will be pursued through mentoring, providing undergraduate research
experiences in a multidisciplinary environment, and influencing the graduate
admissions through service programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description:&lt;br/&gt;Molecular wires that conduct following a coherent and
off-resonant mechanism exhibit an exponential decrease in conductance with
increasing length, making them impractical for applications where highly
conductive long wires are required. One way to overcome this limitation is to
design and construct one-dimensional topological insulator wires with a pair of
radical states. These wires conduct through their radical-based unique boundary
(or edge) states, while their interior remains insulating. Such wires could
result in a conductance that increases with wire length. This project aims to
design, create, measure, and understand electronic transport in these molecular
wires by combining theory and experiment. The three specific objectives of the
project are: (1) To probe transport in wires with a single radical pair and
understand how the electronic coupling between these states and the source and
drain electrodes control transport; (2) To create wires with multiple radical
pairs and investigate how conductance changes with length; and (3) To design
cyclic wires with multiple radical pairs to explore the effects of quantum
interference and spin on transport. The educational and outreach efforts of this
project also have three broad objectives: (1) To provide undergraduate research
opportunities in a multidisciplinary environment; (2) To integrate research into
the Applied Physics undergraduate education and (3) To engage K-12 students in
laboratory activities and introduce them to
nanoscience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.