* 2241831
* Collaborative Research: THE BENTHIC MICROALGAL SUBSIDY  IN ESTUARINE ECOSYSTEMS
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Craig Plante, College of Charleston
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 06/30/2026
* USD 159,210.00

Estuaries are nurseries that are critical habitat for many commercially and
recreationally important species. The base of the food web in these systems is
supplied by microalgal primary production in both the water column
(phytoplankton) and the sediments (benthic microalgae). This project focuses on
quantifying the contribution of benthic microalgae to total ecosystem primary
production in the North Inlet Estuary, SC. Benthic microalgal production
estimates along an elevational gradient (low to high tide region) are then used
to assess responses to the impending sea level rise. The results have
implications for wetlands valuation, carbon credits, trophodynamics, and carbon
storage in estuarine ecosystems. This research is transformative in that it
provides the first ever comprehensive measures of intertidal, ecosystem-level
benthic microalgal contributions to total net primary production to evaluate the
ecological importance of BMA for estuarine ecosystem processes and functions.
The research results will likely restructure our understanding and current
paradigms of energy flow and cycling processes in estuaries. In addition to the
research activities, the project involves the mentorship of graduate students
and undergraduates, with efforts to recruit students from historically
underrepresented groups; incorporation of findings into educational materials
for teachers and K-12 students; and a community science program in collaboration
with the National Estuarine Research Reserve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our current
understanding of ecosystem net primary production in southeastern estuaries is
missing a fundamental component that may, in fact, provide as much as a third of
the fixed C fueling the high biomass of upper trophic levels. The concept of a
major benthic microalgal-based subsidy contradicts the traditional views that
phytoplankton and detritus-based food webs are the only energy sources for most
southeastern estuaries. This project quantitatively determines the relative BMA
contribution by characterizing the spatiotemporal variability in BMA NPP to
estimate the annual ecosystem-level contribution to total system NPP. The
primary objective is the measurement of estuarine intertidal BMA NPP, biomass,
community composition, and relevant environmental variables (nutrients, grain
size, porosity, etc.) along fixed transects that span the intertidal elevational
gradient from mean low water to mean high water and incorporate these results in
a GIS DEM to calculate ecosystem-level BMA NPP. Furthermore, the GIS model
predicts shifts in the magnitude and spatial distribution of BMA NPP resulting
from various sea-level rise scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.