* 2241238
* Conference: WORKSHOP ON SCIENTIFIC OPPORTUNITIES AND INSTRUMENTATION NEEDS FOR NEXT GENERATION MATERIALS GENOMICS BASED MATERIALS RESEARCH IN MATERIALS WITH LONG RANGE ORDER
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Simon  J. L. Billinge, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Guebre Tessema
* 08/31/2023
* USD 49,153.00

This award supports a proposed workshop to bring together visionaries from
Materials Science synthesis and characterization fields to explore scientific
opportunities offered by the emergence of the 5th paradigm of science: AI and
data enabled discovery with automation and autonomation of experiments. The
context is materials discovery within the framework of the current Materials
Genome Initiative strategic plan, to identify the technological, economic, and
sociological challenges that will have to be overcome, and propose a path
forward that will allow the US to excel and lead in this emerging area. Products
of the workshop will be archives of the workshop materials, a consensus report,
and a public facing journal article that summarizes the motivation and findings
coming from the meeting. The focus of this meeting will be limited to materials
described as having long-range order, but more specifically materials
exemplified by bulk crystals, epitaxial films, 2-dimensional materials, Quantum
Materials, and Van der Waals materials, but not soft materials or structural
materials that will be covered in two other related workshops.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will explore concrete steps needed to enable
the development of 5th generation scientific research in materials discovery in
the US community. The intellectual merit of the activity is to identify early
scientific opportunities and map out what investments, organizations,
bureaucracies, education, and training, that need to be put into place for the
US materials community to take advantage of these emerging opportunities. It
will result in reports and journal articles that lay out the current
understanding of the community on opportunities and needs and a vision for how
this could move forward with an emphasis on short-term actionable items.
Accelerating the discovery and adoption of new materials provides potentially
transformative benefits to all people. A broader impact of this proposed
activity is to build foundations for greatly accelerated materials discovery
capabilities. 5th-Generation scientific research is an inherently multi-
investigator, multi-expertise, multi-discipline convergent research activity.
The workshop will also be to identify how to develop, train, and retain a
diverse future workforce for operating in this teaming
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.