* 2241490
* The Causes and Consequences of Global Police Militarization
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Erica De Bruin, Hamilton College
* Standard Grant
* James I. Walsh
* 05/31/2026
* USD 192,757.00

The Causes and Consequences of Global Police
Militarization&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent decades, police forces
around the world have become more militarized adopting the weaponry,
organizational structures, and accountability more typical of military forces.
This project examines how militarized policing spread internationally, why it
spread in the way that it did, and what the security consequences have been. The
project will include an examination of the impact of police militarization on
the attitudes of police officers towards civilian oversight and their
willingness to engage in political action. The project will also produce a new
global dataset of police militarization, which will be useful for scholars
studying policing and crime, repression, counterinsurgency, and civil-military
relations. The findings of the project will have important implications for the
use of security sector assistance in foreign aid policies as well as efforts to
undertake police reform. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this
project are to: (1) document patterns in police militarization across countries
and within them over time through the creation of a new, cross-national time-
series dataset on global police militarization, which includes 170 countries,
1946-2022; and (2) develop and test innovative arguments that advance scientific
knowledge about the causes and consequences of global police militarization. The
project will test new and innovative arguments with mixed methods, including
statistical analyses of the global police militarization dataset, archival
research on international police assistance programs during the Cold War, and a
survey of police officials with an experimental component. The findings of the
project will advance basic research on questions regarding the development and
performance of police forces in comparative perspective, police attitudes toward
civilian authorities and reform efforts, and security sector assistance as an
instrument of foreign policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.