* 2241654
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Does language affect cultural identity among minority populations?
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Thomas Hansen, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 02/29/2024
* USD 16,786.00

Globalization has contributed to both blurring and retrenchment of ethnic
boundaries. On the one hand, acculturation can lead to one population absorbing
another; on the other, populations may cleave to specific identity markers as
ways of distinguishing themselves from others. How different markers operate to
impact these processes remains poorly understood. This doctoral dissertation
project investigates how minority populations sharing cultural, linguistic, and
religious identities leverage different markers to claim a coherent group
identity. The project trains a graduate student in scientific cultural
anthropology and disseminates its findings broadly to academic and non-academic
audiences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project seeks to investigate how minority
and majority populations interact and shape each otherâ€™s identities, cultural
markers, and claims of political belonging. Using participant observation,
surveys, interviews, and archival research, the investigators query the
following: 1) how literary, religious, and ethnic associations understand and
interpret linguistic and ethnic identities; and if and in what ways language and
other ethnic markers are used by majority and minority populations to interpret
political belonging. In doing so, the researchers help to resolve fundamental
questions regarding interrelationships among populations and the markers they
use to mediate those relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.