* 2241630
* City Size and Public Service Delivery in Comparative Perspective
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2026
* Alison Post, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Brian Crisp
* 01/31/2026
* USD 350,000.00

According to U.N. projections, most global population growth during next two
decades will occur in small- and medium-sized urban centers. Meanwhile, many
countries have recently decentralized the provision of many basic services to
municipal governments. This means that understanding municipal politics is
critical if populations are to have access to basic health, education, and
infrastructure services. Such services enable participation in labor markets and
facilitate economic development, and thereby contribute to political and social
stability. This project will document the extent to which service access and
quality vary across cities of different sizes in four large, highly
decentralized democracies in three world regions. It will inform policymaking by
shedding light on the political factors driving differences in the quality and
reach of vital local services across cities of different sizes. In particular,
project findings will position policymakers to more effectively target lending
and grants intended to improve local service delivery in low- and middle-income
countries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes and tests a new
theoretical explanation of variation in policy priorities and service delivery
outcomes across cities of different sizes. It theorizes that officials in
smaller cities will prioritize investments in basic health and education
facilities, whereas officials in larger cities will devote attention to a
broader set of policy areas, and prioritize more specialized health and
education services over clinics and schools. These differences stem from the
greater prevalence non-state health and education providers in larger cities,
greater voter concerns regarding urban problems (i.e., congestion, crime) in
larger cities, and politiciansâ€™ greater ability to claim and attribute credit
for basic health and education facilities in smaller cities. Research will test
this theory using a variety of types of data, including: compiled administrative
and political data from each of the case study countries; geospatial data on the
location of public facilities; social media posts and livestreamed city council
meetings; surveys with citizens and politicians; and qualitative research in
case study cities of different sizes. Datasets created through the project will
be published with online repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.