* 2241706
* Collaborative Research: Integrating Students’ Interests, Identities and Ways of Knowing with Network Visualization Tools to Explore Data Literacy Concepts
* EDU,DRL
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Daniel Parker, Digital Promise Global
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Noll
* 04/30/2026
* USD 397,980.00

This project is responding to the growing recognition that youth can benefit
from a wide range of data literacy skills. Network visualization is a
particularly powerful and relevant approach for learners to understand. In a
network visualization, people, places, and things are the nodes in a network,
displayed as circles. These nodes are connected by lines that represent
interactions. Learners can view relationships between nodes and lines in a
network using either a dynamic visualization or they can view network data as a
table. The two different representations together can help learners explore data
in many contexts. This exploration is particularly relevant for data about
relationships built on popular social media platforms. Therefore, network
visualizations present a unique opportunity to explore data and data literacy in
rich social contexts that are of interest for, and relevance to, youth learners.
As they explore a range of locally relevant contexts across disciplines,
learners will be engaged with core data literacy principles. To accomplish this,
the project team will design, implement, and study an instructional unit about
network visualization using the open-source Net.Create software tool that this
team previously created to support intuitive, collaborative network
visualization. As part of a co-design process with teachers, the team will
create a curriculum unit that encourages 7th and 8th grade students to engage in
core network visualization and key data literacy practices that meet
disciplinary standards. The curriculum will integrate students’ interests and
cultural identities, and those of their communities. For example, network
visualizations that may be explored include hobbies and activities they are
engaged in as well as aspects of their culture or identity. To help students
appreciate network visualization in a robust manner, they will have
opportunities to develop, critique, and revise the visualizations they
build.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will take a synergistic approach in
which middle school students use network visualization to learn about themselves
and their communities. As the same time, students will also be learning about
the underlying network science and data literacy principles that make their
exploration possible, and which are central to their experiences with many
common technologies. The project addresses three research questions over this
three-year study: 1) How can students learn network and data literacy concepts
through the creation of network visualizations with their peers? 2) How does
exploring their collective identity, through topics of interest to students both
individually and as a whole, using network visualization help motivate them to
explore data literacy and integrate technology more deeply into their lives and
careers? 3) What challenges and opportunities do teachers see in using network
visualizations to support teaching data literacy concepts? The project team will
engage in iterative co-design with a partner school district to adapt the draft
curriculum to be locally relevant and meaningful. The project will also extend
the Net.Create tool to support more robust exploration of the data literacy
concepts such as data provenance. Data analysis will include pre / post measures
of data literacy concepts and criticality, analysis of networks created by
learners and computer logs, application of an engagement rubric that measures
quality of student engagement with different activities, and interaction
analysis of classroom activities to help articulate how learners used the tools
to develop understanding of target concepts. The project team will work closely
with two teachers in year 1, three teachers in year 2, and five teachers in year
3, while also scaling up the implementation to see how up to 20 additional
teachers are subsequently able to implement the curriculum. This project is
funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers
(ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings of practices,
program elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing students'
knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT)
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.