* 2241671
* Collaborative Research: Integrating Language-Based AI Across the High School Curriculum to Create Diverse Pathways to AI-Rich Careers
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Christy Byrd, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 05/31/2026
* USD 385,921.00

Artificial Intelligence (AI) is transforming numerous industries and generating
enormous wealth. K-12 is the critical stage for youth to develop knowledge of
and interest in AI. This project will leverage the interdisciplinarity of AI to
create learning opportunities for secondary students from diverse backgrounds.
Focusing on natural language-based AI, this project will develop and research a
novel AI Across the Curriculum program that integrates AI concepts and practices
into the existing high school curriculum. The project team will develop and test
a two-hour introductory module and three five-hour modules for mathematics,
English language arts (ELA), and history, as well as a 60-hour professional
development program for teachers to develop the competencies required to
implement the modules. Teachers in math, ELA, and history will implement the
modules in a coordinated fashion to offer learning experiences that are coherent
across the different disciplines to their students. During the project, 12
teachers and 900 students will directly benefit from participation in the
program. The output of the project will advance national prosperity through AI
workforce development by enabling high schools to provide high-quality AI
education to all students, especially African Americans, Latinx, and females,
who are the underrepresented and underserved groups in the field of AI. The
project will be led by an interdisciplinary team of AI developers and educators,
STEM and humanities educators, learning scientists and designers, and experts on
diversity, equity, and inclusion at the Concord Consortium, Carnegie Mellon
University, and North Carolina State University. The team will partner with the
San Joaquin County Office of Education in California and the Maryland Center for
Computing Education and work closely with two school districts, one in CA and
one in MD, that serve student populations underrepresented and underserved in
the field of AI. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers will address three research
questions: 1) How do students’ social and disciplinary identities shape their
participation in learning of AI knowledge and AI-rich careers? Guided by the
intersectional identity theory, the project will capture eight focal students’
learning processes with repeated interviews, video, audio, and screencast
recordings, and computer logs. These data will be analyzed using the personal
narratives framework and ethnomethodological and conversation-analytic
approaches. 2) What and how are new ideas generated by teachers as they seek to
coordinate their efforts to integrate AI across the curriculum? Based on the
community of practice theory, the project will capture teachers’ idea generation
and transaction processes with Professional Development (PD) recordings, online
communications, and interviews. These data will be analyzed using the idea
authorship framework. 3) To what extent, for whom, and under what conditions
does the AI Across the Curriculum program support students to develop knowledge
of and interest in AI-rich careers? The demographic and academic backgrounds of
900 students and 12 teachers will be collected via surveys to determine the
impact of this approach. An AI &amp; Machine Learning Core Concepts
Questionnaire and an AI-Rich Careers Questionnaire will be administered before
and after the curriculum. These data will be analyzed quantitatively to
determine to what extent, for whom, and under what conditions the modules are
beneficial. Through research publications and professional learning resources,
the project will increase the capacity of educators and researchers to advance
AI education. All technologies, curriculum modules, assessments, and PD
materials will be freely available to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.