* 2241538
* Collaborative Research:  El Nino/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) Predictability--Initial Condition Signal versus Uncoupled Atmospheric Noise
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2027
* Benjamin Kirtman, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 05/31/2027
* USD 708,450.00

The equatorial Pacific has an outsized influence on weather and climate as it is
home to the El Nino/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) phenomenon, featuring an
alternation between warm equatorial sea surface temperatures (SSTs) during El
Nino events and cold SSTs during La Nina events. These SST changes affect the
global atmospheric circulation and thus induce long-range impacts including
changes in the severity of winters in Canada, the distribution of rainfall in
the Asian monsoon, and Atlantic hurricane activity. These worldwide impacts have
motivated intensive efforts to develop ENSO prediction systems, which show some
promise but so far have had mixed results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Here the PIs
hypothesize that the mixed success of ENSO predictions is intrinsic to ENSO,
meaning that some ENSO events are in fact more predictable than others. In that
case a "forecast of the forecast skill", meaning a method to determine in
advance the likely accuracy of an ENSO prediction, would have great practical
value. The Principal Investigators (PIs) are particularly concerned with the
skill of ENSO predictions made before the onset of the event, which are skillful
to the extent that ENSO events develop from some form of preconditioning such as
the buildup of heat in the subsurface equatorial ocean. Model simulations
conducted previously by the PIs suggest that preconditioning is not a necessary
condition for ENSO events, which can initiate rapidly starting from neutral
conditions. Such events, arising purely from the chaotic growth of very small
initial perturbations of the atmosphere-ocean system, would be inherently
unpredictable. But the PIs argue that some forms of preconditioning can render
the system less susceptible to noise-level perturbations and instead drive the
evolution of an El Nino or La Nina event in a deterministic manner, allowing
skillful predictions several months ahead of the onset.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PIs test their hypothesis through numerical simulations performed with the
Community Earth System Model (CESM). The work takes advantage of procedures they
have developed for strictly controlling the state of the equatorial Pacific in
CESM simulations, so that various forms of preconditioning can be imposed or
excluded. Additional work uses the PI's Interactive Ensemble (IE) technique (see
for example AGS-1558837) to consider the role of random weather fluctuations
unrelated to ENSO in limiting the predictability of ENSO
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work is of societal as well as scientific
interest given the global impacts of ENSO events, and results of this research
have direct bearing on attempts to improve ENSO forecasts. The software
developed for the project is made available to the research community, along
with relevant datasets, to facilitate adoption of methods and results by the
research and operational communities. In addition, the PIs participate in summer
internship programs targeting high school and college students through Miami-
Dade College and the American Indian Higher Education
Consortium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.