* 2241713
* CRII: SaTC: Towards Understanding the Robustness of Graph Neural Networks against Graph Perturbations
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Binghui Wang, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 05/31/2025
* USD 175,000.00

Learning with graphs, such as social networks, biological networks, and
financial networks, has drawn continuous attention recently, wherein graph
neural networks (GNNs) have been emerging as the most prominent methodology.
However, recent studies show that GNNs are vulnerable to graph perturbation
attacks: slightly perturbing the graph structure can make GNN model's
performance severely degraded. The lack of robustness of GNNs makes them risky
for their potential applications. However, existing studies on GNN attacks and
defenses are very limited in scope: the attacks are assumed under less practical
scenarios (i.e., the attacker has a full or partial knowledge about the GNN
model), while the defenses are either heuristic-based that can be easily broken
or their robustness in defense is lacking. This project aims to understand how
to perform the graph perturbation attack to fool any GNNs with least/no
knowledge about the GNN model. Accordingly, the project designs both restricted
and stringent black-box graph perturbation attacks to any GNNs, which are
inspired by the influence function and bandit algorithms, respectively. Next,
the project aims to understand how to protect any GNNs from the strongest white-
box attack with robustness guarantees. To this end, it designs provable defenses
for any GNNs against white-box graph perturbation attacks via novel randomized
smoothing techniques and designs principled methods to optimize the defense
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project’s novelties are to gain a holistic
understanding on the robustness of GNNs against graph perturbation attacks, to
look into more practicable attacks and lastly to devise a more provable
defenses. The project’s broader significance and impact are 1)advancing not only
the field of secure and trustworthy machine learning, but also other fields
(e.g., social science and economy) where graph data model and graph learning are
widely used; 2) developing a new seminar course “Graph Learning in the
Adversarial Settings”, and 3)supporting cross-disciplinary research for both
undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.