* 2241835
* Collaborative Research: Interpersonal Pathways to Radicalization &amp; Deradicalization
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Erin Rossiter, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* James I. Walsh
* 04/30/2025
* USD 57,389.00

Collaborative Research: Interpersonal Pathways to Radicalization and
Deradicalization&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Political extremism around the world has
increased in recent years, representing a global security issue. Despite the
growing threat of extremism, there is still much we do not know about how
radicalization and deradicalization occur outside of the Jihadi extremism
context. The research team argues that a key driver of radicalization is
interpersonal communication on social media, where potential recruits are
connected with extremist thought leaders from around the world. However,
interpersonal interactions in conversational settings may also have the
potential to deradicalize. This project will use social media data to
investigate how interpersonal communication may facilitate radicalization as
well as experiments involving real conversations to investigate potential
avenues for deradicalization in interpersonal settings. The findings of this
project will offer key insights for policymakers seeking to limit the
proliferation of extremist content on social media and deescalate and disrupt
patterns of interpersonal radicalization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will conduct two complementary studies to investigate how interpersonal
communication radicalizes and deradicalizes via informational and affective
pathways. First, the researchers will develop and analyze a large-scale social
media dataset containing posts and interactions between extremist leaders around
the world and their followers across seven social media platforms, The dataset
will be used to examine how extremists use the power of information and affect
to further radicalize followers via interpersonal communication. Second, the
researchers will conduct an experiment involving real-time conversations between
moderate and extremist participants to test informational and affective
interventions that equip moderates with conversational tools to persuade and
deradicalize extremists. The findings of this project will contribute to
significant advances in basic research not only on the use of social media and
online communication in radicalization processes, but also how interpersonal
communication strategies can be used to achieve
deradicalization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.