* 2241720
* Collaborative Research: Pressure effects on microbially-catalyzed organic matter degradation in the deep ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Carol Arnosti, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 03/31/2026
* USD 659,297.00

Microbes are important players in the carbon cycle in the ocean. These organisms
consume organic carbon and produce carbon dioxide in marine systems. Because the
average depth of the ocean is 4000 m, microbes must work at high pressures
typical of the deep ocean (&gt;1000 m). Although high pressure is known to
affect marine microbes, their carbon cycling activities have mostly been
measured at surface ocean pressures. As a result, it remains unknown how closely
these measurements reflect the activities of deep-sea microbes at high
pressures. As a result of collaborations with scientists in Denmark and Germany,
this project will be able to use special equipment to investigate the effects of
high pressures on marine microbes and their carbon cycling activities. This work
is necessary to quantify rates of carbon cycling and identify the microbes
involved, especially in deep waters. The project will provide training for
diverse undergraduate and graduate students, and a postdoc who will conduct
novel research in the U.S., Denmark, and Germany, both at sea and in the lab.
The scientists will also teach middle school students about the role of microbes
in the carbon cycle and pressure effects on life in the ocean. The project will
provide internships for high school students, focusing on first-generation
students who would like to go to college. This work may aid in future efforts to
identify enzymes that function well under high pressure.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Heterotrophic microbes (e.g., bacteria and archaea) are
found throughout the ocean. Their biogeochemical functions help determine the
rates and locations at which carbon and nutrients are regenerated, as well as
the extent to which organic matter is preserved. Although research has shown
that pressure profoundly affects the activities of marine microbes, most
investigations of microbial communities of the deep sea are conducted at
atmospheric pressure, due to the limited availability of specialized equipment.
In collaboration with the Danish Center for Hadal Research at the University of
Southern Denmark, this study will identify the effects of pressure on microbial
communities and their extracellular enzymes of pressures characteristic of
bathy- and abyssopelagic depths. At sea and in the lab, the scientific team will
compare the effects of depressurization on the activities of enzymes produced by
microbial communities of the deep ocean, as well as the effects of high pressure
on surface-water derived enzymes and communities. Fieldwork will take place in
Danish coastal waters, well as in the open North Atlantic and Pacific Oceans.
Using pressurization systems and in situ incubations, this study will measure
hydrolysis rates of peptides and polysaccharides, two of the major classes of
marine organic matter. Project activities will also focus on developing the
means to measure enzyme activities in situ in the deep ocean. In collaboration
with colleagues from the Max Planck Institute for Marine Microbiology in
Germany, this proect will additionally investigate whether pressure affects the
selfish uptake of polysaccharides. These studies will provide new insight into
understudied but key factors that help determine the fate of organic matter in
the deep ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the Biological
and Chemical Oceanography Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.