* 2241074
* Acquisition of Two-Color 3-D Minflux for Live-Cell Single Molecule Imaging and Tracking at Unprecedented Spatial and Temporal Resolution
* MPS,PHY
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2025
* Zaida Luthey-Schulten, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 12/31/2025
* USD 194,457.00

This award will enable the purchase of a MINFLUX imaging and molecule tracking
system. MINFLUX technology can locate molecules to 2 nm resolution and the
ability to track molecules with 10 MHz time resolution an order of magnitude
improvement over other single molecule techniques. MINFLUX is a technology
developed by Nobelist, Stefan Hell. As the name suggests, MINFLUX detects
individual molecules by illuminating their surroundings and not exposing the
molecule itself to high light intensities, greatly reducing bleaching and
phototoxicity. This is accomplished by optically activating a fluorescent
molecule and then surrounding it with a donut of excitation light. As the center
of the donout is moved off the molecule the fluorescence intensity increases
indicating the position of the molecule. This process is then carried out in
three directions locating the molecule in space while minimizing the photon flux
experienced by the molecule to the range of 800 to 2500 photons per localization
event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The extraordinary capabilities of this instrument
will allow at least 20 faculty from 10 participating units at the University of
Illinois to track receptors in neuronal synapses, image chromatin folding,
neural muscular junctions, and much more. All against the background of the cell
or other complex environments. There are currently two MINFLUX systems in the
United States. One is located at Scripps on the west coast and one at NIH on the
east coast. A MINFLUX instrument in the area would provide access to faculty
members located in the Midwest and strengthen the University of Illinois’
standing in imaging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The best-in-class resolution of the
MINFLUX microscope will allow new science to be conducted and foster
collaborations between experimental and theoretical biophysicists to
characterize these discoveries. It will be housed in the IGB Core Facility and
will be managed with the same training procedures, calendars, and billing, as
our other high end optical microscopes. As the MINFLUX early adopter in the
Midwest, the IGB Facility will work with Abberior instruments to provide
demonstrations and access for off campus researchers along with hands- on
training for students and postdocs at Illinois and throughout the
Midwest&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.