* 2241515
* Functional diversity of specialized vesicles derived from the endoplasmic reticulum in plants
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2027
* Zhixiang Chen, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Adrienne Cheng
* 03/31/2027
* USD 950,000.00

Protein trafficking between subcellular compartments is an essential and basic
process of cellular life. Plants contain various types of functionally
specialized vesicles that accumulate or transport specific proteins important
for plant growth, development, and stress responses. In Brassica plants (plants
in the cabbage and mustard family), there are specialized vesicles called
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) bodies that can generate toxic compounds upon tissue
damage as a “mustard oil bomb” against pathogens and herbivores. ER bodies and
their associated chemical arsenal were thought to occur only in Brassica plants,
but recent studies have shown that ER body-related vesicles are present in all
plants. The functions of these vesicles are unknown. This project seeks to
understand these ER body-related vesicles and how they contribute to the
diversity of biological functions in plants. The Broader Impacts of this project
include teaching and training students to conduct their own mini-research
projects and the PI will also participate as a mentor for high school science
fairs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Vesicle-mediated protein trafficking between
subcellular compartments is a basic process of cellular life. Plants contain
various types of functionally specialized, ER-derived vesicles (ERDVs) that
accumulate or transport specific proteins important for plant growth,
development, and stress pathways. In the highly conserved secretory pathway, ER-
synthesized proteins fold and pass onto the Golgi apparatus through COPII-coated
vesicles before transport to other subcellular compartments. However, in plant
cells, some specific ER-synthesized proteins pass into specialized ERDVs and are
transported to other compartments in a Golgi-independent manner. ER bodies in
Brassica plants are specialized ERDVs that generate toxic chemicals against
herbivores and pathogens. These ER bodies are found only in Brassica plants and
their origins are unknown. NAI2 is an ER body protein with homologs only in
Brassica and is required for ER body formation. Three related NAI2-interacting
proteins (NAIP1 to 3) from Arabidopsis are also required for ER body formation
but have homologs in all plants. While NAIP1 is specifically associated with ER
bodies, NAIP2 and 3 are also associated with related ERDVs containing other
proteins. Thus, there is a novel family of ER body-related, NAIP-containing
vesicles in all plants. The goal of this project is to establish the functional
diversity of the NAIP vesicles by identifying their cargo proteins, determining
the regulatory roles of NAIP vesicles, and analyzing additional factors
important for the biogenesis of NAIP vesicles. Progress of this project will
enhance the understanding of the molecular basis of plant traits such as seed
germination, vascular development, and plant defense, which has a multitude of
applications, including those in the agricultural
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.