* 2241873
* Investigating the physical and chemical controls on aerobic methane oxidation
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* John Kessler, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Katsumi Matsumoto
* 01/31/2026
* USD 443,926.00

This project will study the variables that control the oxidation of methane in
oxygenated natural waters. Methane is an important greenhouse gas. Oceans are
often viewed as having the potential to release large amounts of methane to the
atmosphere with warming. However, current emissions of methane from the sea
surface to the atmosphere are relatively low. Local studies have shown that
aerobic oxidation of methane in these natural waters helps to remove methane
prior to emission. However, estimating this removal has been challenging for two
reasons. First, methane oxidation measurements from different laboratories do
not always agree. Second, different national conditions change the rates of
aerobic methane oxidation. This project will solve these problems. This work
will help determine the global importance of this methane sink, predict how
methane oxidation rates will change in the future, and establish measurement
protocols for greater comparability of results. Additionally, this project will
engage a cohort of undergraduate students. These students will be taught
oceanographic research methods centered around this project. Also, they will be
coached on how to develop their own scientific interests, hypotheses, and
experimental plans. Then, these students will be given the opportunity to join
the research cruise associated with this work where they will enact their own
experimental plans. Past participants of this program have contributed to 5
scientific publications, and 12 students have gone on to highly competitive
graduate programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will be accomplished
through a combination of systematic laboratory experiments and environmental
measurements. Investigations on the US Great Lakes and at sea along the US
Atlantic Margin will be conducted to evaluate the steady-state and non-steady-
state chemical kinetics of aerobic methane oxidation. This project will test the
hypothesis that water temperature and methane concentration are the dominant
variables governing aerobic methane oxidation with other variables of dissolved
oxygen and nutrient concentrations contributing secondary influences. At the
conclusion of this work, a relatively simple model will be established combining
water temperature and substrate concentration(s) to predict rates of methane
oxidation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.