* 2241095
* Student Participation in 2022 Society of Engineering Science Annual Technical Meeting; College Station, Texas; 16-19 October 2022
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* George Pharr V, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 08/31/2023
* USD 44,985.00

This award provides travel support for 75 undergraduate and graduate students to
attend the 2022 Society of Engineering Science (SES) Annual Technical Meeting to
be held from October 16 to 19 on the Texas A&amp;M University Campus in College
Station, Texas. The selected students will attend the conference and present a
poster or presentation. Students will benefit from the technical experience and
professional networking in both formal and informal settings. Consideration in
the selection process will be given to the inclusion of members of
underrepresented groups, diversity of institutions that the students represent,
and diversity of programs within engineering. This opportunity will have
societal and economic impact of the field of mechanics of materials, and in
developing the next generation of researchers and engineers from diverse
backgrounds. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SES Annual Technical Meetings are a
leading forum for bringing together diverse, interdisciplinary groups of
researchers to discuss advances in highly focused symposia. In 2022, the
conference will have approximately eighty symposia within multiple technical
thematic areas that include solids and structures, soft and flexible,
biomechanics and mechanobiology, data science and machine learning, fluid and
granular, manufacturing and infrastructure, multifunctional and multifield, and
robotics and controls. The opportunity to attend and present will broaden the
participating studentsâ€™ technical understanding, stimulate the development of
new ideas and research topics, and provide numerous professional development and
networking opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.