* 2241064
* Collaborative Research: Investigating intraplate melting processes in northwest New Zealand with seismic imaging
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Karen Fischer, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 06/30/2027
* USD 11,636.00

While most of Earthâ€™s volcanoes occur at the boundaries between tectonic plates,
many others occur within plate interiors. Some of these intraplate volcanoes,
such as those in Hawaii, are linked to hot mantle that flows upward from depths
of more than 2500 km in the lower mantle. Others, however, have more enigmatic
origins. One group of volcanoes in the enigmatic category erupt lavas whose
chemistry is consistent with melting of rocks at depths of 410 km to 660 km. The
New Zealand Auckland Volcanic Field is an example of this type of volcanic zone.
The goal of this project is to image the melting region for these volcanos. This
will be carried out by measuring the properties of the mantle beneath the North
Island of New Zealand and the surrounding ocean using seismic waves from distant
earthquakes recorded by seismometers on the ocean floor and on land. These
results will be combined with numerical models and geochemical measurements to
understand origins of these volcanic rocks. Broader impacts include support for
undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this study
is to develop a better global understanding of the processes that produce
intraplate volcanism by resolving the origins of the Holocene Auckland Volcanic
Field (AVF). The AVF is spatially separated from the subduction zone arc, and
its magmas do not bear obvious contributions from subduction-related melting.
Neither are these magmas clearly connected to a lower mantle plume, based on
existing seismic tomography and helium isotopes. Rather, geochemical data raise
the possibility that the AVF magmas provide a global end-member case of mantle
melting that emanates from transition zone depths, a class of intraplate
volcanism that has recently emerged. However, other processes such as melting
driven by upwelling related to lithospheric instabilities and small-scale
convection cannot be ruled out, and even upwelling from the lower mantle needs
to be further evaluated. New seismic data will be collected from a temporary
array of 20 US seafloor broadband seismometers (OBSs). These stations will be
complemented by New Zealand-based land arrays, and an OBS deployment from
SUSTech (China). With the proposed array, seismic analyses will test for the
presence or absence of seismic velocity and attenuation anomalies, transition
zone discontinuity topography, and seismic anisotropy associated with the
competing hypotheses. US work will be integrated with seismological and
volcanological analyses by New Zealand collaborators and a SUSTech geodynamical
modeling effort. Results from this synthesis will provide estimates of the depth
extent of melting, volatile ascent, and the degree to which this intraplate
volcanism is driven by processes in the lithosphere, transition zone, or both. A
range of critical questions will be addressed, including: What is the thermal
structure from surface to transition-zone depths? Does upwelling occur, and from
what depth, and are lithospheric instabilities present? What pathways do fluids
and melt take as they ascend, and how do those pathways interact with large-
scale flow? How does volcanism far behind the arc interact with the subduction
system, if at all? This project will support graduate and undergraduate students
at Cornell and Brown, including students from historically marginalized groups.
Results from the project will be incorporated in the outreach and teaching
activities of the PIs. The proposed project will enhance international
collaborations. The project will provide a better understanding of the deep
drivers for volcanic hazards, including young (&lt;1 ka) volcanism within the
Auckland urban area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the
Marine Geology and Geophysics program in the Division of Ocean Sciences and the
Geophysics program in the Division of Earth Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.