* 2241605
* A Comprehensive Observational Examination of the Physical Processes that Link Tropical Cyclone Vortex Alignment to Future Intensity Change
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* David Nolan, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Chungu Lu
* 03/31/2026
* USD 595,824.00

The vast societal impacts of rapidly intensifying tropical cyclones, or
hurricanes, are exacerbated not only due to poor predictions that create
challenges for emergency management decisions, but they also pose a significant
threat to coastal populations as these storms quickly become more destructive.
Prior to undergoing rapid intensification, which is defined as a quick or sudden
increase in the strength of the storm, hurricanes develop from weaker tropical
cyclones that initially are more susceptible to detrimental influences from the
surrounding environment. A significant environmental influence is vertical wind
shear, which is a change in the direction or strength of the wind with
increasing height, and can negatively impact the development of hurricanes.
Vertical wind shear can cause a displacement of the mid–upper level storm
circulation from the low-level circulation. This misalignment of centers allows
more unfavorable, dry air in the surrounding environment to enter a storm’s
inner core, a deterrent to further intensification. Therefore, previous work
strongly supports the notion that a key step for tropical cyclone
intensification is achieving an alignment of centers throughout the depth of the
atmosphere. However, it is still not well understood how or why some initially
misaligned storms transition toward a more vertically-aligned state and rapidly
intensify. In some recent, notable U.S. landfalling hurricanes, uncertainty over
the processes associated with this structural transition has caused considerable
forecast challenges, particularly with intensity change. This project will use a
comprehensive radar dataset to provide insights on the processes associated with
the alignment of centers prior to and during rapid
intensification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous observational case studies and
idealized modeling simulations have identified multiple pathways through which a
misaligned tropical cyclone vortex can transition toward an aligned state.
However, it is widely believed that convectively-driven diabatic processes are
important in the alignment process, regardless of the pathway. Because all
tropical cyclones feature convection to some degree, it is unclear how precisely
precipitation structures associated with vortex alignment events differ from
storms that remain misaligned. This uncertainty is a key motivator for this
study. Furthermore, because these different alignment pathways have only been
documented either in idealized modeling systems or in observational case studies
of individual storms, robust conclusions as to how precipitation, particularly
in weak tropical cyclones, interacts with the surrounding environment and
affects the vortex alignment pathway in nature remains ambiguous. Therefore,
this project aims to build on previous work by contextualizing the vortex,
precipitation, and environmental characteristics associated with a given
alignment pathway. The overall goal of this research is to investigate weak
tropical cyclones using a novel airborne and ground-based Doppler radar
database, which provides the most comprehensive observational database of
tropical cyclone structure to date. This assessment of precipitation structure
at high resolution will help reveal the three-dimensional structure, from which
the physical processes responsible for vortex alignment can be
determined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.