* 2241700
* "Collaborative Research: Studying Science Curiosity and Computational Thinking in an eTextile Upward Bound Curriculum"
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Heather Zimmerman, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Leilah Lyons
* 07/31/2025
* USD 362,113.00

This project will examine and iteratively improve the design of a youth-centered
30-hour summer school curriculum that will engage high school students in making
e-textiles (i.e., wearable technologies). The research builds on an existing
curriculum (STEAM-Maker) that, when piloted, showed a promising capacity to
improve participants' computational thinking. In addition to studying the impact
of the revised curriculum on computational thinking, the current project will
assess the curriculum’s impact on: science curiosity; affinity for science,
technology, and engineering; youths' self-perceptions as computational
professionals; and increased knowledge of and/or interest in STEM-related
careers and pursuits. This work will solidify a research-practice partnership in
two states with the youth-serving organization, Upward Bound. The project will
work with 60 youth in Upward Bound summer camps in Pennsylvania and Michigan,
and employ computer science and engineering graduates involved in wearable
technology industries (e.g., biomedical devices, fitness trackers, robotics, and
smart fabrics) as near-peer mentors during the program. The mentors have been
recruited to challenge typical stereotypes about who can create technology, and
will be trained in anti-racist and equity-based mentorship practices. The
project will produce a refined curriculum which will be shared with high school
summer camp providers, with the intent to broaden participation of Black and
Hispanic/Latinx youth in STEAM-Maker camps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
will support further theorization around the linkages between curiosity,
computational thinking, STEM career interest, and science curiosity. Data will
include video of youths' engagement with activities; learners' artifacts;
validated surveys of science curiosity, STEM career interest, and computational
thinking; and surveys of post-program engagement with making. Analysis includes
qualitative coding of artifacts, micro-ethnographic analysis of youth
engagement, learning and innovation, and statistical analysis of quantitative
data including affect surveys (using location, gender, and race/ethnicity as
variables). The intellectual merit of the project rests in the development of
design principles for encouraging science curiosity, career interest, and
computational thinking in youth-centered making experiences. This project is
funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers
(ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings of practices,
program elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing youths'
knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT) careers. This project
is co-funded by the CS for All: Research and RPPs
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.