* 2241650
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Religion, Migration, and the Boundaries of Political Belonging
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Noor Amr, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 02/29/2024
* USD 19,987.00

Sanctuary plays an increasingly central role in immigration as asylum cases are
adjudicated by various actors and entities. This doctoral dissertation research
examines how religious sanctuary for asylum-seekers intersects with governmental
asylum decisions to understand whether and how the boundaries between state and
non-secular entities are affected by transnational politics. In addition to
training a U.S.-based graduate student in scientific data collection, the
research sheds light on protections afforded to individuals seeking asylum and
disseminates results broadly. This project also broadens the participation of
historically underrepresented groups in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
doctoral dissertation project investigates how governments and religious
institutions differentially interpret and negotiate asylum. The doctoral student
integrates participant observation, semi-structured interviews, and archival
research methods to empirically examine: 1) the criteria by which governments
evaluate evidence of hardship in asylum applications, 2) the criteria by which
religious institutions determine if a rejected asylum-seeker is eligible for
sanctuary protections; 3) how rejected asylum-seekers from different religious,
national, and ethnic backgrounds navigate sanctuary differently and; 4) how
governments and religious institutions come to understand and redefine each
otherâ€™s authority during sanctuary negotiations. The project contributes to
social scientific studies of migration by shifting attention toward
intersections between the state and non-state entities as cooperating to define
political belonging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.