* 2241369
* REU SITE: UNOLS-MATE At-Sea Technical Internship Program
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Alice Doyle, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 06/30/2026
* USD 184,720.00

The University National Oceanographic Laboratory System (UNOLS), hosted at the
University of Washington (UW) School of Oceanography in Seattle, WA, will
organize and manage the Marine Advanced Technology Education (MATE) Internship
program. The program will provide fourteen undergraduate students with
internships of two to twelve-weeks and one student with a six-month internship
each year for the next three years (2022-2025). MATE interns work with marine
technicians and scientists onboard research vessels. These experiences provide
interns with the opportunity to develop their technical, scientific, seamanship
and interpersonal skills. Ships that are part of the UNOLS and the United States
Coast Guard (USCG) fleets will serve as internship hosts. While the program is
open to all U.S. undergraduates, recruitment efforts are focused on community
college students enrolled in marine technology programs and university students
interested in marine technical careers. This training effort is important for
the continued operation of the U.S. academic research fleet and for the marine
industries that benefit by hiring the highly skilled technicians who graduate
from the program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With a focus on recruiting students from
community colleges who are interested in careers as marine technicians, the MATE
internship program fills a unique need in the continuum of support for
undergraduate students in marine sciences. This program provides an excellent
bridge between students who need hands-on training and employers who need
technical support. The MATE internship program will provide a total of forty-
five undergraduates with internships over the three-year period. Most of the
funding provided supports student stipends and their travel to meet the research
vessels where they will be working. The MATE internship program supports
national goals by developing the next generation of technically skilled
workforce. Skills and experience gained through all MATE internships vary
depending on the research vessel, cruise goals and the tasks that mentors need
to accomplish during the cruise. Typical experiences include: 1) cruise
preparation and coordination; 2)operation and maintenance of specific
oceanographic equipment [e.g. Conductivity Temperature Depth (CTD), Acoustic
Doppler Current Profiler (ADCP), fluorometer, transmissometer, temperature and
salinity sampling, nutrient sampling, sonar and echosounders, current profilers,
corers and nets, underwater cameras, AUVs, ROVs]; 3) trouble shooting
instruments and equipment; 4) chemical analyses; 5) operation and maintenance of
computer hardware and software; 6) programming software for data retrieval,
analysis, and archiving; 7) seamanship, marine operations, and safety
procedures; 8) navigation skills; 9) application of basic oceanographic and
meteorological knowledge to sampling design and execution; 10) teamwork and
other interpersonal skills; 11) experience working in a marine and scientific
environment; and 12) communication skills. The prior partnership between the
MATE Center, UNOLS, and the USCG trained dozens of interns who moved on to work
in the fields of marine sciences and marine technology.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is supported by the Department of Defense in
partnership with the NSF REU program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.