* 2241814
* Place-based learning, STEM identity work and identity play with storytelling technologies
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Heidi Carlone, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Asli Sezen-Barrie
* 06/30/2026
* USD 1,299,788.00

As young people experience challenging climate events and become aware of their
systemic nature, they may feel powerless to shape the future and uncertain about
STEM-based solutions. To address these challenges, this project focuses on the
potential of place-based learning, field science, and digital storytelling to
nurture diverse middle school youths’ environmental agency, STEM career
knowledge, and STEM identities. The project includes a series of summer camps
and school-year Saturday Academies to investigate the history, ecology, and
restoration of a local watershed where youths’ schools are located. The
watershed has unique biodiversity and is increasingly impacted by negative
climate events in a city experiencing rapid population growth. Youth will work
alongside STEM professionals, college student mentors, and community leaders to
engage in environmental science fieldwork and restoration of the watershed.
Youth will create stories about the land, water, people, and history of the
watershed using podcasts, augmented reality (AR), and digital zines, with
mentorship from professional experts in each of these media. Digital
storytelling is a way for youth to recapture a sense of agency amidst
considerable climate anxiety as the stories’ digital and mobile nature have the
potential to reach diverse audiences and encourage scientific, affective,
sociocultural, and historical knowledge of the watershed. The project team
includes an array of community stakeholders who live near, study, restore, and
advocate for the watershed. This project aims to develop and involve the next
generation of STEM-knowledgeable community stakeholders. This project is funded
by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST)
program, which supports projects that build understandings of practices, program
elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing students' knowledge
and interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and
information and communication technology (ICT) careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
this project, youth are positioned as creators rather than consumers of media.
The project will result in design principles for the pairing of digital
technologies and place-based learning for settings that nurture youths’ STEM
knowledge, agency, identities, and well-being. A primary contribution to the
advancement of knowledge will be a grounded theory of identity play, which
includes: 1) key indicators of identity play; 2) relationships among place-based
learning, digital storytelling, and identity play; and 3) unique affordances of
digital storytelling in encouraging identity play. These contributions will be
achieved through constant comparative analysis of multiple sources of data
including pre/post nature walk recordings, post interviews, observations of key
activities. 60 middle school youth will be direct participants of this study.
Identity play is a construct that highlights the agency within identity
development and provides a new way of conceptualizing growth. Rather than
viewing growth solely as becoming more scientific or movement towards STEM,
identity play is expansive so that growth may be non-linear and networked.
Identity play may involve things like trying out, finding a better alternative,
stretching, and combining previously disconnected interests. The practical
implications of a grounded theory of identity play include designing for
multiple STEM entry points and pathways, recognizing that youths’ decisions not
to pursue certain pathways may be productive, and explaining the impacts of out-
of-school STEM experiences on diverse youths’ career
choices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.