* 2241573
* Structural and mechanistic studies of oxalate catabolism
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Paul Nakata, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Ishita Mukerji
* 05/31/2026
* USD 800,000.00

Biologically derived oxalic acid has been shown to have a negative impact on
crop production and human health. Oxalate, a form of oxalic acid, is required by
certain plant pathogens for infection. Such pathogens are responsible for major
crop losses every year. The presence of oxalate in plant foods can decrease
their nutritional value and is also a potential toxin, contributing to kidney
stone formation. Although oxalate impacts numerous biological processes, our
understanding of how it is regulated is limited. This project will study the
structure and function of key enzymes involved in the regulation of oxalate.
These studies will potentially provide fundamental knowledge that will
facilitate metabolic engineering of plants toward improving their nutritional
quality and that of plant derived foods. This research project will also be
broadly integrated into the curriculum for the training of high school and
undergraduate students in science. The students will gain invaluable experience
in scientific research through their direct contributions to the project.
Outreach activities will also be extended to local 6 to12-year-old students
through a science discovery camp to broaden their STEM
exposure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Oxalic acid is biosynthesized by numerous
organisms to gain a selective advantage and enhance their survival. Considering
the widespread occurrence of oxalate in nature and its broad impact on a host of
organisms, it is surprising that so little is known about the catabolism of this
important acid. A CoA-dependent pathway of oxalate catabolism was recently
discovered and found to function in both plants and microbes. This project will
define the structure and function relationships of the Arabidopsis oxalyl-CoA
decarboxylase and two candidate Arabidopsis formyl-CoA hydrolases. These enzymes
are proposed to catalyze subsequent steps in the CoA-dependent pathway of
oxalate catabolism. Structural biology, plant biochemistry, genetics, and
mutagenesis approaches will be utilized to elucidate the molecular mechanisms
and gain a better understanding of how these two key enzymes participate in
oxalate catabolism. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded by the
Molecular Biophysics program of the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division
in the Biological Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.