* 2241647
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Science, Kinship, and Memory through DNA Identification
* SBE,BCS
* 12/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Vu Tien Dung Ha, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 05/31/2024
* USD 22,371.00

Advances in DNA technologies have vastly improved the capacity to identify human
remains from armed conflicts. In creating opportunities for families to discover
the remains of their relatives, these technologies have established conditions
where new forms of social relationships and kinship relations might be forged or
redefined. DNA identification projects, especially state-funded ones, are also
circumscribed by inclusion and exclusion criteria in the selection of remains
for reidentification and analysis. This doctoral dissertation research
investigates whether, and in what ways, the scientific identification of war
dead will reshape kinship, memory, and belonging. More particularly, this
research examines the cultural processes embedded in the scientific
identification of the dead and its impacts on memory, identity, and social
relations of the living. The findings will be disseminated as op-eds to the
broader public through public media channels as well as non-academic reports to
the main stakeholders involved in the study. The project trains a graduate
student in scientific methods of data collection and analysis and broaden the
participation of historically underrepresented groups in the production of
scientific knowledge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through an ethnographic study with
forensic scientists and family members of war dead, the researchers will analyze
the sociotechnical processes involved in the identification as well as the
(competing) values, perceptions, and memory of both the scientists and the
families regarding conflict and national identity. The researchers will
participate in the daily activities at the forensic laboratory and observe
commemoration rituals and objects at the homes of family members of war dead.
Data will be collected using participant observation, interviews, oral
histories, and archival research. The findings will shed light on whether, and
in what ways, the DNA identification project of war dead will restore some kinds
of ancestral relations disrupted by wars and conflicts, reshape the relationship
between families and the nation as well as reconstruct or reconcile past
political divisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.