* 2241751
* Promoting Students' Data Literacy through the Creation of Interactive Multimodal Representations of Biometric Data
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Camillia Matuk, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Noll
* 07/31/2027
* USD 1,290,229.00

This project will promote data literacy in high school students by engaging them
in learning about the Quantified Self -- the practice of using technology to
track and reflect on one’s own biological, behavioral, physical, and/or
emotional data. Learning activities will be designed to spark a broad interest
in science and to help develop students’ informed opinions about the role of
human-generated data in public life. To achieve this goal, the project will
develop and test software tools as well as lesson and professional development
materials with which students and teachers can explore, analyze, and create
novel, multimodal, and interactive representations of data, recorded by wearable
biosensing devices. Students will learn about how data from their bodies can be
captured and interpreted through hands-on STEM activities that include the
creation of interactive data representations. Students will design and execute
small exploration projects to answer their own questions and create offline and
online artifacts to communicate their findings. Students will engage in
discussions that consider the privacy implications of using data-fueled
services, applications, and technologies and critically evaluate how their
personal data is being used. During and after the project, instructors and
students will have opportunities to connect with industry partners who work with
biosensing and wearable technologies, and to access career and college readiness
resources relevant to these and related data technology
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will study how interactive and
multimodal data engagement tools, grounded in relatable Quantified Self
experiences, can support students’ learning and engagement with and about data,
(neuro)biology, and bioinformatics. To achieve this, the project will design
tools and materials in collaboration with teachers using a culturally
responsive, participatory design approach, to ensure that the project activities
will appeal to a range of students' interests and that it will promote equity of
participation in STEM education. The project will also examine how
industry/mentor partnerships and an online platform can help learners
contextualize their own cognition and behavior within population-wide patterns
and build awareness of careers in data science, biology, and bioinformatics.
Data will be collected through surveys, interviews, and student work artifacts.
The analysis approach will include both qualitative and quantitative approaches
to understand the impact of the project on student learning and engagement. This
project addresses the pervasive challenges of building data and science
literacy, increasing participation in STEM/ICT fields, and promoting equity in
STEM/ICT workforce and career preparation. By engaging students in creating
novel, multimodal data representations and evaluating their own data, the
project aims to empower them to use data and science as tools for generating
knowledge about issues that concern them and to consider careers in data-related
fields. The project anticipates reaching 25 teachers, 15 mentors, and 400-600
students within the project term, and more via an open-source software and
curriculum. This project is funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for
Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build
understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and processes
contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.