* 2241376
* Planning Proposal: Planning an HBCU Learning Science Network
* EDU,EES
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Albert Hayward, Bethune-Cookman University
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hall
* 04/30/2025
* USD 200,000.00

The Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP) provides support to strengthen STEM undergraduate education and research at
HBCUs. Prompted by challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, Bethune-Cookman
University will conduct planning activities to increase HBCU faculty authorship
of online STEM instruction that supports robust learning of STEM content. The
aim of this project is to enable the conceptualization, planning and
consensus/collaboration building activities regarding robust online learning
opportunities in STEM. This planning project aligns with the goals of the HBCU-
UP program in its efforts to bolster institutional capacity building for the
purpose of enhancing STEM undergraduate education and research endeavors.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19) pandemic made
clear the urgent and ongoing need for undergraduate STEM courses that are
optimized for robust learning and long-term achievement of students. The
characteristics of robust learning outcomes include long term retention,
transfer of learning to new situations, and desire for future learning. The
Bethune-Cookman University research team plans to coordinate the creation of a
collaborative faculty network on learning science research at Historically Black
Colleges and Universities (HBCUs). The planning project will support the
conceptualization, planning and consensus/collaboration-building activities
essential to forming the network. In the first phase, the project leadership
team will collaborate with an initial core group of HBCU faculty to brainstorm,
conceptualize and gain consensus on how an HBCU Science of Learning network
would work. In the second phase, a workshop &amp; follow-on events will provide
initial participating faculty hands-on use of authoring technologies from
Carnegie Mellon University’s LearnLab to collaboratively create online learning
activities and pilot their new content with their students. A third phase will
involve preparing a proposal for large-scale efforts for an HBCU Science of
Learning Network. These activities are envisioned to contribute to efforts at
broadening participation in the nation's STEM workforce and deepening HBCU
faculty contributions to learning science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.