* 2241457
* Collaborative Research: The Bermuda Atlantic Time-series Study: Sustained Biogeochemical, Ecosystem and Ocean Change Observations and Linkages in the North Atlantic (Years 36-40)
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Deborah Steinberg, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 07/31/2028
* USD 107,930.00

Long-term observations of ocean physics, biology, and chemistry across decades
provide a powerful lens for understanding the response of the oceans to
environmental change. This award will continue the Bermuda Atlantic Time-series
Study (BATS) research program, which began in 1988, for another five years.
Observations at the BATS site provide crucial information for understanding the
oceanâ€™s role in the global climate system and the response of the ocean carbon
system and marine ecosystems to climate perturbations. The research goals of the
BATS program continue to be to improve our understanding of the time-varying
components of the ocean carbon cycle and related elements of interest (such as
nitrogen, phosphorus, and silica) and to identify the physical, chemical, and
ecosystem properties responsible for this variability. The BATS program has
substantial and diverse broader impacts, contributing to the field of ocean
sciences by providing high-quality ocean observations and a framework in which
other researchers can conceive and test hypotheses. In addition, the recent
acquisition of the Bermuda Institute of Ocean Sciences by the Global Futures
Laboratory of Arizona State University provides new avenues for educational
opportunities and innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the subtropical gyre of
the North Atlantic Ocean, warming, salinification, deoxygenation, ocean
ecosystem changes, and acidification have accelerated their rate of change.
Fundamental questions and challenges remain about understanding present and
future ocean function, prediction, and modelling. An overarching question for
the BATS program is: Will ocean biogeochemistry and ecosystem functioning
continue to change in response to the acceleration of ocean warming,
salinification, stratification, deoxygenation and acidification? With this
question in mind, the sustained goals for the BATS program are: 1. Quantify the
role of ocean-atmosphere coupling and climate variability on air-sea exchange of
carbon dioxide (CO2) and carbon export to the ocean interior; 2. Document trends
and controls of the following: (a) the interannual to decadal scale variability
in carbon and nutrient cycles and their coupling in the surface and deep ocean
via the Redfield Ratio paradigm; and, (b) biological community structure in the
oligotrophic North Atlantic Ocean in response to low-frequency climate
variability; 3. Quantify the response of planktonic and microbial community
structure and function and impact on biogeochemical cycles (including new and
export productivity) to variability in surface fluxes (e.g., heat, freshwater
and momentum) and physical processes (e.g., mesoscale eddies, Rossby Waves,
internal waves); 4. Facilitate development, calibration and validation of next-
generation oceanographic sensors, tools and technologies; 5. Generate datasets
that can be used by empiricists and modelers to test new hypotheses about North
Atlantic Ocean biogeochemistry and ecosystem functioning; 6. Use BATS cruise,
infrastructure, laboratory and analytical expertise, and data to improve
diversity, equity and inclusion (DEI), education and training programs for BATS
staff, STEM-literate students, and future
oceanographers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.