* 2241989
* Using AI to improve our understanding of verbal confidence and to aid decision-making:  Eyewitness lineup identification as a model case
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Chad Dodson, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Claudia Gonzalez-Vallejo
* 05/31/2026
* USD 135,695.00

From medical treatment to predicting recidivism, artificial intelligence (AI) is
playing an increasingly larger role in human decision-making – in large part
because AI predictions are superior to human predictions in a variety of
different domains. This project uses eyewitness lineup identifications as a
model paradigm. One aim of the project uses AI to better understand verbal
expressions of confidence about an identification. For example, when an
eyewitness states “I’m pretty sure it’s him” about a lineup identification what
is the likelihood that the eyewitness’s identification is correct? Another aim
of the project examines how best to convey AI output to people so as to improve
their predictions about the accuracy of an eyewitness’s identification.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project consists of two sets of experiments. One set
uses variations on an eyewitness memory paradigm to examine the predictive value
of verbal (e.g., “I’m pretty certain”) and numeric (e.g., “I’m 75% certain”)
expressions of confidence. It is largely assumed that verbal confidence
statements reflect the same underlying information as numeric confidence
ratings. Machine-learning classifiers are used to quantify verbal confidence to
explain why verbal confidence is not redundant with numeric confidence but can
contribute unique added value in predicting the accuracy of a response. A second
set of experiments test two predictions. First, that machine learning estimates
about the accuracy of a lineup identification are more resistant than human
estimates to the effects of various kinds of contextual information. Second,
that a cognitive-forcing method of conveying machine-learning estimates about
eyewitness identification accuracy is most effective at improving people’s
predictions about eyewitness accuracy, particularly under conditions when
people’s intuitions about eyewitness performance are wrong. Overall, this
project addresses a need to identify issues in human-algorithm interactions
before the spread of AI-assistance to the domain of eyewitness
identification.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.