* 2241822
* Interactions between winds and sea surface temperature at timescales of several days
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Ana Beatriz Villas Boas, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 06/30/2026
* USD 416,771.00

Recent results based on global coupled ocean-atmosphere modeling suggest a
ubiquitous covariability between sea surface temperature (SST) and wind speed at
timescales of several days. Preliminary work led by this team has confirmed such
oscillation using in-situ observations in the California Current Region. This
research involves the synergistic analysis of existing in-situ observations and
modeling output to better understand the nature of the co-oscillation between
winds and sea surface temperature at timescales of days in the global oceans.
The exchange of heat, momentum, moisture, and gases across the air-sea
transition zone plays critical roles in the Earth system predictability. Thus,
an improved understanding of processes relevant to air-sea coupling has the
potential to advance our understanding of many high-impact, societal-relevant
phenomena, such as extreme weather events. This project will further our
understanding of fundamental processes that control air-sea exchanges, essential
to properly parametrizing them in numerical models and improving weather
forecasting and climate projections. In particular, the research will deepen our
understanding of interactions between two essential climate variables, i.e.,
wind and sea surface temperature. This study will investigate how the co-
oscillation of these two variables impacts and responds to processes in the
ocean mixed layer. The dynamics in this layer are fundamentally important for
the Earth’s climate, as 95% of the anthropogenically created heat in the
atmosphere is communicated to the ocean through the mixed layer. This project
will support PI Bia Villas Bôas—a female, underrepresented minority, early
career Assistant Professor—in her efforts to build her research program, and it
will also support a Ph.D student who will be trained in physical oceanography at
Colorado School of Mines. Villas Bôas is the only oceanographer at Mines, an
institution that has historically focused on Earth resources, such as oil and
gas. Establishing a strong presence in physical oceanography at Mines benefits
the State of Colorado and the country because it will expose students that had
little contact with environmental sciences to the role of the oceans in climate.
Additionally, the PI and her group are committed to Open Science principles and
are actively engaged in efforts to broaden participation and increase
accessibility to oceanography and oceanographic data. The results from this
project will be published in open access journals, and the data code will be
made publicly available along with pedagogical Jupyter Notebooks examples for
seamless reproducibility of the results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This covariability
between wind and SST manifests itself in correlations as an oscillation between
negative and positive correlation with a cyclic nature with a 3-6 day period.
What physical processes drive this oscillation and what sets its time scale
remains unknown. In particular, the study will test the hypothesis that this co-
oscillation results from a combined response to surface heat fluxes, wind-driven
mixing, Ekman pumping, and other processes at the air-sea transition zone; thus,
the characteristic duration and strength of these wind-SST feedbacks will vary
based on season and geographic location.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.