* 2241083
* Evolution of water mass transformation and overturning in the western Nordic Seas in a warming climate
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Michael Spall, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 01/31/2026
* USD 686,707.00

The Nordic Seas are a key region for water mass transformation associated with
the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (AMOC). The warming atmosphere
has shifted the wintertime sea ice edge westward by hundreds of kilometers over
the past fifty years. Greatly enhanced heat loss from the ocean along the
western margin of the Nordic Seas and a reduction of heat loss in the interior
of the Greenland and Iceland Seas has been coincident with this shift. To
improve understanding of the consequences on water mass transformation,
convection, the regional circulation, north-south heat transport and overturning
circulation, this project will apply several complementary tools. These include
theoretical development, the application of an idealized configuration of a
high-resolution coupled ocean/atmosphere/sea ice model and the analysis of a
recently acquired observational dataset in the region. The model simulations
will represent the transition from the large ice extent of the mid 20th century
to the reduced ice of present day and then project into the future under
predicted increasing CO2 scenarios. The work is directly relevant to climate
science and there are also educational broader impacts. The project will support
a postdoc for two years and provide training in physical oceanography, numerical
methods, applied mathematics, climate dynamics, and data analysis. Participation
will also be sought from undergraduate students through the WHOI Summer Student
Fellow Program (at no cost to this proposal). The PI will also co-advise and
host a PhD student from the Univ. of Bergen for an extended period.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses idealized modeling which allows for
control and isolated study of the influences of the various forcing mechanisms
and ocean dynamics expected to be important. The primary tool to address the
influences of sea ice retreat on water mass transformation is the SKRIPS fully
coupled ocean/atmosphere/sea ice model, with components including the MITgcm
with sea ice package for the ocean and ice and the Polar Weather Research and
Forecasting model (WRF) for the atmosphere. The modeling studies are motivated
by, and will be carried out in parallel with, simplified analytic models of the
convective basin/boundary current system with new consideration of ice cover,
Ekman transport, and a finite heat capacity atmosphere. In addition, PI Spall
will work with collaborator Vage at the U. Bergen to analyze the Resilient
Northern Overturning in a Warming Climate (ROVER) observational dataset, in
light of the high resolution modeling and theoretical development of this
project. ROVER included a two-year mooring array across the boundary current,
summertime surveys, an unprecedented wintertime survey, glider data, wintertime
deployment of ARGO floats directly in the boundary current, in addition to
routinely collected glider transects across the boundary and a historical
climatological data base developed by Vage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.