* 2241921
* SBIR Phase II:  Focal Plane Array for Active Coherent Imaging
* TIP,TI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Kam Wai Chan, OAM PHOTONICS LLC
* Cooperative Agreement
* Samir M. Iqbal
* 05/31/2025
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is in developing technology that will enable
the use of a 3-dimensional (3D) light detection and ranging (LiDAR) system in
smaller and more economical drones for mapping, surveying, and navigation. The
3D LiDAR has important applications in environment management, forestry, land
and corridor mapping, construction, land surveying, precision agriculture,
powerline and infrastructure inspection, and countless other areas. The
technology will bring significant economic impacts to the industries by reducing
the ownership costs of a high-performance LiDAR system and the drone that can
carry this system. The reduction of the entry-cost for LiDAR applications with
drones will in turn benefit small businesses to perform smaller-scale projects
in mapping and surveying. Other than drone-based applications, the innovation is
poised to significantly reduce the costs and provide seamless integration of 3D
LiDAR sensing in self-driving vehicles and other industrial applications
including robotics, smart city infrastructure, surveillance, and security, as
well as consumer applications like 3D sensing for augmented reality. The
numerous applications enabled by the proposed project not will only help
increase the economic competitiveness of the U.S. but also improve quality of
life, security and safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project aims at
developing a high-performance, compact, and light-weight 3D LiDAR sensor to meet
the increasing needs of drone-based, high-precision LiDAR applications. Current
commercial high-performance drone-LiDAR systems are notorious for their high
cost, bulkiness, heavy weight, and high power-consumption. Current drone-LiDAR
systems are also prone to mechanical damage. These issues inevitably shorten the
drone flight time, inhibit the installations of high-performance LiDAR systems
on the more common consumer-grade small drones, and increase the operation
costs. The proposed LiDAR sensor will mitigate all of these issues by leveraging
a high-performance coherent LiDAR detection approach with silicon photonics
technology in an innovative design. The coherent LiDAR detection method allows
more sensitive measurements than the method used in most existing LiDAR systems.
The technology achieves a longer detection range and larger number of returns
given the same laser power. Based on highly scalable Complementary Metal-Oxide-
Semiconductor (CMOS)-compatible silicon photonics technology, the LiDAR sensor
is able to achieve high spatial resolution in a compact size. The entire system
will have a form-factor similar to a palm-sized compact camera commonly used for
photogrammetry in small drones. The solution requires no mechanical mechanisms
for beam scanning nor high-precision alignment of optical components, making the
system inherently durable, compact, lightweight, and power
efficient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.