* 2241005
* Hawaii Ocean Time-series (HOT):  2023-2028
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* David Karl, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 07/31/2028
* USD 1,968,248.00

Long-term observations of ocean physics, biology, and chemistry across decades
provide a powerful lens for understanding the response of the oceans to
environmental change. This award will continue the Hawaii Ocean Time-series
(HOT) research program, which began in 1988, for an additional five years.
Continuity of these observations will improve the value of the dataset for
deciphering how natural and human-influenced climate signals affect ecosystem
structure in the Pacific Ocean. All HOT program data are publicly available and
are frequently used by researchers and policy makers around the world. HOT also
serves as (1) a testbed for the development of new sensors and methodologies,
(2) a calibration/validation site, (3) an invaluable training ground that
attracts students and researchers from around the globe, and (4) a forum for
international collaboration and capacity building.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will rely on shipboard observations and experiments conducted
on ten separate five-day expeditions per year along with near-continuous moored
platform measurements of air-sea interactions, ocean mixing, and physical
characteristics of the deep sea. Observations include biogeochemical and
physical measurements required for continued assessment of dynamics in ocean
carbon and nutrient pools and fluxes, plankton community structure, ecosystem
productivity, and inherent optical properties of the water column. The major
program goals and objectives over the next 5 years remain as in prior years and
include: (1) sustain high quality, time-resolved oceanographic measurements on
the interactions between ocean-climate and ecosystem variability in the North
Pacific Subtropical Gyre (NPSG), (2) quantify time-varying (seasonal to decadal)
changes in reservoirs and fluxes of carbon and associated bioelements (nitrogen,
phosphorus, and silicon), (3) constrain processes controlling air-sea carbon
exchange, rates of carbon transformation through the planktonic food web, and
fluxes of carbon into the oceanâ€™s interior, (4) extend to 40 years a climatology
of hydrographic and biogeochemical dynamics from which to gauge anomalous or
extreme changes to the NPSG habitat, forming a multi-decadal baseline from which
to decipher natural and anthropogenic influences on the NPSG ecosystem, (5)
continue to provide scientific and logistical support to ancillary programs that
benefit from the temporal context, interdisciplinary science, and regular access
to the open sea afforded by HOT program occupation of Station ALOHA, including
projects implementing, testing, and validating new methodologies and
transformative ocean sampling technologies, and (6) provide unique training and
educational opportunities for the next generation of ocean
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.