* 2241507
* NSFDEB-NERC: Gigante: Quantifying and upscaling the causes and drivers of death for giant tropical trees
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Evan Gora, Cary Institute of Ecosystem Studies, Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Jason West
* 05/31/2026
* USD 685,564.00

This project – named Gigante - aims to understand when, where, and why the
largest trees in tropical forests die. The research is important because the
largest 1% of trees contain enormous amounts of carbon: about half of all carbon
stored in plants of these forests. However, we do not know what kills these
trees and therefore can’t predict how they might fare in the future or their
impact on climate. Gigante will use drones to guide field teams to locate and
describe thousands of giant tree deaths in tropical forests around the world.
These data will then be used to predict when and where other giant trees will
likely die in the future and to improve our understanding of how carbon cycles
on our planet today. Gigante’s outcomes are crucial to a better understanding of
how vulnerable tropical forests are to environmental change. The project will
train new and aspiring scientists across an international network in the use of
modern technology for studying giant trees, generate publicly accessible data on
all giant tree deaths to help satellite experts and others monitor forests, and
generate new software and training materials to help scientists and land
managers monitor the health of forests worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gigante
will locate giant tree mortality events using multi-platform, high-frequency
remote sensing of 7,500 hectares of tropical forest across five “super sites.”
These data will facilitate targeted field surveys using detailed state-of-the
art protocols to assign proximate agents of mortality to recently dead trees in
an unprecedentedly large field study. The researchers will integrate these data
with information about climate, topography, canopy structure, and tree traits to
validate mechanistic models of tree mortality risk. Finally, combining these
risk models with forest plots and satellite LiDAR, they will evaluate how
drivers of giant tree death predict spatial variation in forest dynamics,
structure, and carbon storage. In the course of this project, Gigante will
produce software and videos to facilitate the use of these methods elsewhere,
and provide training and capacity building to scientists across this
collaborative network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.