* 2241912
* SBIR Phase II:  Non-planar Spectral Breast Computed Tomography (CT)
* TIP,TI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Peymon Ghazi, MALCOVA INC
* Standard Grant
* Henry Ahn
* 04/30/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Innovation
Research (SBIR) Phase II project is to make available to the public a new
imaging device that provides the anatomical and functional information necessary
for effective and efficient diagnosis of breast cancer in women with dense
breasts. The device employs a novel design and method of generating high-
quality, three-dimensional images of the breast anatomy comfortably and at low
levels of radiation dose. By design, the device will occupy a small space and
support fast and efficient patient imaging. When commercialized, it can be
priced on par with existing x-ray-based imaging technologies. Given these
benefits and the large existing need nationwide need for a thorough dense-breast
imaging solution, there is significant commercial potential. The prime objective
of the project is to significantly increase the sensitivity and specificity in
cancer radiological studies of women with dense breasts. Accordingly, this
device has the potential to become the next generation breast cancer imaging
modality of choice for small clinics as well as large hospitals, available to
both patients and clinicians everywhere imaging is
performed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR)
Phase II project supports development and validation of a comfortable,
effective, dense-breast cancer imaging device built upon a new method and design
for Computed Tomography (CT). This CT-based device does not require breast
compression, and is smaller, faster, and higher in spatial resolution than
alternative 3-dimensional imaging technologies. The instrument will provide
spectral information used to distinguish deadly from non-deadly cancers from
both dense and non-dense tissues across the entire breast, including regions
near the chest and underarm. Nearly 50% of the U.S. female population has dense
breasts. The most widely used technologies for breast imaging today —Mammography
and Digital Breast Tomosynthesis — underserve these women. This technology
cannot reliably image breast regions near the chest and underarm where cancers
occur. Current methods also cannot reliably distinguish healthy, but dense,
breast tissue from cancer. During this SBIR project, testing and validation of
the developed device will be carried out using human-like surrogates called
anthropomorphic phantoms. The company will demonstrate that this new technology
provides high quality dense-tissue imaging, consistent whole-breast imaging, and
spectral information that is of clinical benefit in cancer detection and
diagnosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.