* 2241068
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Small: Targeting Challenges in Computational Disinformation Research to Enhance Attribution, Detection, and Explanation
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Kai Shu, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 02/28/2026
* USD 224,033.00

The use of social media has accelerated information sharing and instantaneous
communications. The low barrier to entering social media enables more users to
participate and keeps them engaged longer, incentivizing individuals with a
hidden agenda to spread disinformation online to manipulate information and sway
opinion. Disinformation, such as fake news, hoaxes, and conspiracy theories, has
increasingly become a hindrance to the functioning of online social media as an
effective channel for trustworthy information. Cases are emerging where
deliberately fabricated disinformation is weaponized to divide people and create
detrimental societal effects. Therefore, it is imperative to understand
disinformation and systematically investigate how to improve resistance against
it, considering the tension between the need for information and security and
protection from disinformation. The project aims to study the scientific
underpinnings of disinformation and develop a computational framework to
attribute, detect, and explain disinformation to inform policymaking.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves fundamentally transforming the
process to combat disinformation by developing new knowledge and a systematic
computational framework to address major (provenance, data, and explanaibility)
challenges of detecting online disinformation. The techniques developed combine
interdisciplinary theories and computational algorithms to help policymakers and
social media users address disinformation. The project outcomes help advance
state-of-the-art research on disinformation and introduce style-based and graph-
based optimization methods that can determine the source of disinformation and
its characteristics, disinformation detection methods requiring minimal data or
supervision by harnessing multimodal data and high-level social context
relations, and interpretable detection techniques that rely on well-established
psychological and cognitive theories, and enable human interactions to enhance
detection and explanation. More broadly, the project contributes to data mining,
machine learning, graph mining, and text mining research as well social science
research in communication and journalism on credibility, transparency, and
disinformation mitigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.