* 2241623
* REU Site:  The Williams College SMALL REU program
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Steven Miller, Williams College
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 06/30/2026
* USD 300,000.00

The Williams College SMALL REU program brings 25 to 40 undergraduates to campus
for 9 weeks each summer to work on research projects under the direction of
faculty members in mathematics or statistics. The summer culminates with student
research presentations at Williams and students are encouraged to follow up with
presentations at regional or national conferences. Most research groups will
write up their results for submissions to research journals. The program
includes weekly talks by faculty and students, both in mathematics and in
related fields. Students are part of a vibrant scientific community with over
100 students doing original research in mathematics and the sciences at Williams
each summer, and there are a variety of academic and social activities bringing
all summer students and faculty together.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
REU is to introduce undergraduates to the excitement and challenge of doing
original research in mathematics. Topics are drawn from algebraic geometry,
combinatorics, commutative algebra, computational geometry, discrete geometry,
dynamics and ergodic theory, graph theory, hyperbolic manifolds, knot theory,
mathematical biology, mathematical physics, measure theory, number theory,
probability, random matrix theory, representation theory, statistics and
tropical geometry. In the process, students naturally learn significant
background material and are encouraged to present as well as publish their work,
all invaluable for graduate school. The variety of mathematical activities is
intended to provide a rich intellectual environment. The numbers of students
from traditionally under-represented groups participating in the program has
increased greatly over the last ten years, and there are ongoing efforts to look
for new and better ways to encourage applications from women, first generation
college students, and underrepresented groups in STEM. Students, faculty and the
broader mathematics community will benefit from the presentation and publication
of original research. Students will develop a lifetime network of peers and
mentors, and many of them will pursue graduate studies, partially because of
their REU experience. Almost all students will publish papers in research
journals and many present their results at national and international research
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.