* 2241744
* Understanding the drivers and climate sensitivity of open ocean methane emissions to the atmosphere
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Thomas Weber, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Katsumi Matsumoto
* 05/31/2026
* USD 294,092.00

Methane is a potent greenhouse gas with a global warming potential thirty times
larger than carbon dioxide. In addition to human emissions methane has many
natural sources to the atmosphere, which could be amplified by future climate
warming. Methane emissions from the vast open ocean are relatively small but
their sensitivity to climate change is highly uncertain. This is because the
processes that supply methane to surface ocean waters are not well understood.
To improve our understanding of the open ocean methane cycle, this project will
use a computer model to interpret a large database of methane concentration
measurements. First, the model will be used to determine the dominant biological
source of methane within surface waters. Candidates include production during
algae growth, production in the guts of small animals, and bacterial decay of
organic matter. Each of these processes would produce a different surface
methane pattern, allowing the model to distinguish between them. Second, the
model will quantify the supply of methane from the seafloor in low oxygen zones
of the ocean, and determine whether this methane is consumed by bacteria before
escaping to the atmosphere. This is important because low oxygen zones will
likely grow as the climate warms. Leakage of methane from these regions could
therefore act as a feedback on climate change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The global
model developed in this project will simulate the open ocean sources and sinks
of methane, including in situ aerobic methanogenesis in surface waters,
diffusion from anoxic sediments, oxidation in the water column, and exchange
with the atmosphere. Data will be assimilated to optimize model parameters, and
ultimately determine the balance of sources and sinks that is most consistent
with the observed ocean methane distribution. Aerobic methane production will be
formulated as function of phytoplankton growth, zooplankton abundance, and
organic matter recycling, to determine which mechanisms best explains the
pattern of surface methane supersaturation. The oxygen dependence of sedimentary
methane sources and bacterial methane oxidation will be optimized to best match
the observed plumes that spread laterally from suboxic waters and upwell towards
the surface. The resulting optimized model will then be used to predict future
perturbation of the open ocean methane source in response to ecosystem changes
and ocean oxygen loss.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.