* 2241829
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Obligation and Relationality in the Wake of Critical Events
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Ilana Feldman, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2023
* USD 24,746.00

Critical events can catalyze new forms of social relations or anchor new modes
of collective life. Critical events (major occurrences, such as natural
disasters, conflict, or economic crises that redefine social categories) have
typically been explored in the aftermath of isolated incidents. This doctoral
dissertation project investigates how people’s sense of obligation to others
comes to be defined, experienced, and materialized in the context of multiple
critical events that accrue over time. Existing research on obligation focuses
on reciprocity and exchange and tends to paint a linear account of how
solicitations of obligations form and bind people to one another. This
dissertation research will instead attend to the tangled processes through which
people’s sense of obligation to others is brought into relief and called into
question in the wake of layered critical events. In addition to supporting the
training of a doctoral student, the findings from this project will be shared
with academic audiences as well as humanitarian and cultural non-governmental
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project traces different modes of
response, including assistance and documentation, that people draw on to respond
to layers of critical events. This multi-sited ethnography will encompass
members of different generations and residents of different locales, and will
deploy a combination of semi-structured interviews, participant observation, and
oral life history interviews to explore the factors that guide people’s
responses to events, how sociality and community boundaries become
(re)configured as a result of these responses, and how meanings of critical
events change as they accrue over time. In doing so, this broadens the spatial
and temporal scope of the anthropological study of obligation and contributes to
social science by better understanding the processes and forces through which
boundaries of community are made and remade.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.