* 2241931
* Quantifying biological productivity and ocean carbon uptake in the NE Subarctic Pacific using observations and models
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Amanda Timmerman, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Katsumi Matsumoto
* 02/28/2026
* USD 767,724.00

Earth system models are important tools to evaluate the current and future
changes in the Earth’s environment. However, there are still many model
disagreements about the patterns of carbon uptake by the oceans. This project
will carry out field observations and computer modeling to determine the
biological carbon uptake in the subarctic NE Pacific. This project will
integrate various observations, for example, shipboard, autonomous float,
satellite measurement, with high-performance computing. This project will help
identify the causes of model biases and contribute to future model development.
This study will engage local undergraduates as student assistants from nearby
HBCUs in the Atlanta area and through summer REU program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is organized into three themes. First is the
integration of in-vitro, in-situ and satellite observations of biological
productivity. Second is the development of a regional carbon and ecosystem
model. Third is characterization of spatial and temporal variability of
biological productivity and air-sea carbon flux. The main objective is to
quantify and reduce uncertainty in the regional biological carbon uptake through
the combination of in situ and vitro methods and modeling. The field component
will utilize the Line P time-series cruise in June 2024. Incubation experiments
(13C, 15NO3, 15NH4) at five major stations will be conducted together with high-
resolution underway O2/Ar measurements. This will quantify primary production
and carbon export. To increase data coverage, autonomous floats and satellite
observations will be incorporated. The new and existing observations will be
used to validate and calibrate a new 3-dimensional regional ecosystem and carbon
cycle model at eddy-resolving resolution. This model will be calibrated, then
this model will be used to carry out multi-decadal simulation (1995-present). A
suite of sensitivity model experiments will explore a wide range of scientific
questions and hypotheses including the role of iron dynamics, mesoscale physical
features, climate modes, and extreme events such as marine heat
waves.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.