* 2241483
* Building STEM Skills by Integrating Data Literacy and Text Analytics in English Language Arts
* EDU,DRL
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Victor Lee, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Noll
* 02/28/2026
* USD 499,960.00

Ubiquitous computing and new technologies are infusing fields that have not
historically been identified as STEM-related, such as the humanities, with new
tools and practices involving data. This data infusion is opening up new
opportunities to use data literacy instruction to augment instruction already
required for compulsory humanities subjects, such as English language arts.
Additionally, the potential for improving studentsâ€™ data literacy through the
analysis of textual data is directly relevant to increasing future participation
and success in STEM fields and professions. For example, word frequency
visualizations and analyses are fundamental text analytics techniques that are
at the core of many new language technologies, such as language model-based
chatbots, and emerging STEM-related careers, such as data journalism. Text
analytics techniques are also changing how language is understood and analyzed
by digital humanists, who use such analytics to make patterns and tendencies in
language use visible. The next generation workforce needs to be prepared to work
with language and text as data. The goal of this project is to develop and
research the potential of integrated data literacy and text analytics
instruction in middle school English language arts. This integration may make
fundamental data literacy practices more accessible for students who are not
taking related STEM coursework, provide new resources to help students with
reading comprehension, and create new pathways for greater participation in STEM
fields and professions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through co-design, classroom
research, and participatory professional development with practicing English
Language Arts teachers, this project will be developing text analytics tools,
visualizations, and techniques that are well-suited and tested for use in
English Language Arts middle school classrooms. Changes in student
understandings related to data literacy and textual literacy as a result of
using these new resources will be documented through clinical interviews and
analyzed across multiple years of the project. Changes in student awareness and
perception of STEM skills and data-intensive careers will also be surveyed and
studied across multiple years. In addition to creating new pathways for STEM
skill development, a key hypothesis of this project is that the introduction of
data literacy activities in English Language Arts can also make text
comprehension more accessible for students who are still developing their
English language fluency. These data literacy activities provide graphical and
visualization resources for recognizing important features of text and language.
A majority Hispanic/Latino public school district with almost a third of its
student body classified as English Language Learners, is partnering with the
university-based research team, will be participating in yearlong teacher
professional development activities, and will be providing cycles of feedback
and improvement throughout the project. An estimated 3000 public middle school
students will be using innovative data literacy integrations in their English
language arts classes. This project is funded by the Innovative Technology
Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects
that build understandings of practices, program elements, contexts and processes
contributing to increasing students' knowledge and interest in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and information and
communication technology (ICT) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.