* 2241327
* Exploring Emergent Magnetic Topological States in Three-Dimensional Magnetic Topological Insulator Multilayers
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Chao-Xing Liu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 04/30/2026
* USD 729,992.00

Non-technical abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum-based technologies promise
revolutionary advances in computing, sensing, communication, and metrology, but
success hinges on the creation of a material platform in which a quantum state
can be made robust against environmental decoherence yet simultaneously be
amendable to control and measurement. An attractive scheme towards quantum-based
technologies involves a class of materials called magnetic topological
insulators where the conducting electrons can be confined to the edges or
surfaces of the sample and flow without resistance. In this project, based on a
LEGO design scheme, the research team employs magnetic topological insulators as
primary building blocks to construct a number of multilayer heterostructures and
explores the emergent quantum phenomena therein. The success of this project
will advance knowledge of the interplay between magnetism and topology.
Moreover, this research enhances the material efforts at Penn State. This
research team actively integrates graduate and undergraduate education into the
project, with a particular focus on increasing participation among
underrepresented minorities, and also develops outreach activities that target
K-12 students and teachers from the State College Area School
District.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Current
research on magnetic topological states focuses on the quantum anomalous Hall
state and magnetic Weyl semimetals. The realization of other magnetic
topological phases, including axion insulators, the three-dimensional quantum
anomalous Hall state, and higher-order magnetic topological insulators, is still
limited due to the lack of suitable magnetic material platforms. The goal of
this project is to use magnetically doped and undoped topological insulators and
normal insulator layers as building blocks to construct multilayer
heterostructures as a highly tunable platform for creating and manipulating
these magnetic topological states. The physical properties of these magnetic
topological insulator multilayer heterostructures are explored by combining
advanced experimental probes, such as electrical transport, scanning tunneling
microscopy and spectroscopy, and angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy, with
sophisticated theoretical modeling and material simulations. The realization of
magnetic topological states in magnetic topological insulator multilayer
heterostructures may pave the way for energy-efficient electronic and spintronic
devices. This study also provides the scientific foundation in quantum anomalous
Hall and axion insulators to achieve transformative electromagnetic applications
in quantum information technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.