* 2241991
* Drivers of ocean acidification in a temperate urbanized estuary undergoing nutrient loading reductions
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Hongjie Wang, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Katsumi Matsumoto
* 05/31/2026
* USD 716,649.00

About one-third of human-produced carbon dioxide (CO2) has dissolved in the
ocean, significantly slowing down climate change and global warming. However, as
more CO2 dissolves in the sea, the ocean water becomes acidified because CO2 is
a weak acid. We call this change ocean acidification (OA). OA has a significant
and lasting impact on marine life, as acidified water causes shell dissolution
for numerous marine species. US society is already grappling with the adverse
effects of OA. OA is predicted to lead to economic losses of $400 million
annually by 2100 for the US shellfish industry. Therefore, it is urgent to
understand how OA is changing and the potential approaches to managing it in
coastal waters. Presently, we do not have a good understanding of OA change at
either the large or the small scale because so many competing processes impact
OA. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most dramatic processes that affect ocean
acidification (OA) is the extra nutrient loading from rivers due to human
inputs. While moderate nutrient levels are necessary to support marine life,
nutrient levels that are too high can cause oceanic plankton blooms. As plankton
die, they sink to the seafloor, where they are decomposed by bacteria and speed
up OA where shellfish live. In recent decades, management agencies have been
working on improving water quality by reducing the nutrient input to coastal
waters, which has the potential to reduce the OA even though OA is not the
initial motivation. To our knowledge, there has yet to be targeted research to
understand how OA responds to aggressive nutrient reduction. The average
nutrient input to Narragansett Bay– one of the most rapidly warming estuaries in
the US–has been reduced over one-third in recent decades because of intentional
nutrient reduction. Therefore, Narragansett Bay can be considered a natural
laboratory that can help in better understanding the OA change that other
coastal areas may soon experience resulting from environmental management
actions and climate change. This project will leverage the existing water
quality monitoring network, collect new data, and utilize a coastal
biogeochemical model to quantify OA change and the mechanisms driving its change
in Narragansett Bay, RI. Through engagement with the public and local shellfish
growers, we will increase their awareness of OA and enhance their ability to
carry out ongoing or new aquaculture operations in the near and long term. As
more US states reduce nutrient input to improve coastal water quality, this
project will allow management agencies nationwide to make next-generation
refinements to best limit OA for sustainable fisheries and wildlife in the face
of climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.