* 2241795
* CPS Medium: Collaborative Research: Physics-Informed Learning and Control of Passive and Hybrid Conditioning Systems in Buildings
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Koushik Kar, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 05/31/2026
* USD 417,090.00

This Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) project will develop advanced artificial
intelligence and machine-learning (AI/ML) techniques to harness the extensive
untapped climatic resources that exist for direct solar heating, natural
ventilation, and radiative and evaporative cooling in buildings. Although these
mechanisms for building environment conditioning are colloquially termed
"passive," their performance depends strongly on the intelligent control of
operable elements such as windows and shading, as well as fans in hybrid
systems. Towards this goal, this project will create design methodologies for
climate- and occupant-responsive strategies that control these operable elements
intelligently in coordination with existing building heating ventilation and air
conditioning systems, based on sensor measurements of the indoor and outdoor
environments, weather and energy forecasts, occupancy, and occupant preferences.
The solutions developed in this project can potentially result in substantial
reduction in greenhouse gas emissions generated from space heating, cooling, and
ventilation. The developed techniques may be particularly valuable in affordable
housing by reducing energy costs under normal conditions and improving passive
survivability during extreme events and power
outages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this project will create intelligent
passive and hybrid conditioning systems that optimally leverage climatic
resources in the form of temperate outdoor air and sunlight, harness these
resources at the building envelope and redistribute them within the building’s
microclimates, and learn to respond to changing weather and evolving occupant
needs. The project will advance foundational analysis and design tools for a
class of physics-informed machine learning models for systems governed by local
energy and mass conservation laws. These so-called locally interactive bilinear
ﬂow models have broad applicability beyond the specific physical building
systems studied in this project. From a fundamental cyber physical systems
standpoint, the researchers will establish analytical certificates for learning
and control algorithms designed for this class of systems, bridging the gap
between purely data-driven strategies and physics-based models. Finally, the
project will provide a systematic mechanism to evaluate climate resources
available through the intelligent operation of passive systems, bridging a key
gap in current understanding. Demonstrations in occupied buildings will provide
key insights and evidence to support the applicability of the researched tools
in the real world. This effort will also develop and present educational modules
to attract middle and high school students to encourage careers in sustainable
engineering through the RPI Engineering Ambassadors program; at the same time,
project outcomes will also support community engagement with science and
technology through the University of Oregon Sustainable City Year
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.