* 2241840
* Collaborative Research: Assessing Impacts of a Four-Day Workweek
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2025
* Juliet Schor, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 06/30/2025
* USD 205,084.00

A four-day, 32-hour workweek with no reduction in pay is an emerging workplace
innovation. This project investigates potential benefits of a four-day workweek
for employees, organizations, and the environment. The study investigates how a
four-day workweek shapes workers’ mental and physical health, levels of
satisfaction, and behavior, including household carbon use. Reducing household
carbon use is one potential strategy to mitigate human effects on the changing
climate. The research also considers how a four-day workweek might benefit
companies by investigating company revenue, employee absenteeism, and worker
turnover. The four-day week may be an important contributor to national well-
being and prosperity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is the first known major
scientific investigation of a four-day workweek with a robust research design.
Investigators partner with 4 Day Week Global, a non-profit that organizes six-
month trials for institutions to adopt a four-day workweek. Researchers use a
matched pair case-control design with 20 U.S. companies who trial the four-day
workweek, plus 20 control companies. The project combines surveys, interviews,
and administrative data. The surveys take place across four waves: trial
baseline, mid-point, trial end, and six months from trial end, with a survey
population of between 1000 and 2000. Interviews are conducted twice each with 40
employees or managers and 10 CEOs. The study investigates how a four-day
workweek shapes workers’ stress and burnout, mental and physical health,
exercise, sleep, life and time-use satisfaction, work-life conflict, and
household carbon use. An intersectional approach enables the study of
potentially disparate effects of the four-day week on workers by class, life
stage, and demographic characteristics. The cross-company mixed-methods design
permits comparative analysis across firms, occupations, and industries, thereby
contributing to understanding of workplace flexibility and organizational
change. Investigating how workplace policies shape carbon emissions may also
illuminate how paid work could help to mitigate climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.