* 2241521
* Collaborative Research: Southern Lynchings and Children's Educational Outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Mary Batistich, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 03/31/2025
* USD 201,410.00

Stressors in a child’s environment, among other things, can have significant
adverse effect on the child’s educational attainment, as well as other possible
outcomes. Exposure to violence, especially violence targeted at the child’s own
demographic, social or faith community, can be a severe environmental stressor.
The late 19th and early 20th centuries saw widespread patterns of racially
motivated violence, particularly in the South. This project will use newly
digitized historical records from early 20th century Mississippi to study how
lynchings affected the educational choices of local Black children and their
families using. The research will combine county level lynching data with
detailed school enrolment and attendance record of every child in Mississippi
from 1927 to 1957. This detailed data set, and the exogenous nature of lynchings
will allow the researchers to identify how lynchings affect children’s
educational outcomes. Given the critical importance of education in reducing
inequality and progressing toward racial equity in the U.S., identifying how
exposure to lynchings affected educational attainment can improve our
understanding of the evolution of Black-White inequality in the mid- to
late-20th century South. The research results can therefore guide policies to
improve educational outcomes of racial minorities, hence narrow the racial
achievement gaps in the US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will digitize and
link the Mississippi Enumeration of Educable Children, 1850-1892; 1908-1957, a
newly discovered set of records created by the Mississippi Department of
Education to inform allocation of state education funding across counties. These
records include the school enrollment and attendance status for every child in
Mississippi, biennially from 1927 to 1957, as well as information on the town of
residence, school attended, and sibling links. Using these unique records, the
PIs will construct a measure of historical educational attainment that will be
more accurate than the self-reported educational attainment variable present in
the 1940 and 1950 decennial censuses. The constructed data will allow the PIs to
observe which children had completed their schooling at the time a lynching
occurred in their community. The PIs will use the lynching data in the state of
Mississippi and the constructed educational attainment data to estimate the
causal effect of lynching on the educational attainment of different racial
groups in communities where lynchings occurred during the study period. The
research results can guide policies to improve educational outcomes of racial
minorities, hence narrow the racial achievement gaps in the
US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.