* 2241947
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Implications of Diverse Environmental Knowledge for Community Conservation
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2023,12/31/2023
* J Brosius, University of Georgia
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2023
* USD 12,275.00

Indigenous and local environmental knowledge plays a vital role in community-
based conservation in the United States and across the world. Deploying such
knowledge to inform community decision making regarding natural resource
management, however, involves complex negotiations between stakeholders, who
often have differing environmental perspectives. By investigating how diverse
knowledge shapes the dynamics of collective governance of community conserved
areas, this doctoral dissertation research sheds light on some of the more
challenging aspects of community conservation policy and practice, such as
knowledge integration and stakeholder equity. The dissemination of research
results to policy makers and academic and general audiences will raise awareness
of the value of Indigenous and local knowledge for biodiversity conservation
while emphasizing its diversity and complexity. This project trains a graduate
student in anthropology in the methods of scientific data collection and
analysis and exemplifies the importance of scientifically investigating the
epistemological aspects of community-based natural resource management in order
to foster more successful conservation outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project analyzes how different types of knowledge come into contact to influence
conservation processes and the effects of these varied epistemologies on the
governance and representation of an Indigenous community conserved area.
Specifically, the researchers examine how knowledge holders mobilize
environmental ideas, beliefs, and values to validate opinions about natural
resource management and how differing perspectives are contested or adopted in
order to achieve consensus-based collective action. Qualitative methods and a
multi-scalar and multi-sited research design are utilized to assess the role of
knowledge in shaping conservation processes at an individual, community, and
organization level. Determining the types of knowledge Indigenous communities
mobilize to manage and conserve biodiversity enhances our theoretical
understanding of Indigenous and local environmental knowledge. Additionally,
ascertaining the role of such knowledges in the negotiation of conservation
problems helps expand scientific comprehension of the interpersonal and
epistemological processes inherent to collective action and environmental
governance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.