* 2241489
* RAPID: Deployment of a Field Rheometer Prototype
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Stephan Kolzenburg, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2024
* USD 52,582.00

This project deploys a field rheometer prototype to the reawakened eruption at
Geldingadalir Volcano, Iceland with the goal to test its field performance and
to gather the first ever rheological data on active Icelandic Mid Ocean Ridge
Basalts (MORB) in the field. Access to active lava flows is challenging due to
the unpredictable nature of the timing and occurrence of effusive eruptions.
This eruption, which started August 3, 2022, provides unparalleled ease of
access to active lava flows whose nature is sufficiently “well behaved” to
facilitate in-situ measurements of lava properties. This project strives to
achieve two fundamental goals: 1) Travel to Iceland to deploy the field
rheometer prototype to collect the first field measurements with this device and
test its limits. 2) Performing a series of two-phase (melt+crystals) experiments
at the temperatures, shear rates, and fO2 of lava measured at Geldingadalir
Volcano. Combined, this enables this team to collect the first field
measurements of the rheology of Icelandic MORB lavas and to deduce the effect of
bubbles on three-phase rheology by contrasting the field measurements (with
bubbles) and lab measurements (bubble-free). InSAR data published by the
Icelandic Meteorological Office suggest higher magma influx rates for this
eruption than for the 2021 eruption. This could mean either that the eruption
lasts longer than that of 2021 or it could mean that much of the available lava
is erupted through the pathway created during the previous eruptive event over a
short period of time. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurate forecasting of lava flow
paths and advance rates is crucial to hazard mitigation ahead of and during
effusive events, civil protection, and management of ongoing eruptive crises.
This task has been hampered largely by an incomplete understanding of multiphase
(melt+crystals+bubbles) lava rheology. Field viscosity measurements are
extremely rare and largely limited to a narrow compositional range (dominated by
Hawaiian Basalts). This highlights the dire need for more, and better in-situ
measurements on a broader range of compositions. While our understanding of the
flow properties of lavas has advanced significantly over the past two to three
decades, two core limitations have always remained: 1) Accurate reproduction of
natural emplacement conditions (scale, textures, fO2) 2) The inability to
maintain three-phase suspensions in the lab (bubbles escape on experimental
timescale, limiting measurements to two-phase crystals-melt suspensions).
Measuring the viscosity of lava in the field removes both limitations.
Importantly, when combined with bubble free lab measurements it has the
potential to quantify the effect of bubbles on multiphase lava rheology. This
project therefore has the potential to address some of the major limiting
factors to advancing our understanding of lava flow emplacement for decades.
Results will be shared with stakeholders within and beyond the scientific
community, and some samples and tools from this work will be incorportated into
the Buffalo Museum of Science. Project insights will also be incorporated into
hands on exercises in the UB EarthEd program, providing content for K12
educators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.