* 2241802
* Culturally situated immersive virtual learning and engineering design to build STEM capacity in Dine communities
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Shawn Jordan, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Asli Sezen-Barrie
* 06/30/2027
* USD 1,300,000.00

The goal of this project is to develop and test hybrid immersive learning
environments to engage Diné (Navajo) middle school students in place-based
virtual scientific investigations, hands-on physical experiments, and
engineering design projects. The curriculum units will support technology-
infused science learning on the past, present, and future of (1) energy in the
Navajo Nation (specifically the transition from coal to other energy sources);
and (2) water (both shortage and quality issues). The curriculum will build on
the rich history of Diné traditional ecological knowledge and practices. The
immersive virtual environment will support scientific investigation through
situated, place-based investigation, with connections to cultural and historical
context, and visualizations not accessible in real-world environments. The
physical engineering design activity will involve engineering design projects to
design solutions to meet community needs. This project is a partnership between
Arizona State University Polytechnic School, Harvard Graduate School of
Education, the Ke’yah Advanced Rural Manufacturing Alliance (KARMA), the
Department of Diné Education, and a cohort of middle schools across the entire
Navajo Nation. This approach has the potential to inspire the next generation of
Diné engineers and scientists to use their knowledge to strengthen their
communities. This project will directly impact 1800+ middle school students and
60+ teachers across 15+ schools across all five agencies of the Navajo Nation.
This project is funded by the Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and
Teachers (ITEST) program, which supports projects that build understandings of
practices, program elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing
students' knowledge and interest in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) and information and communication technology (ICT)
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will develop and test two hybrid
culturally-situated immersive learning environments for schools in the Navajo
Nation centered around the energy and water futures. A Community Participatory
Design-Based Research approach will be used to collaborate with Diné community
members (including elders, leaders, teachers, and engineers) to co-design and
revise the curriculum. This study will advance knowledge of blending virtual 3-D
immersive learning environments with hands-on project-based learning in
culturally-situated contexts to support students in designing energy and water
futures. It will also generate new knowledge of how Diné knowledge can be used
in engineering design and intersect with STEM and continue evolving community
participatory approaches to research. The study will use mixed-method approaches
to study student and teacher experiences with and impacts of the curriculum,
through research questions on (1) teachers’ and students’ experiences with the
hybrid learning environment, (2) how students use their cultural capital, and
how students perceive Diné cultural knowledge, skills, and attitudes
intersecting with STEM, and (3) the pre-post impacts of the experiences on
student learning and affective measures. The project will also provide
professional development to teachers in the Navajo Nation to adapt and implement
the curricula, using a train-the-trainer model to scale and sustain the program
beyond the duration of the grant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.