* 2241062
* Current-Collector-Optional Measurements to Quantify Precious Metal and Polarization Impacts on Oxygen Surface Exchange Coefficients
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Jason Nicholas, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 07/31/2026
* USD 497,142.00

Catalytic electrochemical devices are of increasing importance in alternative
energy, environmental protection, and life-support technologies. The project
focuses on a class of high-temperature devices including fuel cells,
electrolyzers, oxygen generators, solar energy concentrators, and catalytic
converters, that are often limited in performance by the slow exchange of oxygen
with the surrounding atmosphere. Oxygen exchange is promoted by Mixed Ionic
Electronic Conducting (MIEC) oxygen exchange catalysts. However, the
identification of materials with improved oxygen exchange is presently limited
by experimental artifacts associated with measuring the catalyst’s oxygen
exchange rate (as typically characterized by a rate coefficient known as
k(chem)). The project will quantify the sources of errors and lack of lab-to-lab
reproducibility in traditional electrochemical k(chem) measurements, while
demonstrating the effectiveness of a novel non-electrochemical thin-film method
for accurately measuring oxygen exchange rates. Beyond the technical aspects,
the project involves educational and outreach activities ranging from
introducing 4-8th grade girls to engineering to teaching a course at the
Michigan State Grandparent University Summer Camp.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Recent
experiments by the investigator’s group, and others, have demonstrated that
precious metal current collectors, even unpolarized ones, can alter high-
temperature MIEC k(chem) values. However, the full extent to which precious
metal surface additions and/or electric polarization influence high-temperature
MIEC k(chem) values, and the mechanisms by which this occurs, have yet to be
fully explored. Hence, the objective of the project is to: 1) quantify the
impact intentionally-added Pt surface additions and/or electric polarization
have on the 400-600°C k(chem) of Pulsed Laser Deposited (PLD) praseodymium
cerium oxide (PCO) thin films, 2) determine the mechanisms by which these
fabrication and testing modifications alter the PCO k(chem), and 3) identify
possible sources of previously-unrecognized, inadvertent precious metal
contamination. This will be achieved by comparing the k(chem) values obtained
from an in situ, non-contact, current-collector-optional wafer curvature
measurement technique developed in the investigator’s group with those obtained
via simultaneous Electrical Conductivity Relaxation and Electrochemical
Impedance Spectroscopy. In addition, surface and bulk thin film composition and
structural characterization techniques (such as X-Ray Diffractometry, Scanning
Electron Microscopy, X-Ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy, and Secondary Ion Mass
Spectrometry) will be used to identify relationships between k(chem) and
materials properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.