* 2241536
* Collaborative Research: HNDS-R Networks and Health Disparities in Delays in Diagnosis of Medical Conditions with Ambiguous Symptoms
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Diego Leal Castro, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Van Zandt
* 07/31/2026
* USD 179,727.00

Missed, delayed, or inaccurate medical diagnoses (i.e., diagnostic errors) are
responsible for up to 80,000 hospital deaths in the United States annually. Some
medical conditions are not easy to diagnose because symptoms are ambiguous or
easy to confuse with other conditions, which contributes to diagnostic errors.
This is especially the case for rare diseases with which physicians may not have
much experience. This project examines whether marginalized status (e.g.,
racially and ethnically minoritized people and women) and the structure of
patient-physician network ties are associated with delays in diagnosis of
medical conditions with ambiguous symptoms. The findings from this project can
lead to better healthcare interventions that could reduce health disparities
related to diagnostic errors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project determines the
social and structural predictors of delays in diagnosis of medical conditions
with ambiguous symptoms. Drawing on theories from social psychology, this study
hypothesizes that marginalized people are more likely to experience longer
delays in diagnosis of diseases with ambiguous symptoms because the diagnostic
process can be affected by racial, gender, and other stereotypes. Drawing on
theories from network science, this study hypothesizes that patient-physician
network structures that encourage exposure to non-redundant information (new
possible diagnoses or tests to consider), together with physicians’ increased
willingness to accept mistakes and correct misdiagnoses are associated with
faster times to diagnoses of medical conditions with ambiguous symptoms. The
project combines Longitudinal Medicaid Analytic eXtract (MAX) medical claims
data with the American Medical Association (AMA) Physician Masterfile data to
quantitatively test these hypotheses. Patient-physician networks are constructed
through direct links between patients and physicians based on clinical
encounters and indirect links between physicians through the patients they
share. This project is important for understanding how social networks influence
the patient-physician relationship and diagnostic processes, and for reducing
the number of diagnostic errors in the U.S. healthcare
system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.