* 2241738
* Disaggregated Earnings Trajectories in the U.S. Labor Market:  New Evidence from Linked Longitudinal Data
* SBE,SES
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Xi Song, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 06/30/2026
* USD 315,662.00

This project investigates the economic outcomes and trajectories of the fastest
growing demographic group in the United States and, in particular, its workforce
in science and engineering. To date, there is no consensus on fundamental
questions about the labor market experiences and trajectories for this group.
Empirical evidence of their labor market outcomes is scattered and mixed despite
their high educational attainment. Moreover, this study investigates their labor
market experiences disaggregating across gender, nativity, and national origin.
The project also yields implications for reductions to barriers to incorporation
and intergenerational mobility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study uses the
restricted-access linked longitudinal survey data in NSF's Scientists and
Engineers Statistical Data System (SESTAT) and Census Bureau’s Longitudinal
Employer-Household Dynamics (LEHD) data and Decennial Census/American Community
Survey (ACS) data. This enables it to overcome previous data limitations, which
have made it difficult to accurately study the outcomes and trajectories of
workers in this demographic group. Because diversity is a hallmark of this
population, failing to disaggregate the population results in biased or
incomplete narratives. The project adapts two widely used statistical
methods—multi-level growth-curve models and group-based trajectory models—to
represent individual heterogeneity in earnings trajectories in a population.
Findings from these life-course trajectory models reveal economic inequality,
such as across workers’ national origin and generation groups, as well as
between this and other demographic groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.