* 2241704
* REU Site: Translating Research in the Psychological Sciences to the Real World
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Patricia DeLucia, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2026
* USD 400,000.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences
(SBE). This REU Site engages students in research that is relevant to solving
society’s most pressing issues, such as improving the mobility of people with
visual impairment, designing semi-autonomous vehicles so that they can be driven
safely, enhancing patient safety by increasing the effectiveness of team
communication, and identifying early behavior markers of Alzheimer’s Disease.
Students will develop skills in conducting literature reviews, understanding and
critiquing scientific articles, designing research studies, collecting and
analyzing data, interpreting results in terms of real-world applications,
conducting research responsibly, working collaboratively, and communicating
results. This training will make students attractive for graduate school as well
as for the plentiful job opportunities in applied psychology, for example, for
industry employers seeking individuals who can apply research training to
practical issues such as evaluating products and user interfaces. The REU Site
will support diversity in social and behavioral sciences by recruiting
underrepresented groups to participate. Results of the research have broad
practical significance and will be publicly
disseminated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research pursued in this REU program
advances the cutting edge of basic knowledge in the areas of cognitive
psychology, cognitive and affective neuroscience, perception, social psychology,
health psychology, industrial/organizational, human-automation collaboration,
and human factors/human computer interaction. It also translates that knowledge
into implications for real-world problems. For example, understanding how people
integrate auditory and visual information from moving vehicles can help enhance
rehabilitation and training in people with visual impairments. Identifying
factors that contribute to discrimination can lead to training practices that
improve the workplace environment. Tracking gradual changes in memory concurrent
with brain measurements can lead to behavior and neural markers of early stages
of Alzheimer’s Disease. All of the research employs rigorous scientific methods
which will generate results that advance both theory and lead to recommendations
for practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.