* 2241312
* Inferring the gene coevolution network from deep comparative genomics
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2026
* Gavin Conant, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Judy Stone
* 12/31/2026
* USD 499,622.00

It is not surprising that a missing or damaged gene can be detrimental to the
organism possessing it. It is more surprising that having extra copies of genes
can also be harmful, as is the case with Down syndrome, where an extra,
undamaged, copy of chromosome 21 is responsible for the syndrome’s symptoms.
Geneticists believe that these extra genes are harmful because they encode
proteins that need to work in concert with the proteins made by genes on other
chromosomes. If these interacting proteins are not present in the correct
numbers relative to each other, they can disrupt cellular activities.
Unfortunately, no simple experiments can identify all the pairs of genes that
need to work in balance with each other. Curiously however, there are also cells
that have entire extra copies of the genome in their cells, possessing not two
but four or more copies. Despite the extra copies, these polyploid cells are
healthy and can be found in many forms of life. In fact, over evolutionary time,
several important groups of organisms, including the vertebrates and all
flowering plants, have undergone such polyploidy events and transmitted the
resulting extra genes to their descendants. Importantly though, not all of the
extra (or duplicated) genes are kept. As a result, the patterns of gene loss and
survival seen after a polyploidy can be used to identify the pairs of genes that
have dosage interactions with each other. In other words, by studying evolution
after polyploidy across many different genomes, it will be possible to identify
the interactions driving effects like those of Down syndrome, and to shed light
on gene interactions in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will use
evolutionary modeling software developed by the investigators to analyze
duplicate gene loss and retention after more than a dozen independent
polyploidies. The team will improve this tool by adding the capacity to model
polyploidies that occurred “on top of” other polyploidies. Then, using more than
60 individual genomes, the investigators will infer a network of genes where the
connections between those genes represent dosage interactions. In this
framework, pairs of interacting genes will be those for which differences in
copy number between the pair is evolutionarily costly. With the network in hand,
the researchers will use existing large-scale datasets on physical interactions
between proteins, regulatory connections between genes and other biochemical
information to understand why certain pairs of genes need to be maintained in
similar copy number in order to function correctly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.