* 2241633
* I-Corps: Struvite Recovery for Organic Food Production
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/2022,10/31/2023
* Wendong Tao, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a technology to recover phosphate and ammonia in wastewater as
struvite. Struvite is a slow-release compound fertilizer. This proposed
technology may decrease the cost of wastewater treatment and improve the
struvite recovery process. Struvite recovery from wastewater is a sustainable
alternative to the industrial production of phosphorus fertilizers that have
resulted in rapidly depleting natural phosphate rock reserves. As global supply
chains of fertilizer have been disrupted, fertilizer prices have increased
substantially, increasing the revenue of struvite recovery. Farming that does
not use water-soluble fertilizers is anticipated to grow rapidly. Unlike the
currently available organic fertilizers, the struvite fertilizers produced with
this proposed technology have high nitrogen and phosphorus
values.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of
mineral-based magnesium-based amendment materials and bio-based binding agents
for cost-effective recovery of struvite from wastewater. When wastewater pH is
raised and magnesium ions are supplemented in nutrient-rich wastewater, struvite
precipitates form. This mineral is precipitated into granules in a crystallizer
for product harvesting. The proposed struvite recovery technology uses minerals
to recover phosphate and ammonia as powdery struvite, a natural fertilizer, and
applies bio-based binding agents to quickly turn the struvite powder into
granular organic fertilizer. The proposed technology integrates two low-cost
minerals and a physical mineral activation method for simultaneous
supplementation of magnesium ions and elevation of wastewater pH for formation
of struvite powder. The discovery of bio-based binding agents for pelletizing
struvite powder increases the production capacity. This technological may change
the overarching strategy of wastewater resource
recovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.