* 2241120
* Collaborative Research: Environmental Context of Long Term Cultural Adaptation
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Matthew Gage, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 07/31/2025
* USD 36,424.00

The goal of this research is to understand the environmental conditions that
occurred during occupation and abandonment of the Moundville site, a regionally
important late prehistoric site in Alabama. The research includes collection and
analysis of lake sediment cores from Touson Lake, an oxbow located 2 km west of
the site. Identification of the contents provides useful data for inferring
human impacts that can be applied at a wide range of situations, yielding useful
information without methods that are destructive to sites. Furthermore,
understanding how societies responded to past climate change and/or local
environmental degradation is important for understanding how challenges of the
21st century might impact populations. Included are sharing of results with the
Moundville Archaeological Park Museum and sharing monthly updates to federally
recognized Tribal Nations with several representatives of which are involved
with both sampling and interpreting the data. This project also trains one
graduate and two undergraduate students at multiple universities in a multi-
disciplinary setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Combined archaeological and
paleoenvironmental studies demonstrate that humans are in direct and constant
interaction with their environment. While there is considerable information
about climate-environment-human interactions for cultures in central and South
America, there is a lack of such information for Mississippian mound-building
societies in North America. This project addresses two overarching research
questions: 1) did environmental conditions influence shifts in population and
agriculture at Moundville? and 2) did environmental changes create stresses that
caused eventual site abandonment? To answer these questions, sediment cores from
Touson Lake are analyzed for: 1) stable isotopes of carbon and nitrogen in
organic matter, 2) grain size distribution, 3) magnetic susceptibility, 4)
charcoal particles, 5) pollen assemblages, 6) cyanobacteria pigments, and 7)
fecal sterols, all of which indicate past environmental conditions. Compilation
of existing archaeological literature on the demography of the local and
regional populations are compiled and representatives of Muskogean-speaking
tribes affiliated with Moundville contribute to data interpretation with their
indigenous traditions and culture histories associated with the
region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.