* 2241698
* Experiments on the Role of State Actors in Eliciting Pro-Developmental Behavioral Change
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2025
* Charles Hankla, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Brian Crisp
* 02/28/2025
* USD 268,222.00

Governments are often tasked with providing important collective and individual
benefits to citizens, but, in many key policy areas, citizens must take action
in order for these benefits to be realized. For example, governments and NGOs
have long understood that expanding access to healthcare and education in
underserved communities requires poorer citizens to avail themselves of public
programs. In the wake of the pandemic, the question of how states can elicit
individual behavioral change has taken on pressing significance for policy-
makers and practitioners in the United States and beyond. Through an
experimental examination of how messages from state actors shape participation
in government health and education benefits, this project will directly inform
efforts to implement initiatives which rely on pro-developmental actions from
citizens.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project explores how citizen relationships
with and perceptions of particular state actors shape the success of these
actors in motivating pro-developmental behaviors. It posits that this success
will vary according to (1) whether state actors operate at the state or local
level, (2) whether they are elected officials or appointed administrators, and
(3) whether they are women or men. In addition, the project contends that
citizens who share political preferences and demographic traits with particular
state actors will be more likely to trust their calls for behavioral change. To
test these arguments, the project implements two related Randomized Controlled
Trials (RCTs), focusing on two policy areas – health and education. The health
portion explores the choice by lower-income citizens to sign up for health
insurance, while the education portion looks at parent willingness to enroll
girls in school. The RCTs comprise two waves of survey experiments delivered to
a randomized selection of approximately 2,000 lower-income citizens. In the
first wave, messages encouraging pro-developmental behavior in education and
health – and randomized as coming from different types of state actors -- will
be delivered in-person. The same messages will then be delivered over two months
to respondent mobile devices, after which the second wave will measure whether
respondents have indeed engaged in the recommended pro-developmental action. The
findings will allow an assessment of whether, and under what conditions, state
actors can influence citizens to adopt pro-developmental
behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.