* 2241946
* DDRIG in DRMS: An assessment of local government dam management action and inaction for risk reduction
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Mirit Friedman, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 03/31/2024
* USD 32,034.00

As a largely unseen type of infrastructure, dams in the United States get little
attention until a disaster conveys their importance. While changes in land use,
poor maintenance records, expensive upgrades, and aging structures have long
plagued dam management, climate change heightens the threat of unexpected
flooding. Despite the increasing risks of dam failures, insufficient public
funding for proactively managing dam safety and highly variable state level dam
safety regulations add precarity to the future of dams. For local governments,
the burden of dam management gets added to other infrastructural and community
needs, and they are forced to make difficult tradeoffs between dam-related
community benefits, such as flood control and water storage, and dam failure
risks that threaten communities downstream. The fundamental issue at the center
of this research is what factors motivate local governments to take action
relative to local governments in comparable situations who opt not to act. This
study addresses a gap in the literature and helps dam managers and state
regulators improve proactive and climate-responsive dam management. As the
potential dangers of dam failure increase with climate change, the findings from
this research inform policies and planning to reduce failure risks and and to
improve decision making strategies for dam management. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
authors examine the factors that lead local governments to proactively manage
their aging and failing dams. This study consists of two phases. Phase one is a
survey of 1,205 local government dam managers in all 50 states who have acted or
have not acted to reduce risks of failures. Phase two involves two cases and two
controls to qualitatively examine the contextual and procedural factors in
depth. This project advances theory on dams and planning by bringing together
disparate literature on dam management, decisions under risk and uncertainty,
and local climate change adaptation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.