* 2241906
* Collaborative Research: modifiers of ocean acidification effects on top-down control in eelgrass habitat
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Kevin Hovel, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jayne Gardiner
* 03/31/2026
* USD 521,796.00

Seagrasses are widespread ocean plants that perform valuable ecosystem services,
such as providing habitat for animals, slowing shoreline erosion, and
sequestering carbon dioxide. This project investigates how changing ocean
conditions (ocean acidification and nutrient pollution) affect growth and
survival of eelgrass, the world's most widespread seagrass species. The project
supports training for undergraduate students and graduate students at two
Hispanic Serving Institutions through student exchanges and incorporation of the
research into undergraduate courses and an immersive marine science semester.
The results of this research, which inform preservation and restoration of
seagrasses, are being shared with local resource
managers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global stressors like ocean acidification (OA)
act on organisms within the context of local environmental conditions. To fully
understand how stressors influence marine species, it is essential to test how
stressors interact with local factors to mediate ecosystem functions,
particularly in foundation species (e.g. seagrasses, corals) whose degradation
and loss has widespread effects on ecological communities. The principal
investigators of this project are using eelgrass (Zostera marina) and its
associated epibiota as a model system to test how the effects of OA on animal-
plant linkages are influenced by two factors that vary among and within
estuaries: nutrient stress and habitat structural complexity. These linkages
involve a key mutualistic relationship between eelgrass and crustacean and
molluscan epifauna, in which epifauna feed on fast-growing algae that can
overgrow and kill eelgrass leaves, particularly when nutrient pollution is high.
The PIs specifically are focusing on how OA and nutrient stress interactively
alter epifaunal herbivory and trophic cascades in which predators indirectly
drive eelgrass growth and mediate competition between eelgrass and epiphytic
algae. The results advance knowledge of the effects of changing ocean conditions
on ecological interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.