* 2241029
* Developmental and genetic dynamics of ambrosia beetle-fungal partner symbioses
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Nemat Keyhani, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Mamta Rawat
* 03/31/2026
* USD 765,428.00

Ambrosia beetles infest trees, where they dig into the bark to lay their eggs.
These beetles are unique in that they also harbor fungi that act as their food
source which grows on the tree tissues. Some of these fungi can then infect the
tree and in several cases can result in the death of host trees within months of
infection. These beetles and their pathogenic fungi occur worldwide and pose a
significant threat to forestry and natural ecosystems. However, no genetic
models for the study of any ambrosia beetle-fungal partner pairings are
available. This proposal will use the Xyloborus beetle-laurel wilt pathogenic
fungus (Harringtonia lauricola) as a model. Both the original beetle and the
fungus are invasive to the United States and are rapidly spreading throughout
the Southeastern part of the country. The beetle carries the fungus to trees,
where the fungus is capable of killing otherwise healthy trees. There are over
500 different species of trees that the beetle uses as a host including
swampbay, redbay, sassafras, and the agriculturally important crop of avocado,
where the only treatment is to cut and burn the trees. In this project, we will
study the dynamics and genetics of how the beetle harbors its fungal partner,
including how the beetle chooses, promotes the growth of, and carries the fungus
from host tree to host tree. These data can provide foundational information
that can ultimately be used to help stop the spread of these tree pathogens. In
addition, the project will provide opportunities for training and outreach to
high school, undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral students on fungal
biology, disease, symbioses and evolutionary processes. In partnership with
programs at University of Florida, the investigator will develop educational
material for the high school teachers and the general public on fungal-insect
symbioses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Insect-fungal mutualisms are widespread in
nature and ambrosia beetle-fungal interactions represent some of the oldest and
most successful symbioses known. The fungus serves as the sole source of
nutrition for the beetles that burrow into trees to form galleries where they
grow and “farm” the fungus for food. These beetles have evolved specialized
structures (mycangia) that house, transport and disseminate the fungus. These
fungi and beetles have co-adapted to symbiotic lifestyles throughout
evolutionary history and include independent evolutions of different types of
mycangia that house different fungal symbionts. The fungus, Harringtonia
lauricola is a highly destructive tree pathogen affecting avocado and other
members of the Lauraceae family and has killed &gt;300 million trees in the US
alone. H. lauricola is the mutualistic partner to its original invasive (to the
US) beetle carrier (Xyleborus glabratus) and may have now spread to indigenous
beetle species. We will investigate the developmental and genetic mechanisms
which underlie the relationship between H. lauricola and Xyleborus beetles. The
project will use cellular and genetic approaches to test specific hypotheses
concerning symbiotic association. We will: (1) probe the cellular dynamics of
mycangial colonization, including investigating selection,
persistence/maintenance, turnover, and competition in the mycangia using
microbiological and cellular (e.g., microscopic) methods, (2) identify genetic
mechanisms that mediate fungal symbioses, e.g., what fungal genes/network are
important for colonization and fitness within the mycangia, and (3) construct
gene expression profiles (i.e., transcriptomics) of the fungus during mycangial
colonization to help define the evolutionary processes that has led to fungal-
mycangial symbioses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.