* 2241675
* Planning: Maine EPSCoR RII Track-1 Planning Grant
* O/D,OIA
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2024
* Khodadad Varahramyan, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 01/31/2024
* USD 100,000.00

Over a one-year period, this planning grant will focus on addressing five
objectives to mature a selected project concept and research team, using a
collaborative, inclusive approach. The planning grant objectives are: (1)
network assessment and mobilization, focusing on the human and organizational
network in Maine; (2) strategic planning and gap analysis; (3) economic
assessment, including workforce and commercialization analyses; (4) workforce
development planning, including the determination of baseline demographics
within Maine; and, (5) development of key strategic documents and events,
including an implementation plan for the future five-year project and a detailed
project logic model. Key activities to achieve these objectives will occur on a
12-month timeline that features three major statewide events focused
sequentially on listening, strategic planning, and synthesis.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning project from the University of Maine has the
potential to develop the intrastate teamwork needed for a future EPSCoR Research
Infrastructure Improvement Track-1 proposal on the topic of “Future
Opportunities for Decarbonization with Climate-Smart Renewable Resources in
Maine’s Emerging Green Economy (Maine-FORRE).” This topic is properly aligned
with Maine’s state Science &amp; Technology plan, which identifies “Maine’s
forests and their associated products as a unique opportunity for the state,
given interests in decarbonization, renewable materials, and natural climate
solutions upon which Maine-FORRE will capitalize and expand.” Maine-FORRE plans
to strategically unify several existing University of Maine research centers
(i.e., Advanced Structures and Composites Center, Center for Research on
Sustainable Forests, Center for Research in STEM Education, Forest Bioproducts
Research Institute, Margaret Chase Smith Policy Center, Process Development
Center, and Senator George J. Mitchell Center for Sustainability Solutions). The
planning proposal will foster linkages among the existing centers, and allow
additional linkages to other partners, both internal and external to Maine,
particularly Federal national laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.