* 2241462
* Conference: International Workshop on Sustainable Clean Energy, Power and Environment
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2022,04/30/2024
* Ashwani Gupta, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 04/30/2024
* USD 44,870.00

The availability of clean and sustainable energy is of fundamental importance to
the global society for all applications of energy, power, mobility and
propulsion. The International workshop on sustainable clean energy, power and
environment plans to bring together world renowned leaders in selected fields
spanning from fuels, biofuels, in current and future platforms of power,
mobility and propulsion for cleaner energy harvesting and utilization. It will
also bring speakers and audiences from worldwide locations interested in
learning the state-of-the-art science and technology in fuels and novel energy
conversion devices for seeking solutions to the rapidly growing carbon loading
to the environment. It will bring diverse community at the workshop with the
international leaders in the field to share their knowledge to provide enriched
educational benefits to the society and promote cleaner utilization of fuels to
foster healthy sustainable environment. It will also bring awareness to young
scientists so that they know the topics of significant importance to work on in
their professional careers. The workshop will provide ample networking
opportunities in the areas of common interest. The fundamental issues to be
addressed include clean utilization of fossil fuels, energy recovery from wastes
and low-grade feedstocks for a wide range of applications, as well as education,
new challenges and opportunities in the fields of renewable energy, biofuel
production and use, and value-added products. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
workshop will bring together renowned experts from around the globe to share the
latest fundamental and applied research innovations on clean energy harvesting
and utilization for a wide range of devices extending from micro scale energy
conversion to supersonic and hypersonic propulsion using fossil and biofuels,
and different low carbon energy resources. The planned workshop will have
several tailored technical tracks with presentations form world renowned
technical experts in the field on current and potential future activities. The
international workshop will help identify key critical issues faced for the
development of novel technologies that show promising viable options for
improved, efficient and sustainable utilization of new and novel energy
conversion resources, as well as use of low carbon fuels and biofuels resources
in advanced energy conversion for power and propulsion applications. It will
also help to foster international research collaborations and research exchanges
to promote diversity. The organizers will invite several leaders in the field
from around the globe with a key focus on energy and the environment. It is
expected that this workshop will result in several international collaborations
on low carbon fuels production and utilization as the topic is of great interest
to the international community participating at the workshop. In addition, it
will provide rich educational experiences and pedagogical benefits to the
students and researchers. A research monograph with chapters contributed by the
invited speakers will be published.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.