* 2241620
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Financial and Legal Planning of Elders
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2023
* Mei Zhan, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2023
* USD 17,111.00

The privatization of eldercare has greatly aggravated the financial burden of
elders. Without adequate social and familial support, many elders turn to
financial and legal instruments as they plan for their late-life care. This
doctoral dissertation research investigates how older adults navigate, engage
with, and reshape financial and legal settings as they conduct late-life
planning. In addition to supporting the training of a graduate student in
anthropology in the methods of empirical data collection and analysis, this
research yields valuable information for government officials, elder law
practitioners, caretakers, social workers, gerontologists, and fellow
researchers to understand how aging experiences are intertwined with financial
and legal networks. The findings of this research will help stakeholders and
officials understand how elders develop strategies to build more affordable,
inclusive, and equitable care for older adults. By disseminating findings from
this project in non-academic venues, this research will facilitate public
understanding of the meaning of late-life well-being and challenges faced by
expanding aging population globally. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researcher asks
what impacts cohort sociopolitical experiences have on older adults’ perception
and engagement with legal and financial institutions, and what kind of
understandings of institutional power and late-life well-being emerge as elders
interact with official and non-official legal and financial settings. The
research methods consist of participant observation, semi-structured interviews,
life histories, and archival research. Ethnographically, the researcher will
observe how distinct cohorts of elders make late-life property arrangements and
health-relevant decisions at various sites including notary offices, financial
consultancy, will registration centers, and retirement residences. This project
not only sheds light on the multifaceted nature of the relationship between
social, financial, and legal sectors that shape perceptions of late-life care
but also reveals the assumptions and beliefs about older adults ingrained within
the legal, financial, and kinship networks. Moreover, it generates a novel
understanding of how elders reconfigure and co-construct legal and financial
settings through their daily practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.