* 2241639
* Conference: Workshop on Materials for Space
* MPS,DMR
* 11/15/2022,10/31/2023
* Timothy Minton, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 10/31/2023
* USD 127,944.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A virtual workshop, organized by a
small Steering Committee (including the Chair) and facilitated by a professional
workshop and support company, gathers 50 experts from materials science, space
environments effects, spacecraft engineering, and mission planning communities.
Convening for six half-day periods spanning three weeks, participants are
identifying current and future needs for materials that can perform their
functions in various space environments and defining materials research areas
where investment is likely to have the greatest impact on future missions. While
space has always been a key national security venue, the rapid growth in the use
and exploration of space for economic purposes will undoubtedly have immensely
important political and international consequences. Thus, a key objective of
this workshop – the identification of transformative areas of materials research
leading to prolonged operation of planned missions or the enabling of new ones –
will naturally impact the whole of society, bringing new knowledge and economic
benefits. These benefits require a talented and innovative workforce in
materials science and engineering (MSE), so another key objective is developing
strategies to attract a larger and more diverse body of students to MSE and
educate them for careers where their talents can push back the frontiers of
space utilization and exploration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;Space environments are unforgivingly harsh on spacecraft,
which are almost always subjected to high energy charged, and often neutral,
particles and short-wavelength electromagnetic radiation. In addition,
micrometeoroids may strike spacecraft in certain environments, and some mission
profiles may lead to extreme heating, thermal gradients, or thermal cycling.
Besides the hazards caused by the natural space environment, man-made or induced
environments create further hazards, including molecular or particulate
contamination, electromagnetic interference, build-up and release of static
charge, thruster plume impingement, and debris impacts. There are countless ways
in which these hazards, acting either individually or in combination, may affect
or even compromise the operation of a spacecraft by altering the properties of
its materials in unwanted or unanticipated ways. This workshop is identifying
fundamental research directions that could substantially enhance the design,
fabrication, and use of innovative metallic, ceramic, and composite materials
and systems in spacecraft applications where the maintenance of material
properties or functions in harsh or extreme environments is of paramount
importance. This workshop also addresses the unique challenges of testing and
qualifying new and potentially transformative materials for use on spacecraft.
In this context, the Steering Committee and participants are considering the
increasingly relevant roles of theory and computation, advanced synthesis
methods, emerging characterization approaches, and innovative property
measurement approaches. Both laboratory and in-space property measurement
techniques are being evaluated. Educational and workforce issues that limit the
impact of research on new materials for space are also being addressed. Finally,
the workshop is considering the possible role of research on functional, yet
durable, materials in meeting national security priorities for space missions. A
report is being produced containing the most relevant and salient workshop
findings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.