* 2241596
* Equity-Centered Design of Conversational Agents for Inclusive Science Communication Education in High Schools
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Rossella Santagata, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Chia Shen
* 06/30/2026
* USD 499,801.00

Science communication, defined as the ability to communicate scientific concepts
and discoveries to broad audiences, is an important scientific literacy skill.
It can promote public efforts to protect the biodiversity and livelihood of
communities around the world. Yet, K-12 students have limited opportunities to
engage in inclusive science communication approaches that incorporate their
lived experiences and account for the diverse socioeconomic, language, and
cultural backgrounds of potential audiences. This project will engage high
school students from predominantly Latinx, Title I schools in Orange County,
California, in an AI-guided science curriculum for learning and practicing
inclusive science communication and marine biodiversity. Students will interact
with conversational agents that represent different community perspectives
around the local marine ecosystems. They will also collaborate with peers to
train and create their own conversational agents to share views on marine
conservation. Project activities aim to offer meaningful engagement to deepen
students’ understanding of science communication, AI literacy, and interest in
careers in AI and broader science fields. This project is funded by the
Innovative Technology Experiences for Students and Teachers (ITEST) program,
which supports projects that build understandings of practices, program
elements, contexts and processes contributing to increasing students' knowledge
and interest in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and
information and communication technology (ICT) careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
partnership with Crystal Cove Conservancy, an environmental nonprofit in Orange
County, California, the project will invite students, formal and informal
educators, community members, and marine scientists to co-design the
conversational agents’ interface and exchange. The project team will interview
additional community members to integrate their perspectives to refine the
agents’ dialogues. 90 students in grades 9-11 will engage in the AI-guided
curriculum. Researchers in STEM education and education technologies from
University of California, Irvine and Utah State University will explore research
questions surrounding Equitable Partnership and Learning including (1) How can
the co-design and implementation of conversational agents with informal
educators, community partners, and students be facilitated in equitable,
collaborative ways?, (2) How does the AI-integrated curriculum support inclusive
science communication about environmental systems, interest in STEM careers, and
AI literacy?, and (3) What instructional adaptations do teachers make to
facilitate these learning outcomes? The project will draw from equity-centered
research-practice partnership and design tension frameworks to answer research
questions around how to facilitate equitable design work and adapt the
curriculum in instruction. Regression analyses will be used to test the
hypothesis that students significantly improve in science communication,
interest in STEM careers, and AI literacy, as indicated by pre- and post-
assessments. The outcomes of this work include (1) an innovative AI-integrated
high school curriculum around inclusive science communication, (2) co-design
principles to collaborate with community members to develop the technology, and
(3) a student-constructed language corpus of conversations to train future
conversational agents in STEM contexts. The research takes important advancing
steps in the emerging field of AI-integrated education supporting diverse K-12
populations to deepen scientific and AI literacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.