* 2241023
* Conference: 2023 Gordon Research Conference and Seminar on Plant Lipids: Structure, Metabolism, and Function
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Rebecca Roston, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 12/31/2023
* USD 20,000.00

This award supports registration and travel expenses for participants in the
Gordon Research Conference and Seminar on Plant Lipids: Structure, Metabolism,
and Function, held in Galveston, Texas, on January 29 - February 3, 2023. Lipids
are essential for plant growth, development, and responses to environmental
change and challenges. Because of this and their high energy value, lipids also
serve as important renewable resources for human benefit. Lipids are a critical
source of food, feed, biofuel, and bioproducts. Plant biologists worldwide are
working together to respond to humanity’s growing need for food and renewable
fuels. To accomplish this, advances made at the molecular and cellular scales
and advances in understanding mechanisms of resilience and environmental
adaptation must be integrated with high-value product production. The Gordon
Research Conference and Seminar on Plant Lipids brings world-class plant lipid
scientists together in the United States to make progress on this critical need.
It is expected that all meeting participants will gain a greater understanding
of the long-term challenges in both basic and applied plant lipid sciences and
how participants’ diverse research programs collectively fit within a portfolio
of potential scientific solutions that benefit humanity. In addition, early-
career scientists will leave with a clearer direction for their future careers,
and new collaborations and improvement in scientist advocacy and diversity in
the plant lipid field are expected outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is the goal
of the 2023 Gordon Research Conference and Seminar on Plant Lipids to bring
together visionary leaders and early-career scientists to discuss the latest
technological advances and research in biomechanics, metabolism, and energetics
associated with plant lipids, and how these basic discoveries can be leveraged
into new opportunities for human benefit. Conference speakers will be invited to
contribute to a special journal issue on plant lipids, and a written report that
highlights the current state of plant lipid research and identifies gaps and
emerging opportunities will result from the award. Additional objectives of the
meetings are to broaden participation by (1) increasing participation by
students, post-doctoral fellows, and members from underrepresented groups, in
order to improve the resilience of the plant lipid research community; and (2)
creating a dynamic, inclusive environment in which early-, mid-, and late-career
scientists from industry, government, and academia of all ethnicities,
nationalities, and genders feel welcomed to share their newest, unpublished
research for the benefit of the field. All Seminar participants are early-career
scientists, as are one-third of the Conference’s invited speakers, and all will
benefit from the meetings’ scientific discussions and networking opportunities.
Specific activities focused on career mentoring and diversity advocacy are also
included. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the BIO-IOS-
Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics program and the BIO-MCB-Cellular
Dynamics and Function cluster.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.