* 2241879
* SaTC: CORE: Small: An Automated Framework for Mitigating Single-Trace Side-Channel Leakage
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Aydin Aysu, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Epstein
* 09/30/2026
* USD 339,842.00

Quantum computers can break existing cryptography algorithms (e.g., RSA -
Rivest–Shamir–Adleman) that are used to secure data transmission in everyday
applications, such as point-of-sale purchases and online payments. Post-quantum
cryptography seeks new cybersecurity solutions for such applications that are
resilient to quantum computer attacks. The National Institute of Science and
Technology (NIST) is currently evaluating and standardizing such algorithms for
mass-scale adoption. Although these algorithms can be shown to be theoretically
secure, their practical implementation can be vulnerable to attacks.
Specifically, adversaries can use the power consumption or electromagnetic
radiation of a device running the cryptography algorithm to reverse-engineer
computations and steal secret cryptographic keys. Therefore, practical
deployment of next-generation cybersecurity standards requires protected
software implementations against such attacks. At the same time, the validation
and application of such defenses need automation to broadly address these
vulnerabilities in a variety of computing devices. The project’s novelties are
exposing unknown risks of software running post-quantum cryptography to reverse-
engineering attacks and developing a new framework to automatically address
those risks. The project’s broader significance and importance are improving
national security and training a cybersecurity-aware science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
analyzes side-channel security vulnerabilities in the software implementations
of lattice-based cryptography algorithms that were chosen by NIST for post-
quantum standardization. The primary research objective of this project is to
develop a framework to automatically expose and mitigate single-trace side-
channel vulnerabilities. Single-trace attacks aim to steal information from a
single execution's leakage and are harder to mitigate than those needing
repeated measurements. The project augments low-level virtual machine frameworks
by applying static and dynamic program analysis to detect vulnerabilities, and
by using program repair with randomization techniques to address the
leakage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.