* 2241823
* Collaborative Research: Building the Group Identity Concept from the Ground Up
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Adrian Bell, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 08/31/2026
* USD 159,098.00

Individuals in our increasingly connected society straddle multiple social
worlds. Understanding the intersecting identities that result from these
connections is a pressing challenge for social science and policy. This project
uses both cross-cultural empirical research and theory-driven mathematical
modeling to conceptualize and measure group affiliations, developing a suite of
empirical and conceptual tools for social scientists to better engage with the
complexities of modern social life. The project trains a post-doctoral scholar
and PhD student in scientific and mathematical methods and theory. It also
creates interactive, publicly available online tools that (1) explain theories
of group membership, (2) illustrate how we can empirically measure group
affiliations and the relationships between groups, and (3) demonstrate how the
integration of theory and measurement can create a more accurate picture of how
our social worlds evolve.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work builds on theories that
assert that outward expressions of identity are used instrumentally to
facilitate assortment and expedite social interactions, including cooperation
and aggression. While these theories are well supported, they often present a
limited, unidimensional characterization of identity. In this project,
investigators develop cultural evolutionary theory to understand how
multifaceted group affiliations respond to individual incentives, including the
costs and benefits of coordinating identities and cooperation. Specifically, it
builds a new statistical approach that identifies and measures the relationships
between real groups. Models are iteratively refined via tests using ethnographic
data collected to capture how people understand their own and othersâ€™ identities
across multiple realms of interaction. Despite being evident that individuals
hold multiple group affiliations, we do not currently have analytical tools or
language that adequately describes the complex nature of group affiliations.
This project builds these tools to contribute to understanding how individuals
position themselves across a range of social
relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.