* 2241389
* Collaborative Research: How iron states impact temperature sensitivity of heterotrophic respiration in humid tropical soils
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Jennifer Pett-Ridge, Texas A&M AgriLife Research
* Standard Grant
* Kirsten Schwarz
* 04/30/2026
* USD 368,578.00

Humid tropical forests regulate the Earth’s climate, due to their capacity to
absorb large amounts of atmospheric carbon dioxide and store it in vegetation
and soils. These forests are also the most impacted by changes to the climate,
such as global warming. An increase in temperature may cause tropical soils to
release more carbon dioxide, further contributing to warming of the atmosphere.
This research evaluates how an increase in temperature can affect the release of
carbon dioxide from soils, specifically carbon dioxide produced by soil
microorganisms through a process called heterotrophic respiration. The research
advances our understanding of the fundamental processes that regulate the
functioning of soil microorganisms and their production of carbon dioxide, as
well as the mechanisms that affect the ability of soils to store and stabilize
carbon dioxide. The work has important implications for environmental
scientists, engineers, and policy makers working to assess climate change
mitigation and adaptation strategies, such as reforestation and afforestation.
The project supports the development of new interdisciplinary curricular
material at the intersection of microbiology, hydrology, environmental science
and engineering, engages middle and high school students around the impacts of
climate change to tropical forests, and trains diverse
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Iron is a relatively abundant mineral in humid
tropical soils. This work evaluates how the interactions between iron cycles and
soil carbon modulate the temperature sensitivity of heterotrophic respiration
over time. The research is guided by the hypothesis that short-term soil organic
carbon decomposition through iron reduction increases the temperature
sensitivity of heterotrophic respiration. In the long-term, it is hypothesized
that both microbial community adaptation and physicochemical protection of
organic carbon by iron minerals reduce the temperature sensitivity. The project
combines experiments and process-based modeling, leveraging the Tropical
Responses to Altered Climate Experiment (TRACE), a state-of-the-art field
warming experiment in the Luquillo Rainforest in Puerto Rico. Comprehensive
experiments with soils sampled from control and warmed plots at TRACE inform
their biogeochemical response to temperature gradients and changing iron states.
A process-based soil model is applied to analyze observations and
mechanistically explain the response to changing temperatures. The project
includes training at the undergraduate, graduate student and postdoctoral
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.