* 2241433
* Collaborative Research: Exploring the dynamics of nitrous oxide in the Southern Benguela Upwelling System
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2027
* Annie Bourbonnais, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 04/30/2027
* USD 147,450.00

Nitrous oxide is a long-lived and powerful greenhouse gas. It is also a driver
of ozone depletion in the stratosphere. Natural sources of nitrous oxide include
production by bacteria through processes called nitrification and
denitrification. The ocean is a major source of nitrous oxide to the atmosphere,
and areas of high biological productivity like eastern boundary upwelling
systems have been shown to generate particularly high nitrous oxide emissions to
the atmosphere. The Southern Benguela Upwelling System (SBUS) is arguably the
most productive eastern boundary upwelling system, yet there are no published
measurements of nitrous oxide from this region. In addition, the relative
importance of the major biological pathways of nitrous oxide production in the
SBUS is not well established. A team of scientists from the University of
Connecticut and the University of South Carolina will investigate nitrous oxide
cycling in the SBUS, estimate nitrous oxide fluxes to the atmosphere, and
explore what drives changes in nitrous oxide cycling across seasons and in
different locations. This study will improve understanding of an important
greenhouse gas and how its cycling might change in response to changing ocean
conditions. Funding from the proposed work will sponsor the training of a
graduate student at the University of Connecticut and an undergraduate student
at the University of South Carolina. It will also provide a postdoctoral fellow
the opportunity to apply computational skills in regional modeling and machine
learning, offering preparation for a career in academia or industry. The project
will contribute to undergraduate education and communication of climate change
science to the general public and policymakers through the incorporation of the
study methodology into an undergraduate Service Learning course at the
University of Connecticut.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work seeks to provide
estimates of the regional flux of nitrous oxide to the atmosphere, to examine
seasonal dynamics, to assess the biological pathways to nitrous oxide production
and consumption, and to query regional and large scale forcings on nitrous oxide
dynamics in the SBUS. To this end, the team will (a) measure nitrous oxide
concentrations in samples collected in the SBUS during seasonal surveys, measure
surface nitrous oxide continuously underway, and derive robust estimates of the
sea-to-air flux of nitrous oxide from coincident windspeed; (b) query nitrous
oxide production and consumption pathways from measurements of the nitrogen and
oxygen isotope ratios of nitrous oxide and nitrate, and investigate
environmental correlates of nitrous oxide cycling; (c) develop regional machine
learning models for nitrous oxide from these measurements to investigate
environmental drivers of seasonal and inter-annual nitrous oxide dynamics,
predicting nitrous oxide in the SBUS with historical data and with hydrographic
fields derived from a regional dynamical ocean model. The work will give
insights into pathways of nitrous oxide production and consumption in an eastern
boundary upwelling system bounded by a broad continental shelf – contrasting the
greater body of knowledge obtained from active margins. The statistical nitrous
oxide models borne of machine learning will ultimately serve to predict nitrous
oxide from climate projections of the SBUS, and to anticipate the regional
response of nitrous oxide to global ocean de-
oxygenation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.