* 2241628
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Adolescent Experiences of Social Support in Educational Trajectories
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Giselle Sanchez, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2023
* USD 31,600.00

This doctoral dissertation research project investigates how adolescents living
with significant social challenges experience social support for their
educational aspirations and future goals. In so doing, this project provides a
greater understanding of supportive practices that guide adolescents toward who
they could be, and kinds of the lives they hope to lead. In addition to
providing funding for the training of a graduate student in anthropology in the
methods of empirical, scientific data collection and analysis, this project
broadens our scientific knowledge of Latino/a/x communities, youth educational
trajectories, and the human capacity for hope in adverse conditions. Findings
from this research project will also be shared with the communities in which
this project takes place, to identify and enhance school policies and social
support practices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the use of mixed methods for
data collection, this project cross-culturally and ethnographically compares
from multiple stakeholders 1) how adolescents experience social support within
their social environment (home, school, community) and the intersubjective
qualities that facilitate this experience for youth; and 2) the ways
adolescentsâ€™ lived experiences of social support, or lack thereof, in their
respective schools, homes, and local communities inform their hopes and
orientations toward future possibilities and opportunities. The researcher
employs person-centered interviews, participant observation, and adolescent
versions of anxiety and depression screening scales. Data will be thematically
coded and analyzed to examine how adolescent experiences of support inform
educational motivation and aspirations for the future. In a time of increasing
global inequities, findings from this project will provide a blueprint for
improved scientific approaches toward the role of social support in studies of
hope, and of the impress of structural violence on lived
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.