* 2241213
* RAPID/Collaborative Research: The 2022 Yellowstone Flood: Evaluating National Parks as Critical Infrastructures to the US Ecotourism Economy
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,12/31/2023
* Benjamin Ryan, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 12/31/2023
* USD 63,967.00

Yellowstone National Park (YNP) sustains over 4 million visitors annually and
generates over 8,700 jobs and greater than $830 million of benefits to the
surrounding region’s economy. During June 2022, a 500-yr flood event swept
across YNP and gateway communities destroying road and building infrastructures,
leading to the closure of the park and the evacuation of more than 10,000
visitors. YNP remained fully closed for 9 days and subsequently reopened
partially under variable entry systems; however, the northern entrances have
remained closed, disconnecting gateway communities and crippling dependent
economies. The economic impacts from the YNP closures on the region’s eco-
tourism industry is expected to be severe in the following years. The
Yellowstone flood experience runs counter to conventional disaster risk
paradigms, which focus on the exposure, vulnerability, and resilience of the
‘built-up environment’, such as risks to human health, property damages, or
critical infrastructures. In contrast, the Yellowstone flooding suggests that an
extreme disturbance in a national park, or natural infrastructure, can induce
severe and systemic economic impacts to entire regions. This suggests that
natural infrastructures can operate similarly to human-built infrastructures in
providing critical services for human livelihoods. Ultimately, this brings into
question how society should manage and value protected land assets and extends
society’s valuation of US National Parks, “America’s Best Idea”, beyond mere
aesthetics to an accurate portrayal of serving critical roles in preserving our
nation’s economic and public health security and safety. This Rapid Response
Research (RAPID) project seeks to monitor and understand the infrastructural and
economic impacts and recovery, as they rapidly unfold over the next weeks and
months to understand the interdependencies between humans and natural
infrastructures, particularly exposing society’s vulnerability to disasters in
non-built-up areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the work is to
rapidly collect ephemeral information critical to documenting and understanding
the infrastructural impacts of the YNP flooding, the rate and nature of
infrastructure evolution and recovery, and the systemic economic impacts of the
flooding on the ecotourism-dependent industries in the gateway communities.
Comprehensive inventories of infrastructure loss, damage, and recovery will
occur via direct observation and photo documentation. Through interviews and web
surveillance, the impacts of the closures and re-openings on economics, regional
travel, and human activities will be documented. Finally, the FEWSION for
Community Resilience (F4R™) program will identify social and physical
infrastructures embedded within the region’s critical supply chains and provide
communities with approaches to mitigate future disaster
risks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.