* 2241663
* Collaborative Research: Measuring abyssal warming with seismic Scholte waves
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Wenbo Wu, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 04/30/2026
* USD 475,435.00

Due to its large heat capacity, the ocean absorbs most of the excess energy
trapped by anthropogenic greenhouse gases and thus regulates the rate of global
warming. Accurate measurements of the ocean's warming are critical for
understanding Earth's energy imbalance and climate anomalies. This project will
employ a novel method of using seismic Scholte waves excited by repeating
natural submarine earthquakes to monitor the global large-scale abyssal ocean
warming. Preliminary results demonstrate the feasibility of the method, which
will be expanded to the global ocean. Existing seismic data can be used to track
abyssal oceawn warming back to the 1990s. The results will complement
hydrographic measurements and improve understanding of the dynamics of the
response of the abyssal ocean to surface forcing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work
will provide new observational constraints on abyssal ocean warming over the
past few decades. The investigators will systematically search for shallow
submarine repeating earthquakes since the 1980s. Scholte waves excited by these
repeating events travel along the seafloor, and their propagation speed is
sensitive to abyssal temperatures. Scholte wave travel time changes between
repeating events thus constrain abyssal temperature change. The sensitivity of
Scholte wave travel times to abyssal temperatures will be calculated using
numerical simulations of wave propagation. Sensitivity kernels will be used to
interpret the measured travel time changes, to infer average abyssal ocean
warming along the waves' path, and to quantify uncertainties. The inferred
warming will be compared against hydrographic and Argo data where available.
Providing direct estimates of basin-scale abyssal ocean
warming.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.