* 2242222
* US GEOTRACES GP17-ANT: Dissolved Gallium, Barium, and Vanadium as interface, process, and circulation tracers in the Amundsen Sea
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2026
* Laura Whitmore, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 02/28/2026
* USD 392,761.00

The goal of the international GEOTRACES program is to understand the
distributions of trace chemical elements and isotopes in the oceans. By
measuring trace elements and isotopes on coordinated expeditions, oceanographers
can learn about processes that control their inputs, outputs, and movement
through the ocean. The National Science Foundation is supporting a U.S.
GEOTRACES sampling expedition in the Southern Ocean and Amundsen Sea in
2023-2024. This project will focus on the measurement of dissolved gallium,
barium, and vanadium to infer several processes such as the distribution of
different water types – like glacial meltwater or warm ocean water – sediment
supply of trace elements, and the effects of biological productivity on metal
cycling in this under-sampled region. The project will support an early career
investigator and an undergraduate student researcher and results will be shared
with the public through several planned outreach
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Utilizing filtered seawater and sea ice
samples, this study will use isotope-dilution and ICP-MS methodology to
determine concentrations of dissolved gallium, barium, and vanadium. Leveraging
distributions of dissolved gallium, barium, and vanadium in their relative
ratios with other parameters of interest (e.g., iron and aluminum) this study
will investigate: (1) how sea ice processes intersect with water column trace
element cycling through material supply, uptake, and remineralization; (2) how
local sedimentary processes (reductive versus non-reductive sediments) influence
the regional distribution of trace elements; and (3) if a linear-mixing
approach, with dissolved gallium in addition to historically used tracers, can
be used to constrain circulation of different water types in this region. This
study will thus assess the connectivity of Amundsen Sea waters to the off-shelf
region, the influence of polynyas on geochemical cycles, and the relative supply
of trace elements from terrestrial, cryosphere, sedimentary, and oceanic inputs.
These points are particularly pertinent in the Amundsen Sea as a locus of rapid,
climate-induced destabilization of the region’s ice sheets and since the
Amundsen Sea has connectivity with the Ross Sea, where deep waters are formed,
and the circumpolar current, a productive region that influences the chemistry
of global water masses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.