* 2242862
* Collaborative Research: RUI: An undergraduate cohort thermochronology research and mentorship experience investigating the thermo-tectonic record of the northern Klamath Mountains
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Francis Sousa, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 06/30/2026
* USD 172,594.00

The geologic history of mountain building events is chronicled in the rock
record, especially along former tectonic plate boundaries. Approximately 56
million years ago, a large basaltic oceanic plateau, the Siletzia-Crescent
terrane, erupted off what is now the coast of the Pacific Northwest. A few
million years after eruption, it collided with North America, and is proposed to
have caused i) tectonic plate rotations, ii) mountain building and major
regional-scale faulting, and iii) the subduction zone plate boundary to jump
westward, establishing the modern Cascadia subduction zone. Today, the southern
edge of Siletzia-Crescent terrane collision is preserved as a sliver of basaltic
rock thrust on older sedimentary rocks in southern Oregon. Few syn-collisional
sedimentary rocks survive from the time of Siletzia collision, rendering direct
investigation of the effect of the collision challenging. To overcome this
challenge, the investigators will target specific minerals in older, crystalline
rocks from the northern Klamath Mountains, located south of the collision
suture. Using this approach, the research team will reconstruct the burial,
thickening, uplift, and erosion history of the region in response to collision.
Geochemical analysis of these mineral chronometers is an application commonly
used to address large scale tectonics questions, however, the advanced technique
is typically available only to scientists at large, primarily research-oriented
institutions. In this project, the principal investigators will center a group
of undergraduate researchers at Cal Poly Humboldt and Oregon State University,
locations that straddle the geologic region of interest, to reconstruct the
tectonic history of the southern Siletzia-North American collisional zone, by
applying multiple mineral chronometers, in a collaborative, academic-year,
cohort-based undergraduate research experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Siletzia
formation and subsequent accretion marks a major shift in western U.S.
subduction tectonics. The timing of Siletzia collision is coincident with the
shut off of Farallon slab subduction and predates the formation of the modern
Cascadia subduction zone and arc. The Siletzia terrane comprises the basement
rock over a 600 km stretch of western North America from Roseburg, OR to
Vancouver Island. However, the spatial and thermal impact of Siletzia accretion
on the North American continent is not well understood, largely due to a missing
and overprinted geologic and thermal record. The investigators will center
undergraduate student research contributions through a novel, year-long,
comprehensive cohort experience. The research team will apply multi-method mid-
and low-temperature thermochronometry to northern Klamath Mountain samples to
assess the continentâ€™s response prior to, during, and following Siletzia
accretion. Results will address a major knowledge gap in regional evolution of
the Cascadia Subduction Zone, have implications for the thermal and spatial
magnitude and rate of exhumation, burial, and deformation driven by accretion
tectonics on overriding continental plates, address challenges resolving
tectonic and landscape evolution events that are missing from the rock record
using multi-method thermochronometry, and engage undergraduate students as
primary research contributors guided by three Principal Investigators with
overlapping expertise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.