* 2242771
* RII Track 1: West Virginia Network for Functional Neuroscience and Transcriptomics (WV-NFNT)
* O/D,OIA
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Randy Nelson, Higher Education Policy Commission
* Cooperative Agreement
* Chinonye Nnakwe
* 05/31/2028
* USD 4,828,803.00

The underlying flexibility in nervous system structure and function, broadly
known as neural plasticity, is the basis for nervous system development and how
the nervous system can adapt when organisms are confronted by change. The "West
Virginia Network for Functional Neuroscience and Transcriptomics" (WV-NFNT)
project seeks to build human and physical infrastructure capacity in
neuroscience and data science. This project will examine the ability of the
nervous system to change during development and in response to stimuli along two
themes: 1) circuit plasticity during development and adulthood; and 2) synaptic
structure and plasticity as a result of altered function. WV-NFNT will expand
the capability and diversity of those working in the fields of neuroscience and
data science by implementing specific education and workforce development
activities that will engage students, especially rural, first-generation college
students, and those from other groups traditionally underrepresented, in these
research areas. New collaborations among neuroscientists and bio-informaticists
from four institutions across the state will position West Virginia to be a
center for neuroscience research. The project will be administered by the Higher
Education Policy Commission in collaboration with four institutions: Marshall
University, Shepherd University, West Virginia University, and West Virginia
State University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The WV-NFNT project will contribute to
one of the most impactful neuroscience research areas – circuit and synaptic
plasticity. Despite the importance of neural plasticity, the mechanisms by which
the brain changes are not fully understood. WV-NFNT is specifically designed to
use advanced techniques including stimulated emission depletion (STED)
microscopy and single-cell and/or spatial transcriptomics to understand neural
plasticity of circuits, neurons, glia, and synapses in various animal models.
New methodologies to elucidate structure-function relationships at high
resolution are advancing the ability to examine how synapses, cells, and neural
circuits are controlled at a level of spatial detail not possible until
recently. The WV-NFNT project brings together researchers who work on these
questions and provides the infrastructure to address key gaps in knowledge about
neural function. The project will grow the neuroscience and bioinformatics
community in West Virginia, and a significant portion of the research component
of this project will be conducted by graduate and undergraduate trainees.
Formalized training and mentorship of trainees in neuroscience and data science
research, coupled with access to internships, will contribute to the goal of
placing West Virginians in competitive post-graduate programs or employment in
STEM industries. WV-NFNT will also expand the capability and diversity of those
working in the fields of neuroscience and data science by implementing specific
education and workforce development activities that will engage trainees across
the career continuum—especially rural, first-generation college students, and
those from other groups traditionally underrepresented in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.