* 2242980
* Toward a revised model of the cell cycle that captures reversible and irreversible arrest
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2027
* Jeremy Purvis, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Richard Cyr
* 02/28/2027
* USD 1,200,000.00

This research project will extend our knowledge of how cells undergo arrest, a
state in which they are still alive but stop dividingâ€”either temporarily or
permanently. The textbook model of the cell cycle describes a single state of
arrest but is mostly silent on whether this state consists of multiple arrested
states; how cells may enter or exit these states; and how cells transition from
reversible to irreversible arrest. This project will define the molecular steps
that govern reversible and irreversible arrest and reveal how flexible the cell
cycle is. These research objectives are deeply integrated with two community
outreach activities that will engage a diverse group of students and scientists.
Building on a long-term partnership with Durham public schools, seventh-grade
students will learn the fundamentals of the cell cycle as well as the technical
skills needed to perform microscopy. The project also draws on an existing
partnership with the University of North Carolina's 'Treatment and Education of
Autistic and Related Communication Handicapped Children' Program to employ two
neurodiverse individuals to perform image analysis of cell cycle
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first aim of this project focuses on reversible
cell cycle arrest with the specific goal of determining how cells resume G1 and
enter S phase following quiescence, a temporary state of cell cycle arrest.
Perturbation experiments will test mechanisms by which the accumulation of
CDKs/cyclins overwhelms pro-arrest factors to promote cell cycle re-entry. The
second aim investigates mechanisms controlling irreversible cell cycle arrest, a
phenotype commonly associated with cellular senescence. Time-lapse imaging and
computational modeling will identify the precise sequence of molecular steps
governing transition to permanent arrest. Systematic perturbation of G1 and G2
regulators are expected to relax the permanency of arrest. Successful completion
of these research objectives will fill critical knowledge gaps in how the cell
cycle is organized and regulated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.