* 2242610
* FW-HTF: Whole-body Exoskeletons for Advanced Vocational Enhancement (WEAVE)
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Divya Srinivasan, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Jordan Berg
* 08/31/2024
* USD 1,236,490.00

The Future of Work at the Human-Technology Frontier (FW-HTF) is one of 10 new
Big Ideas for Future Investment announced by NSF. The FW-HTF cross-directorate
program aims to respond to the challenges and opportunities of the changing
landscape of jobs and work by supporting convergent research. This award
fulfills part of that aim, by examining whether and how a new technology can
improve worker productivity, safety, and well-being.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Powered, full-body exoskeletons have the potential to
augment human physical capacity, thereby increasing productivity and lowering
injury risks, while also preserving human skill for operating in dynamic,
unstructured environments. Exoskeletons could also allow people with different
physical abilities the opportunity to enter and stay employed in physically-
demanding occupations. This project will complete critical fundamental research
necessary to make exoskeletons effective for augmenting human performance in
industrial use, such as manufacturing and warehousing. The project also examines
the potential impacts this new technology may have on the sociotechnological
landscape of jobs and workers. The team will develop a new control interface and
an intelligent cognitive assistant to make exoskeleton use natural and
intuitive, thus minimizing learning time and enabling adaptation to dynamic
environments. The multimodal control interface will allow for augmentation of a
user's perception and cognition when using physical capacity augmentation
systems, and adaptive control of assistance from the exoskeleton according to
user and context. The end results of this research will help workers to operate
efficiently and seamlessly in dynamic and information-rich industrial settings.
Industrial adoption of exoskeletons can have broad-reaching social and economic
implications: by understanding the ramifications of this new technology for
workforce diversification and labor market outcomes, the research will
facilitate technology design choices that benefit the U.S. economy and U.S.
workers. Collaboration with industry partners, including Sarcos Robotics and
General Electric, will further insure industrial relevance of this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will advance knowledge and state-of-the-art
in exoskeleton control, human-robot cooperation, human factors, and augmented
reality systems. An augmented reality interface to improve the user's mental
model of exoskeleton capabilities and increase situational awareness will be
developed, thereby enabling users to formulate new work strategies only afforded
by the newly extended physical capabilities. In terms of human-robot
cooperation, an adaptive predictor-based controller of high-level exoskeleton
assistance parameters will be developed. This will account for the time varying
response of the human to the system and the potential for different steady-state
characteristics depending on the user, so as to achieve a tightly-coupled human-
in-the-loop system. The assessments of learning and adaptation across a diverse
range of workers will be key to making the developed designs more inclusive and
effective, and to elucidating the effects of exoskeleton technologies on
workforce diversification, including people with cognitive and physical
impairments. While the impact of automation (replacing workers with technology)
has been extensively studied in the economics literature, this work will
generate the first empirical models of the effects of augmentation on worker
productivity and well-being, industry profits, and the labor market in
general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.