* 2242895
* Collaborative Research: Greenland Dry-snow Ice-sheet Science Coordination Office
* GEO,OPP
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Zoe Courville, Dartmouth College
* Continuing Grant
* Renee Crain
* 04/30/2026
* USD 123,065.00

Summit Station in Greenland has been the research location for many National
Science Foundation Office of Polar Programs (NSF-OPP) activities for over twenty
years. The value of the facility is based on its location, well above the Arctic
circle, high enough in elevation to be in the free troposphere, not influenced
by human settlements or the moderating effects of the ocean, and the site of the
Greenland Ice Sheet Project 2 (GISP2) deep ice core. Summit Station (72oN, 38oW,
3250 m.a.s.l.) hosts the Greenland Environmental Observatory (GEOSummit), the
only NSF site with permission from the Government of Greenland and the Danish
Commission for Scientific Research in Greenland to provide long-term
environmental measurements. Summit Station is staffed year-round and fills an
important niche in the international scientific community’s global measurement
capability. The Science Coordination Office (SCO) for Summit Station represents
research interests that utilize the station, providing regular feedback to the
managers of the Arctic Research Support and Logistics Program (RSL) and
conveying information back to the research community about NSFs plans for the
station. The SCO presents the needs and desires of the science community working
on the ice sheet in interior Greenland in discussions and decision making
process between RSL and their primary logistics support contractor. NSF has
stated plans to recapitalize the infrastructure at Summit Station over the next
8 years and the SCO will ensure there is communication with the research
community throughout the planning and design process. The SCO concurs with NSF’s
goals to make a safe and sustainable Summit Station elevated above the drifting
snow and preserving the clean air and clean snow research areas. The GEOSummit
website has resources for new Principal Investigators, students and educators.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Summit Station, Greeland is the site of decades of study
of the past climate through deep ice cores, and studies of atmospheric
chemistry, snow processes and, more recently, the study of high-energy neutrinos
from the origins of the universe. Through this effort, the SCO will ensure that
plans to operate and in coming years to recapitalize the infrastructure at
Summit Station will be done with the interests of the research community. The
SCO meets weekly with the arctic logistics contractor science support, logistics
and operations at Summit Station to remain informed about plans and communicate
research interests. The SCO is invited to review documents and provide input on
plans for Summit Station. The Radio Neutrino Observatory for Greenland (RNO-G)
project has installed 6 detector nodes of a planned 30-node network. SCO will
continue to advocate for Summit Station site plans that accommodate an influx of
astrophysical research while maintaining long standing focus on climate relevant
research which needs clean air and snow conditions. This plan will also welcome
and support researchers from a range of other disciplines, and will include
opportunities to educate students and new researchers, but must keep everyone
from inadvertently interfering with each other. The SCO website is a keystone of
communication to the science community, with several features added over the
past few years such as the Google Earth based GIS -- recording activity in the
region over the past 12 years -- a virtual tour using Streetview images, a new
Working at Summit section targeting new investigators, a comprehensive
bibliography of published work near Summit, and a quarterly
Newsletter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.