* 2242589
* SG: Phylogeny, Biogeography, and Revision of Lobelia in the Mexican Transition Zone
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Tina Ayers, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* Shannon Fehlberg
* 06/30/2025
* USD 194,093.00

The five major mountain ranges in Mexico called the Mexican Transition Zone
provide a unique opportunity to study the relationships of closely related
species that are restricted to a single range. These mountains are a transition
zone because they have a mix of organisms from the temperate parts of the
Americas as well as from the tropics. The target organism for the project will
be the plant genus Lobelia. There are 90 species in the mountains of Mexico and,
of those, 83 are found only there. Most of the species have small, blue flowers
and are insect-pollinated, but six have large, red flowers that are hummingbird-
pollinated. Both groups have species with a unique floral feature, a nectar
spur, found nowhere else in the world. This project will reconstruct the
evolutionary relationships of the Mexican Lobelias to investigate how they are
related to each other and to species in other parts of North and South America
and will help determine whether hummingbird pollination and nectar spurs have
evolved independently multiple times. First generation and underserved graduate
and undergraduate students will be trained in molecular techniques and museum
studies. The research will strengthen international collaborations among a
Mexican specialist with intimate knowledge of the species from field work,
students, and researchers. Outreach materials will be developed collaboratively
and incorporated into a permanent public display and showcased at a booth at
Louisiana State Universityâ€™s monthly Night at the Museum event. Specimens
collected and discoveries made will also be incorporated into courses taught at
Northern Arizona University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular data gathered from
chloroplast genomes and a nuclear probe set developed for a closely related
group will be used to build a comprehensive phylogenetic framework for the plant
genus Lobelia, focusing on the highly diverse and endemic lineages of Mexico.
This framework will be used to answer broad evolutionary questions about
biogeography, pollinator shifts, and hybridization. A time-calibrated tree will
also be produced to test specific biogeographic hypotheses in the Mexican
Transition Zone including: 1- geographic barriers between lineages, 2- long-
distance dispersal between mountain ranges, and 3- biogeographic patterns
associated with pollination syndrome or presence of nectar spurs. The
revisionary work produced by this collaboration and multiple undergraduates will
include publicly available descriptions, images, photos, and an interactive web
key to all Lobelia species in Mexico and Central America, all of which will
serve as a resource for current and future floristic
inventories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.