* 2242311
* ERI: Understanding the Dynamic and Thermal Behaviors of Colloidal Droplets Toward a Novel Freezing-based Inkjet Printing Concept
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Yang Liu, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Sumanta Acharya
* 05/31/2024
* USD 171,218.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Inkjet-based additive
manufacturing technology has been widely used for manufacturing complex and
advanced structures. Conventional inkjet 3D printing creates layer-by-layer
structures by jetting colloidal droplets onto a substrate with subsequent
evaporation and deposition. While this inkjet technology can provide fast and
efficient non-contact manufacturing with additional design and material
flexibilities, it suffers from drawbacks such as coarse resolution, lack of
adhesion, manufacturing inconsistency, and uncertainty in mechanical properties
of printed parts. These undesired effects arise from droplet placement errors,
uncertainty in droplet spreading, and uneven deposit distribution, due to the
liquid nature of the colloidal droplets. To overcome these disadvantages, this
work proposes a novel freezing-based inkjet printing concept that freezes the
colloidal droplets upon impact followed by sublimation, eliminating the
undesirable overspreading, particle transport, and fluid motions during
deposition. The project aims to provide a better understanding of the
fundamental physical details of the dynamic and thermal behaviors of colloidal
droplets during the impact, deformation, and freezing processes, which govern
the deposit resolution and uniformity of the freezing-based inkjet process. The
knowledge developed has potential applications in the aerospace, healthcare,
biomedical, and automotive industries. The project will also provide a wide
range of educational and outreach activities, including a multi-year
graduate/undergraduate research program, development of new teaching modules,
and an outreach program for local K-12 students, especially those from groups
underrepresented in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
seeks to advance the fundamental understanding of the dynamic and thermal
behaviors of colloidal droplets in the novel freezing-based inkjet 3D printing
process. The proposal envisions three major foci: (i) quantitatively
characterize the dynamic behaviors and thermal evolutions of colloidal droplets
during impact, deformation, and freezing/solidification processes under
different ambient and surface conditions; (ii) extract the associated dynamic
and thermal time scales; and (iii) examine the deposit morphologies with varying
ambient temperature, humidity, surface temperature, and hydrophobicity. This
project will establish the foundation for a long-term research program focused
on the development of the novel freezing-based inkjet 3D printing technique
tailored for fabricating high-quality functional structures in various
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.