* 2242087
* Solving the participation puzzle: Understanding mechanisms behind causal effects of randomized controlled trials in conservation
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2023,11/30/2024
* Jonathan Bauchet, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 11/30/2024
* USD 113,613.00

This project examines the motivation for people to engage in conservation.
Individuals and households potentially respond to a wide range of variables that
can promote conservation-oriented behavior, including financial incentives and
social, cultural, political, and institutional factors. Within a population,
individuals may exhibit additional variation related to personalities, values,
identities, and social norms. This research focuses on how these factors
interact with material rewards to shape the willingness of individuals and
households to accept payments for environmental conservation, an approach that
is commonly employed in cost-share programs in the United States and other
countries. This study helps researchers to understand how people perceive such
payments and who enrolls in such programs, information that can inform the
design and effective implementation of these programs to be more inclusive and
effective at promoting environmental conservation. This project also contributes
to improving research methods used by cultural anthropologists and researchers
in other disciplines by combining in-depth interviews with a large-scale
experiment. The organization of an open workshop allows the researchers to
promote the methodological approach among social scientists and other audiences,
including students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to explore why
individuals who have been offered material incentives to promote environmental
conservation, either conditional upon their adoption of specific behaviors or
unconditionally, may be equally likely to participate in the program. Among
environmental social scientists, unconditional incentives have conventionally
been expected to be more appealing, particularly to marginalized populations,
including women and poorer households, who commonly face higher barriers to
participation and more difficulties to meet program conditions. In contrast to
those expectations, however, prior research has shown that the conditionality of
compensation may not be predictive of participation in programs. This project
uses ethnographic methods and cultural consensus analysis to assess the
mechanisms behind this unexpected finding from a previous study, which employed
a randomized controlled trial. Alongside consideration of multiple hypotheses
from diverse academic disciplines, this project also examines a new hypothesis
that cultural norms about trust, intrinsic motivation, and perceptions of
fairness play a more prominent role in households’ decisions to participate in
conservation programs than the conditionality of the programs’ payments. The
ethnographic work that is being conducted as part of this project helps to
contextualize the prior findings and advance theory in the interdisciplinary
study of conservation behavior. The results of this work are shared with
policymakers and other institutions that manage natural
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.