* 2242375
* Biomaterials built by biology: Mechanism and applications of hyperbranched fractal plasmonic structures
* MPS,DMR
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2026
* Jesse Jokerst, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 02/28/2026
* USD 550,000.00

PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The behavior of common metals
changes dramatically as the size of the metal decreases. The color and
electrical properties of metals like gold and silver change dramatically as they
get smaller. People have used the color changes and electrical properties of
ultrasmall metal clusters to make medical devices, environmental sensors, and
electronic components. However, it is very difficult to control matter at very
small size regimes. We recently showed how tiny protein fragments can actually
cause metal clusters to assemble into larger wire-like structures. This is a key
step to building larger structures that people can use. Our goal in this
research is to use protein fragments to create functional devices. We will
incubate these short protein fragments with small metallic clusters. Our
preliminary data showed that the protein acts as a guide and can cause the
metallic clusters to self-assemble into remarkably complex structures of an
intermediate size (bigger than the source clusters but smaller than bulk metal).
That is, we are using the protein guides to assemble tiny clusters of metals
into wires. After doing controlled experiments to understand the mechanism, we
will determine the limits of this technique, i.e., we will determine how big we
can make the wires. We will then use the resulting wires to make a sensor that
can quickly diagnose and discriminate between different respiratory viruses.
Finally, we will use the color changes resulting from the sizes changes to train
the next-generation of materials scientists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2:
TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hierarchical plasmonic biomaterials are
interesting because they are useful. These biomaterials are built from small
nanoparticles that combine into larger micron-sized structures. As a result of
their unique structure, hierarchical plasmonic biomaterials have tunable
optical, electronic, and structural properties. These properties can then be
harnessed for medical devices, environmental sensors, electronic components,
etc. Thus, the long-term goal of this research is to develop theory and
applications related to biologically-constructed hierarchical nanoparticles.
More specifically, our preliminary work uses diffusion-limited aggregation in
the presence of defined peptide sequences to build hierarchical silver
biomaterials with a fractal snowflake-like design (see figures below). These
fractal systems were constructed from ~30 nm silver nanospheres incubated with
certain short peptides (5 – 20 residues). We now seek funds to conduct
additional studies to derive a coherent mechanistic understanding of how the
peptide length, amino acid sequence, and nanoparticle surface so dramatically
impacts biomaterial morphology. We hypothesize that the hierarchical assembly is
driven by bridging interactions between the nanoparticle surface the peptide
scaffold. To test this hypothesis, Objective #1 will study the
structure/activity relationship of the peptide length and charge: We will
monitor nanoparticle morphology as a function of peptide design. Objective #2
will perturb the nanoparticle surface chemistry to elucidate the role that
surface ligands have on particle assembly into hierarchical structures.
Objective #3 will build even larger biomaterials by combining multiple self-
assemblies face-to-face—this work will lead to customized wires and lattices
based on DNA-guided assembly. Objective #4 will deploy these insights for a
practical sensor that discriminates between respiratory diseases via a simple
color change. We also include objectives that use the colorimetric changes
inherent to plasmonic materials to recruit and educate a new generation of
materials scientists. Thus, the project outcomes are new knowledge and new
materials to create hierarchical plasmonic biomaterials that benefit society as
well as newly trained materials scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.