* 2242574
* Doctoral Dissertation Research In Economics:  Misinformed or In Denial?  Explaining the Low Take-Up of Tuberculosis Preventative Therapy
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2024
* Debraj Ray, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 03/31/2024
* USD 25,000.00

Low adoption rates of preventative health technologies, such as immunization,
around the world is a major public health problem, yet it is generally not
understood why households underinvest in preventative health. This project uses
field experiments to seek behavioral explanations for such under-investment
using the Tuberculosis Preventative Therapy (TPT)—a course of medication that
prevents the progression of latent Tuberculosis (TB) infection into disease---as
a case study. TPT uptake among adult contacts is low, despite being offered at
no cost to the recipient. This project investigates whether this is due to
incorrect beliefs of low infection risk (misinformation), or if contacts do not
take the therapy for fear of being stigmatized or fear of adverse drug reactions
(motivated beliefs). While misinformation can be solved with targeted
information campaigns, motivated beliefs may not be easily solved, hence it is
important to disentangle these behavioral sources of under-investment in
formulated effective public health policies. The results of this research will
provide major guide to developing polices to increase investment in preventative
health, thus improving the level of health and human capital generally. Improved
health and general human capital would also lead to faster economic growth,
further increasing the living standards of Americans. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two
behavioral explanations for incorrect beliefs about low infection risk are
hypothesized---lack of awareness about the risk of contracting the infection
(misinformed beliefs) and deliberate underestimation of infection risk to cope
with fears of stigmatization (motivated beliefs about low susceptibility). To
test these hypotheses, adult household who have contacts with a recently
diagnosed pulmonary TB patients will be surveyed to elicit beliefs about TB
infection risk. The elicited beliefs will be used to empirically test
theoretical predictions for motivated belief formation (against misinformation).
To account for an alternate possibility of motivation by high non-monetary
costs, the project also elicits how contacts trade off the non-monetary costs of
TPT against the expected benefits, using discrete choice experiments with
hypothetical TPT-taking scenarios. The beliefs and preferences thus elicited
will then be used to estimate a model of contacts’ TPT uptake decisions; the
estimates will be used to simulate contacts’ responses under various
counterfactual policy scenarios. The results of this research will provide major
guide to developing polices to increase investment in preventative health, thus
improving the level of health and human capital
generally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.