* 2242568
* Bayesian Inference of Whole-Brain Directed Networks Using Neuroimaging Data
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Tingting Zhang, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 04/30/2026
* USD 275,112.00

This research project will develop new statistical models and computationally
efficient algorithms to analyze functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI)
data. The advent of fMRI offers unprecedented opportunities for scientists to
study the functional organization of the human brain because fMRI provides non-
invasive measurements of the entire human brain's activity with a high spatial
resolution. However, the massive size and large noise of fMRI data and the
complex functional organizations of human brains pose challenges to scientists.
This project will develop efficient fMRI data analysis methods to address these
challenges. The new methods will be applied to investigate human brains'
functional organizations, functional organization changes during brain
development, and the relationship between the human brain and behavior in the
population. The project results will contribute to the critical knowledge of the
development of both healthy brain functions and risks for mental health
challenges. Open-source software that implements the new statistical tools will
be developed and made publicly available. The project will provide educational
and training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will build Bayesian models for
whole-brain networks of many subjects based on their fMRI data. The new models
will specifically characterize functionally specialized modules of brain regions
and connections within and between the modules in whole-brain networks. In
addition, the new models offer model flexibility, improved estimation
efficiency, and robustness to model error and data noise in characterizing many
subjects' whole-brain networks. Efficient computational algorithms will be
developed to address the computational challenge in analyzing massive fMRI data
and to map many subjects' whole-brain networks simultaneously. The project also
will propose scalar-on-network regressions that feature heterogeneous
relationships between behavior and brain networks in the population. The
investigator will apply the new methods to neuroimaging and behavioral data of
many subjects and examine the variation and distribution of the human brain's
functional organization and its relationship to human behavior in the
population. The project's findings will enhance understanding of the brain,
human behavior, the risk for mental health challenges, and the role of the brain
in overall health and well-being.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.