* 2242099
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Navigating Care: A Study of Pediatric Cancer Patients undergoing Palliative Care
* SBE,BCS
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2023
* Adrienne Strong, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2023
* USD 30,500.00

The lack of pediatric palliative care facilities continues to negatively impact
the health of children suffering from cancer. This is further compounded by a
lack of children’s representations and voices in health. In addition to
providing funding for the training of a graduate student in the methods of
empirical, scientific data collection and analysis, this doctoral dissertation
project provides a scientific analysis of children’s conceptualizations of care
in relation to socio-cultural differences and historical circumstances which
impact the everyday lives of community members, caregivers, and patients. By
examining the engagement of children with palliative care practices, this
dissertation project will disseminate its data and findings to impact the
delivery of health interventions to be more sensitive and suitable for
children’s specific needs. The project also broadens the participation of
historically underrepresented groups in the production of scientific knowledge.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation research project examines
children’s experiences with pediatric palliative care to determine how they
produce individual meanings of care. It has three primary aims: (1) to document
the lived experiences of pediatric cancer patients with palliative care and
examine their everyday interactions with care providers; (2) to examine how care
providers administer and engage in practices of palliative care; and (3) to
investigate how socio-cultural factors affect caregivers’ perceptions and
practices of palliative care. To achieve these aims, the researcher will
integrate visual methods (such as arts-based methods, participatory photography,
participatory photo elicitation, and observational sketching) and conduct
ethnographic observations, semi-structured interviews, focus group discussions,
and archival research. Data will be thematically coded and analyzed to
contextualize how children interact with palliative care practices, and whether
communitarian social values may shape different ideas of care. This research
contributes to anthropological theory on children’s agency in health and
improves theorizations of care to account for a more heterogeneous range of
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.