* 2242151
* Observations and Analysis Throughflow Indonesian Seas, Upwelling, and Mixing Physics (TRIUMPH) Data
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2026
* Raden Susanto, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 03/31/2026
* USD 736,628.00

The goal of this project is to analyze oceanographic data from the Indonesian
Through Flow (ITF) region taken during the TRIUMPH (ThRoughflow Indonesian seas,
Upwelling, and Mixing PHysics) oceanographic field program, a collaboration with
researchers from Indonesia and China. TRIUMPH has deployed seven moorings in the
main direct ITF pathways and the upwelling region of south Java since Fall 2019.
The project will examine: the full-depth of ITF transport variability and its
associated heat and freshwater fluxes in the Makassar, Lombok, and Alas Straits
on tidal, intraseasonal, and seasonal timescales; tidal mixing variability; and,
propagation of Kelvin waves from the tropical Indian Ocean-Makassar
Strait.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Indonesian Through Flow (ITF) is an essential
conduit for the flow of low latitude Pacific Ocean waters into the Indian Ocean.
Its variability is particularly significant because it plays a vital role in
global ocean circulation and climate. Even though ITF has been measured the last
three decades, no detailed measurements of full depth variability have been done
nor has its impacts on mixing and upwelling along the eastern tropical Indian
Ocean been investigated. This absence of data represents a significant gap in
our understanding of the role of this shallow choke point in regulating the
Pacific-Indian Ocean exchange, air-sea interactions, and water-mass
transformation in the chokepoint of the shallow Meridional Ocean Circulation.
Hence, it is essential to have detailed simultaneous measurements of the ITF,
mixing, and upwelling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.