* 2242049
* EAGER: Quantum Manufacturing: Supporting Future Quantum Applications by Developing a Robust, Scalable Process to Create Diamond Nitrogen-Vacancy Center Qubits
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2024
* Charles Parker, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Kuech
* 12/31/2024
* USD 299,668.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) Quantum Manufacturing
award will support innovative research to demonstrate a new approach and reveal
new knowledge on the creation of nitrogen-vacancy (NV) color centers in diamond
for quantum bit implementation. Quantum information applications, such as
quantum computing, communications, and sensing, rely on the implementation of
reproducible and robust quantum bits, or qubits. Numerous materials and systems
have been identified to create qubits, but diamond is of particular interest
because its NV centers are very stable and provide relatively long room
temperature coherence times. However, the creation of color centers in wide
-bandgap semiconductors, such as diamond, is challenging. Qubit fabrication in
these materials has been primarily based on conventional microelectronics
manufacturing techniques. While these approaches have provided a basis for
diamond-based qubit system studies, conventional microelectronic processing
techniques are not optimal for color center manufacturing. To change this, the
research will utilize a robust and scalable diamond growth technique coupled
with carbon nanotube electron beam irradiation to create the defects.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While NV centers in diamond have been shown to be
efficacious for qubit realization, current manufacturing processes remain
challenging. Most implementations rely on the post- processing identification of
effective qubits created using ion implantation and annealing. Specific
manufacturing challenges relate to the difficulties in balancing defect center
creation and diamond defect and strain introduction, control of the spatial
location of NV centers, and the difficulty in scaling processes to large-area
diamond wafers. The new process rests on the synthesis of large-area diamond
prototype wafers and the use of arrays of carbon-nanotube bundles enabling the
controlled introduction of NV centers using field emission and electron
bombardment. This new approach enables more control of the energy required to
create NV centers allowing the trade-off of qubit creation and defect
production, as well as significant advances in the control of spatial
positioning of qubits. The results from this research will benefit the US
economy and society. Quantum information systems will significantly enhance
technologies for security, communications, biomedical sensing, and computing.
This research involves several disciplines including manufacturing, materials
science, and electrical engineering. The multi-disciplinary approach will help
broaden the participation of underrepresented groups in research and will
positively impact engineering education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.