* 2242503
* Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Small: Creating An Extensible Internet Through Interposition
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* James McCauley, Mount Holyoke College
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 02/28/2026
* USD 55,939.00

In common parlance, the Internet is the set of applications and services that we
can access from our phones, laptops, and other personal devices. However, in the
networking research community, the term “the Internet” refers more specifically
to the basic communication infrastructure on which these applications and
services have been built. What many find surprising is that while the set of
applications and services have changed dramatically over the years, the basic
architecture of the Internet itself – that is, the arrangement of functionality
in the communication infrastructure – has remained almost completely unchanged
since it first took shape roughly forty years ago. This lack of change is not by
choice; we know many ways the infrastructure could be improved to provide users
with better security, privacy, and performance. Instead, the lack of change is
because evolving such a large infrastructure is a difficult design challenge in
itself. More specifically, any proposal for architectural change in the Internet
must meet the twin challenges of: (i) how to deploy the new design without
breaking the old, and (ii) how to create incentives so that all the major
providers of the infrastructure benefit from this change (or else it is unlikely
to happen). This research project aims to overcome these barriers with a design
we call the Extensible Internet. If successful, this will not just be a one-time
change, but will turn the Internet into a platform that can easily incorporate
change on an ongoing basis.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;More technically, this work is
built on the central insight that the original Internet architecture’s narrow
waist of IP conflated two roles: that of tying all layer-2 (L2) networks
together, and that of providing a service model to end hosts. The Extensible
Internet separates these two roles by inserting an Interposition Layer between
layers L3 and L4 that (i) is built on top of L3, and can use the current L3
without change, and (ii) provide the service model to end hosts. The entire
focus of the Extensible Internet design is architecting this new layer so that
an extensible set of services – ranging from secure attestation to improved
privacy to multipoint delivery to various other delivery models – can be
seamlessly deployed on top of this Interposition Layer. The research challenges
include: how to structure the data path so that it can be both fully flexible
and highly efficient; how to structure global services to be highly resilient;
and how to feasibly support an evolving yet uniform service model (i.e.,
supported by all network providers). We will demonstrate the resulting design on
various network testbeds, including NSF’s own FABRIC testbed. In addition, all
software we create in this project will be publicly available and open
source.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.