* 2242113
* The role of turbulent coherent structures on the evolving seabed
* GEO,OCE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Tian-Jian (Tom) Hsu, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Sean Kennan
* 04/30/2026
* USD 380,940.00

Seabed bathymetric features, known as ripples, are responsible for hydrodynamic
dissipation, sediment transport, and benthic flux exchange. The three-
dimensional low steepness ripples commonly observed in medium and fine sand
beaches (median grain size of 0.15-0.3 mm) have received much less attention
compared to the high steepness coarse sand ripples, even though the medium and
fine sand beaches are more common in nature. Furthermore, the migration of
medium and fine sand ripples may contribute to a significant part of the beach
profile evolution. The proposed work will apply numerical modeling methods to
study medium and fine sand ripples driven by waves and currents. The Large Eddy
Simulation (LES) two-phase flow methodology will be applied to understand the
geometry and migration of medium-fine ripples in the presence of flow separation
vortices, flow instabilities, and turbulent coherent structures in a turbulence-
resolving system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Medium and fine sand ripples will be
studied using a large-eddy simulation (LES) Eulerian two-phase methodology. The
steepness of medium-fine sand ripples is both low and capricious, and it is
hypothesized in this project that their evolution is dictated by flow
instabilities and coherent structures such that the conventional paradigm which
separates the primary vortices from the cascade of turbulent coherent structures
is inadequate. The proposed work is expected to gain a new understanding of
explaining the geometry and migration of medium and fine sand ripples, deliver
an open-source numerical simulation model capable of simulating low steepness
ripples, and inform improved parameterizations on transport rate and migration.
The project will test the hypothesis that the Reynolds-averaged modeling
approach that objectively separates the energy cascade of turbulent coherent
structures from the resolved primary vortices becomes inadequate for low
steepness ripples. This project will create the first turbulence-resolving (LES)
Eulerian two-phase model capable of simulating the geometry and migration of
medium and fine sand ripples by extending the existing open-source model,
SedFoam.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.