* 2242398
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: The Impact of Product Market Competition on the Labor Market
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Jaroslav Borovicka, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Nancy Lutz
* 04/30/2024
* USD 22,512.00

This award will fund a doctoral dissertation that uses unique data to measure
the effects of high market concentration on workers, including work to better
understand the links between the competition a firm faces for the products it
sells and the competition it faces for workers it seeks to employ. Economic
theory predicts that workers will earn higher wages when there are many
employers offering jobs. However, in some local areas there are only a few
employers. In this kind of concentrated labor market, employers have an
advantage because workers lack viable alternative offers. Furthermore, if a firm
has a dominant position in the market for the product/s it sells, it may also be
dominant in the labor market. This kind of firm would then have an outsized role
on both its workers and its consumers. The project will systematically
investigate how concentration affects wages, employment spell duration, and
profit pass-through. The results of this project may help policymakers
understand the costs and benefits of policies designed to reduce market
concentration. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is based on three
administrative datasets spanning the years 2008 to 2020. The first is the quasi-
universe of employment spells year-by-year; the research team will use this to
systematically construct the employment and wage bill concentration indexes.
This first dataset lacks the ability to track workers over time for
confidentiality reasons. The second dataset is an employer-employee panel with
information on wages, duration of spell, industry, occupation and some
demographic information. This dataset allows us to follow workers and firms over
the years. Finally, the third dataset contains balance sheet information at the
firm’s level (sales, profits, inventories, etc.). What makes these datasets
unique is the possibility to merge them using a unique firm identifier. The
project builds the concentration index by labor market and merges that measure
with our panel data and each firm’s balance sheet. The result is a new panel in
which we can look at how wages vary depending on concentrations in the product
and labor market. This analysis represents the core of the project. The first
step will be to properly define labor markets. We will rely on traditional
notions like occupation by commuting zone, in addition to a clustering approach
based workers’ transitions across firms (applying newly developed techniques in
stochastic block modeling). We will then run labor regressions to document
patterns between wages (level and growth), concentration and profits and sales.
We want to document whether workers in more concentrated markets are better or
worse off. As pointed out above, in more concentrated markets, firms are likely
to have more bargaining power, yet they should also be more productive firms,
and therefore be paying higher wages. These regressions will not inform us on
the causality of market concentration on wages though. To alleviate that point,
the next step of the project will be to propose a search-and-matching model in
which a discrete number of firms compete for workers and use our empirical
results to calibrate it. We will then be able to run counterfactual analyses on
the impact of concentration on workers’ welfare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.