* 2242269
* The transition from normal subduction to slab window, unraveling its effect on the subcontinental lithospheric mantle of southern Patagonia
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* J. Gregory Hirth, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 06/30/2026
* USD 335,370.00

This team plans to evaluate the processes that create, modify and destroy the
Earth’s continents. They will also estimate how changes in composition and
mechanical properties of the continental roots affect its stability. This
proposal focuses on Southern Patagonia, where the continental roots have been
sampled by lavas erupted over the last 50 million years. Very recent
seismological data also shows clear evidence of continental root removal. This
research together with the new seismological observations will provide the
necessary information to evaluate the evolution and stability of the Southern
Patagonia continental root and how its removal might affect the composition of
the nearby Earth’s interior. The results of this work will inform a similar
ongoing study of the continental roots of West Antarctica. Combined, these
projects have global implications for the stability of Patagonia and West
Antarctica, which were once a single continent. The research team will
collaborate nationally and internationally, and this project supports five
analytical facilities in three US research institutions. The proposal supports
an early-career researcher and a graduate and an undergraduate student at Brown
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the proposed work is to understand
how subduction processes have affected the stability of the Southern Patagonia
subcontinental lithospheric mantle (SCLM). This proposal aims to collect new
geochemical and microstructural data on mantle xenoliths from across Southern
Patagonia. The xenoliths have been sampled by erupted lavas over the last 50
million years; this time encompasses the tectonic transition from normal
subduction of the Nazca oceanic plate to the formation of a slab window during
the Chile Ridge-South America trench collision. The main objectives of this
study are to determine the P-T conditions, extent of hydration, refertilization
and deformation of the SCLM during this transition. It will allow estimation of
the effective viscosity and stability of the lithospheric mantle and evaluation
of whether the deformation occurred prior to or was affected by the introduction
of water/melt. Furthermore, the proposed new data will be combined with new
seismological observations to evaluate how these geologic processes affected the
seismic properties (velocities, anisotropy) of the Southern Patagonia SCLM.
Because the new seismological data show clear evidence of lithospheric mantle
removal, the geochemical characterization of the mantle xenoliths will help test
the hypothesis that the removed lithospheric mantle contributed to the
composition of the volcanism not only in Southern Patagonia, but also in the
Chile Ridge system. Finally, this proposal will be combined with an ongoing
study of the lithospheric mantle of West Antarctica, which formed a single
continental block with Southern Patagonia before the opening of the Drake
passage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.