* 2242391
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Expected Utility Core of Risk Preferences
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Charles Sprenger, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eric Bahel
* 01/31/2024
* USD 23,576.00

Understanding decision-making in the absence of confidence is important because
many real-life decisions involve uncertainty and complicated trade-offs.
Economic theories link the departure of behavior from the rational model of
choice under uncertainty to the lack of decision confidence. The lack of
decision confidence may arise, for instance, from individuals’ uncertainty over
their willingness to take risks. This research project will use economic theory
and laboratory experiments to study how people make decisions between risky
alternatives and how confident they are when they make their decisions. The
results of this research project will help understand how people behave as a
function of their level of decision confidence. A particular emphasis will be
given to decisions between safe and risky alternatives, for which it will be
possible to examine whether people tend to be more risk-averse or risk-seeking
when unconfident. The researchers will also conduct laboratory experiments to
study the importance of experience in decision-making. In particular, the
researchers will study whether people who can familiarize themselves with the
decision environment before making a decision tend to become more confident
about their decisions and behave more rationally. This analysis will provide new
insights into the design of policies aimed at promoting socially desirable
behaviors by increasing the familiarity of the targeted population with the
decision environment. Moreover, the researchers will also develop and implement
a novel methodology to estimate individuals’ willingness to take risks from
incentivized experiments and relate this new measure to decision confidence.
This novel approach may be used, for instance, by financial advisors to
determine appropriate portfolio recommendations for their
clients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers will conduct laboratory
experiments to study failures of the independence axiom, to understand their
relationship with decision confidence and experience, and to elicit risk
aversion for individuals who may violate the independence axiom. To this end,
subjects will make choices over monetary lotteries and declare on a scale from
zero to 100 how confident they are about their choices. Moreover, to study
whether experience can affect decision-making, a group of subjects will be asked
to observe random draws of monetary prizes from some pairs of lotteries before
answering these questions. The researchers will analyze the experimental data
using the notion of expected utility core, which represents the greatest part of
a preference relation that satisfies the independence axiom. Studying the
expected utility core amounts to testing the implications of the independence
axiom locally for every single choice. This local analysis will allow
reevaluating the relevance of features of the choice environment traditionally
associated with higher violations of the independence axiom, most notably the
presence of a certain (i.e., probability 1) alternative. Moreover, it will shed
new light on the role of decision confidence and experience in decision-making
under risk. In particular, the project seeks to explore the correlation between
decision confidence and violations of the independence axiom and under what
circumstances experience can increase confidence and reduces independence
violations. The lack of confidence can arise, for instance, from indecisiveness
on the level of risk aversion. This project will formalize this intuition by
developing a new methodology that exploits the expected utility core to estimate
a set of possible levels of risk aversion, each captured by a different utility
function. This novel approach allows for a general analysis of attitudes toward
risk that is robust to model misspecification because it relies neither on
expected utility nor on a specific alternative model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.