* 2242111
* Collaborative Research: A global census of submesoscale energetics using in-situ drifter observations and a high resolution ocean model
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Shane Elipot, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 05/31/2026
* USD 158,992.00

Oceanic motions are turbulent over a wide range of scales, but observationally
this turbulence has primarily been investigated at the smallest (&lt; 1km) and
at the largest (&gt; 100km) scales. Many of the properties of the oceanic flow
field at intermediate scales, referred to as the submesoscales, have remained
relatively elusive because of observational limitations: most high-resolution
in-situ observational measurements have limited spatial range while satellite-
based velocity estimates have limited spatial resolution. In addition,
satellite-based surface velocities are estimated using the simplified physics
assumptions (geostrophy), which breaks down at the submesoscales. Overall, a
global view of kinetic energy as a function of length scale in the submesoscale
range is not currently available. The primary goals of this project are i) to
estimate kinetic energy distribution and transfers at submesoscales, ii) to
understand the role of balanced and wave-like flow components in setting these
submesoscale energetics, and iii) to quantify how and assess why these
submesoscale flow properties vary globally. This research will quantify global
submesoscale kinetic energy content, its dynamical characteristics, and
transfers as a function of spatial-scale, using existing surface drifter
observations from NOAA. Global observations of kinetic energy at these scales
have never been examined before: this work is a unique opportunity to
characterize the spatial patterns and seasonal variability of ocean submesoscale
flows, and to assess the effects of mixed layer depth and surface forcing on
energy content at these scales. These estimates will provide the first global
observational baseline to compare against future observations and high-
resolution simulations, and one such comparison will be performed in this work.
In addition, these observations will elucidate the energy budget of the global
ocean by quantifying energy transfers across scales. In coarse resolution
climate models, subgrid-scale parameterizations represent the effects of
submesoscale motions: the baseline provided by this work will help improve these
parameterizations in the future. The analysis will provide a useful ground truth
to validate and calibrate future satellite observations, and to quantify biases
in high resolution ocean models. Improved understanding of ocean energetics also
has direct relevance for the development of better subgrid scale
parameterizations for ocean and climate models. Additionally, this project will
generate documented and open-source Python code for processing observational and
synthetic Lagrangian data for future studies of ocean energetics. In terms of
workforce training, this project will support one graduate student, who will
learn how to analyze high-resolution model data using parallel processing tools
in Python. Two undergraduate students will conduct suitable research projects
and will be mentored through the Research Experiences for Undergraduates program
at two different institutions. Two early-career scientists will be supported by
this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve its goals, this study will analyze
the position and velocity data from the drifting surface buoys of the Global
Drifter Program, with the help of two-point spatial statistics. Specifically, it
will use the second order structure function to quantify how kinetic energy is
distributed as a function of scale, and the third order structure function to
quantify how kinetic energy is transferred across scales. Additionally, it will
make use of Lagrangian filtering to quantify the statistical properties of and
interactions between balanced and wave-like motions. These observational data
analyses will be supported by the analysis of a high-resolution global ocean
simulation, which will allow for the quantification of the biases caused by
Lagrangian sampling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.