* 2242514
* REU Site: Materials Make the World, A Dartmouth College REU Site in Materials Science
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Ian Baker, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 03/31/2026
* USD 428,020.00

Non-technical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dartmouth College will host a
Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site that prepares and mentors
undergraduates who might not have otherwise considered Materials Science and
Engineering as a career option. Ten undergraduates spend nine weeks at Dartmouth
during the summer during which they receive substantive, hands-on research
experience. Student participants share in the creation of new materials that
will eventually find their way into improved products and services that benefit
broader society. In conjunction, they learn to communicate this information
effectively to both a range of scientists and non-scientists. Half of the
student positions are reserved for under-represented minorities, there is a
50:50 gender balance, and half the students are recruited students from non-
research-intensive universities and colleges in order to broaden participation
in the field. Under the guidance of Faculty mentors, the students gain both
practical Materials Science research experience in the laboratory, and also
learn about the breadth and value of materials science in the classroom from
experts in the field. They also engage in professional development activities
that include the development of research data for publication, public
presentation of research results, professional networking, Graduate Record
Examination coaching and preparation, and training in the Responsible Conduct of
Research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU
site prepares and mentors undergraduates who might not have otherwise considered
Materials Science and Engineering as a career option. Ten undergraduates spend
nine weeks at Dartmouth during the summer during which they receive substantive,
hands-on research experience on a variety of topics including Multifunctional
Electronic Textiles for Health and Protection, Understanding the Origin of Two-
Level Systems in Al2O3, Engineering the Interface of Sodium Ceramic Electrolytes
for Sodium Metal, Advanced Medium Entropy Alloy Soft Magnets, Fabrication of
conductive 3D-printed carbon materials, Fabrication and Property Tuning of
Polymer-Derived Ceramics, Measurements of Nonlinear Dielectric Behavior in MnZn,
Ice Growth on Surfaces with Variable Material Properties, Controlling the
photophysical properties of liquid crystals using switchable, Band Engineering
of 2D-Conducting Oxide Semiconductors for Flexible Electronics, and High-
efficiency, high-temperature solar selective absorber coatings. The student
participants share in the creation of new materials that will eventually find
their way into improved products and services that benefit broader society. In
conjunction, they learn to communicate this information effectively to both a
range of scientists and non-scientists. Half of the student slots are reserved
for under-represented minorities, there is a 50:50 gender balance, and half the
students are recruited students from non-research-intensive universities and
colleges in order to broaden participation in the field. Under the guidance of
Faculty mentors, the students gain both practical Materials Science research
experience in the laboratory, and also learn about the breadth and value of
materials science in the classroom from experts in the field. They also engage
in professional development activities that include the development of research
data for publication, public presentation of research results, professional
networking, Graduate Record Examination coaching and preparation, and training
in the Responsible Conduct of Research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.