* 2242369
* DDRIE: Farm to Fridge: Traceability and Quality Incentivizing in a Dairy Chain
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Jonathan Robinson, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 12/31/2023
* USD 25,000.00

Improving the quality of agricultural products is an important step in the
process of structural transformation---moving farmers from subsistence farming
to modern commercial agriculture. Disorganized agriculture value chains prevent
the transmission of quality incentives to farmers in the supply chain,
especially when quality is unobserved at the farm gate. Without an effective
traceability system along the value chain, farmers will not be rewarded for
producing high-quality products. This project will support low-income farmers to
develop more accountable food supply chains by establishing a sustainable
traceability and quality-based payment system in dairy farming. This system
helps to improve products’ quality, increase farmers’ profit, and improve
consumers’ welfare, which has the potential to be scaled up to not only many
other dairy cooperatives, but also other agricultural commodities. This research
would help the U.S. target its aid policies in agricultural value chains in
developing countries more effectively with a better understanding of these
emerging markets. The results of this research could improve agricultural
product quality and increase the incomes of small-scale farmers as well as
improve the health of consumers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will use a randomized controlled trial (RCT) at the collection center level
within dairy cooperatives to evaluate the effect of establishing a milk quality
traceability system, supplemented with a quality-based payment on milk quality,
and farmers’ investment in quality upgrading. The experiment has two arms.
First, the project implements a traceability system to track the flow of milk
delivery throughout the value chain among randomly selected collection centers.
Milk tests at different levels based on the traceability system will be
conducted to determine farmers’ eligibility for quality subsidies. Second, this
project randomizes the subsidy to be paid to eligible farmers as well as vary
the range of subsidies to be given to farmers. This experimental design allows
the PIs to identify the causal effects of traceability systems and quality-based
payment on milk quality and farmers’ investment in quality upgrading. The design
can be adapted to study other markets and the results could provide economists
with a better understanding of product quality upgrading, and important
contribution to the development economics literature. The data collected for the
project will be made available to future researchers. The results of this
research could improve agricultural product quality and increase the incomes of
small-scale farmers as well as improve the health of consumers. The results will
also inform US policies on quality upgrading in agricultural value chains as
well as guide the formulation of US aid policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.