* 2242812
* RII Track-1: AI-enabled Devices for the Advancement of Personalized and Transformative Healthcare in South Carolina
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Qi Wang, Clemson University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Pinhas Ben-Tzvi
* 07/31/2028
* USD 5,126,834.00

The vision of the "Artificial Intelligence-enabled Devices for the Advancement
of Personalized and Transformative Healthcare in South Carolina" (ADAPT) project
is to build research capacity at the nexus of artificial intelligence (AI), life
and social sciences, and bioengineering through fundamental research, education,
workforce development, and industry partnerships. Building this capacity will
significantly accelerate the development and deployment of AI solutions to
create next-generation biomedical devices that will improve healthcare outcomes
and address the healthcare needs of South Carolinians, especially those in
underserved regions. ADAPT will contribute to South Carolina’s AI-enabled
biomedical device industry by fostering cross-cutting STEM research throughout
the state and translating research outcomes into new technologies. Participation
in AI development and associated biomedical device research will be expanded by
recruiting and supporting trainees from groups traditionally underrepresented
through STEM camps, teacher engagement, and retention/persistence initiatives
along the STEM pipeline. ADAPT will be led by Clemson University in partnership
with Benedict College, The Citadel, Claflin University, College of Charleston,
Francis Marion University, Medical University of South Carolina, South Carolina
Research Authority, South Carolina State University, Tri-County Technical
College, University of South Carolina, and Winthrop University.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ADAPT research will focus on emerging biomedical AI and
its integration with targeted biomedical devices for use in three phases of
medical interventions: diagnosis, treatment, and rehabilitation. The AI-enabling
Core will take on fundamental research in biomedical AI, tackling issues such as
data acquisition, multimodal data fusion, data representation learning, meta-
learning, physics-informed machine learning, security, and trustworthy AI to
provide integrated solutions for the biomedical devices developed in each
research thrust. The AI ethics team in ADAPT’s AI-enabling Core is tasked to set
AI ethics standards and design innovative education and training programs to
ensure that the AI-enabled biomedical devices are trusted by both healthcare
providers and receivers in practice. Research will address critical issues in
biomedical AI, including incorporation of ethics into design decisions;
elimination of the “black box” via explainable AI; integration of multimodal
data via deep learning models; and AI-device integration via digital twins.
ADAPT will deliver a new national model for developing biomedical devices,
educating and training a biomedical AI workforce, and interacting with
stakeholders. ADAPT will benefit the State of South Carolina through: (1)
leadership and national prominence in healthcare AI; (2) an AI-literacy campaign
to promote the use of AI in addressing healthcare disparities; (3) social
awareness of the importance of AI in precision medicine; and (4) professional
competency in AI through continuing education credits for healthcare
professionals (e.g., nurses, physicians, and healthcare
administrators).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.