* 2242729
* I-Corps:  Fringe Projection Profilometry for Precision Surface Metrology
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2023
* Justin Hyatt, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a rapid measuring system for precision curved surfaces. The
proposed technology is aimed at the design and fabrication of submillimeter
radio telescopes and satellite communication antennas, which require tight
surface tolerances, with panels produced in large quantities according to strict
surface accuracy requirements. There are currently many methods used for
measuring surfaces with high accuracy. However, they are limited on size,
spatial resolution, and sensitivity to contact. Other methods such as coordinate
measuring machines (CMM) and laser trackers, involve single point measurements
and, therefore, are very slow. The proposed technology is designed to measure
meter-scale areas with sub-millimeter spatial resolution and with extreme
accuracy in a few minutes. In addition, the proposed technology may be used the
alignment of a final assembled reflector dish, which is generally done using
holography or commercial photogrammetry systems with manual fiducials. Both
applications require significant preparation time, hardware, and an available
satellite beacon signal in the case of the holography method. Radio telescopes
of the future will require higher accuracy, larger dishes, and in higher
quantities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of fringe projection photogrammetry. The proposed technology uses
inexpensive, off-the-shelf hardware to rapidly measure freeform curved surfaces
in high resolution. The technology works by projecting a series of fringe
patterns onto the curved surface to be measured. Two cameras use stereo vision
to triangulate the location of features in the projected patterns in three-
dimensional space. Proprietary algorithms process images recorded by the cameras
to generate a dense cloud of points with three dimensional coordinates that map
the shape of the surface. This entire process takes only a few minutes and does
not require custom optics or hardware based on the shape to be measured. This
makes the proposed technology optimal for high volume, mass customization
fabrication processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.