* 2242597
* DDRIG in DRMS: The Effects of Internalized Cultural Inferiority on Political Attitudes and Behavior
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Daniel Posner, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 03/31/2024
* USD 20,437.00

Non-White individuals face social pressure to accept or embrace racial
stereotypes and ideologies that characterize their own racial groups as
inferior, a phenomenon of internalized cultural inferiority. Existing research
demonstrates that internalized cultural inferiority can generate poor mental and
physical health among non-White individuals. This project examines how this
mentality affects Black individuals’ interactions with government, specifically
in settings where most citizens are Black. Historical racial stereotypes and
ideologies suggest that Black individuals are not capable citizens or political
leaders. As a result, Black individuals who accept these ideas may participate
in politics less and/or judge Black-led governments more harshly than they
otherwise would. Understanding these effects is important because negative
stereotypes can be powerful enough to create self-fulfilling prophecies; in
other words, stereotypes can actually degrade the objective quality of
government services over time. This research highlights how racial inequality
may reproduce and sustain itself, even in cases with minimal contemporary legal
barriers to political equality. Scholars and activists in certain contexts have
identified this mentality as a ubiquitous, persistent, and damaging legacy of
colonialism and imperialism. Nonetheless, social scientists have largely ignored
this social ill in these contexts, limiting knowledge about its prevalence, its
consequences, and means of mitigating it. This research better equips
policymakers and practitioners by providing measurement tools and by identifying
potential social harms arising from an internalized cultural
inferiority.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project surveys six hundred
Black respondents to accomplish two goals. First, the researchers develop a new
scale to measure this mentality. This scale is substantially shorter than
existing scales – only four to six items – making it easier for social
scientists to conduct policy-relevant research. Second, this survey generates
evidence to examine how this mentality affects Black individuals’ political
attitudes, beliefs, and behaviors. In particular, it tests hypotheses that this
mentality (1) reduces self-assessed political competency, as well as propensity
to vote and take other political action, and (2) generates more unfavorable
evaluations of government performance under Black leadership. The same survey
collects data for both scale development and hypothesis testing simultaneously
as a cost saving measure; however, the researchers finalize the scale before
examining political data to prevent generating bias toward their own hypotheses.
By increasing understanding of the causes and consequences of a this mentality,
the research provides useful information for policy makers in their efforts to
reduce internalized cultural inferiority.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.