* 2242189
* Workshop on Future Storm-Resolving Configurations of Community Earth System Model (CESM); Fort Collins, Colorado; Two days in April 2023
* GEO,AGS
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2024
* David Randall, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 01/31/2024
* USD 20,843.00

This award supports a workshop on the topic of global storm resolving
configurations of the Community Earth System Model (CESM). CESM includes a full
representation of the earth's climate system, including component models for the
atmosphere, ocean, land surface, sea ice, and ice sheets. Earth system models
like CESM simulate wind, temperature, humidity, and other atmospheric variables
on grids in which the grid spacing is too coarse (generally at least 15km) to
simulate convection, meaning the overturning atmospheric motions seen in
thunderstorms. While it is very difficult to simulate the full range of
convective motions, models with grid spacings of a few kilometers (say 3km) are
able to simulate the evolution of mesoscale convective systems (MCSs), the large
thunderstorm systems that occur over the central US and in other parts of the
world. Thus there is interest in developing configurations of CESM with the
necessary high resolution and enhanced dynamics and physics required to enable
simulation of MCSs and other forms of organized convection. The workshop brings
together model developers and users who are interested in the development and
use of such configurations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts of the
workshop come from the desirability of models which are better able to represent
weather and climate processes that have substantial impacts on human activities.
For instance much of the extreme precipitation in the US comes from MCSs, which
are also responsible for hailstorms and tornado outbreaks. More specifically,
the workshop benefits the broad community of users and developers of CESM, which
is the only earth system developed by and for the global climate research
community. Funds from this award will support travel expenses for students and
early-career scientists attending the meeting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.