* 2242288
* Strategic Redistricting and Government Interventions
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Laurent Bouton, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Bahel
* 04/30/2025
* USD 335,395.00

Gerrymandering is the strategic redrawing of the boundaries of congressional and
state legislative districts. In most US states (39 states), it is the state
lawmakers themselves who draw the new electoral map. Beyond producing
“bizarrely-shaped” districts that are not geographically compact or cohesive,
gerrymandering appears to impact policy-making (both the ideological slant of
actual policies and the allocation of public resources) through a variety of
channels. This project claims that geographic disparities in turnout are key to
understanding gerrymandering practices; and these disparities may be explained
by differences in the share of the population eligible to vote (e.g., due to age
or immigration status), the propensity to vote, or the easiness of registration
and voting. The investigators will answer specific, policy-relevant, questions:
Are there patterns of gerrymandering observed in practice that our theory helps
understand and detect? What are the implications for policies and governmental
resource allocation? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are three components to this
research project. First, the project will develop a theoretical model of
strategic redistricting in which voters differ not only in partisanship, but
also in turnout rates. Existing models and measures of gerrymandering focus on
difference in partisanship across individuals, ignoring other dimensions of
heterogeneity. However, in practice, differences in turnout rates are
substantial and cannot be ignored. Indeed, existing theories of gerrymandering
cannot explain some patterns observed in practice. From the model, we will
characterize the optimal map from the gerrymandering party's viewpoint and
identify clear testable implications for the map that each party should draw.
Our theory could help explain some puzzling redistricting patterns observed in
practice. The second part of the project will test these implications using the
proposed maps by legislators of both parties for the same state in the 2020
redistricting cycle in the U.S. Finally, in the third project, we focus on
policy implications and the inequality in the allocation of governmental
resources. How does gerrymandering affect the choice of policies or allocation
of public resources across the space and the population? If gerrymandering
affects the allocation of resources, how do future choices in terms of resource
allocation affect the incumbent’s electoral map design? The authors will use
their theory to guide empirical tests and policy recommendations on
gerrymandering, which is a topic of great general
interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.