* 2242043
* Collaborative Research: Phylogenetic and Physiological Characterization of Amino Acid Nitrogen Isotopes in Phytoplankton
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Patricia Glibert, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 03/31/2026
* USD 498,844.00

Phytoplankton are microscopic plants that live in the ocean and act as the base
of the marine food web. These microorganisms use inorganic nitrogen (N) from the
water to make a variety of amino acids. Some of the amino acids keep the initial
chemical signature (i.e., N isotope value) of their N source. Other amino acids
are involved in metabolic processes that change the initial chemical signature
(N isotope value). These distinct N isotope signatures are passed along to
organisms that consume phytoplankton and throughout the food web. Thus, the N
isotope values of individual amino acids can be used to obtain the isotope value
of N sources supporting food webs and to estimate the trophic position of
organisms in biota, particles, coral skeletons, and sediments. But, this
requires a clear understanding of the N isotope patterns of amino acids produced
by phytoplankton. This project will examine whether different phytoplankton
species produce amino acids with distinct N isotope patterns when using the same
N source. The project will also study whether the N isotope patterns produced by
the same species of phytoplankton change under different growth and
environmental conditions. Information from this study will improve the ability
to use N isotope values in amino acids in ecological and biogeochemical studies.
This collaborative project combines novel research with broader impacts focused
on engaging the public and promoting diversity and inclusion at various levels.
Three graduate students and one postdoc will participate in the research.
Research opportunities will be provided to undergraduate students, especially
those with backgrounds. Students will be recruited through the McNair and Louis
Stokes Alliances for Minority Participation program at Texas A&amp;M Univ. at
Corpus Christi, a Hispanic Serving and Minority Serving Institution. To share
results broadly, the investigators and students will give talks about marine
science to local K-12 students in Corpus Christi TX. The New Bedford High School
(in MA) summer marine intern program will be engaged in this project. Public
lectures will be given on the topic of algal blooms and a children’s article
will be written on the topic of isotopes. Outcomes of this project will also be
incorporated into presentations to the Chesapeake Bay Program, Maryland Harmful
Algal Bloom Task Force, and the Scientific and Technical Advisory Committee of
the Maryland Coastal Bays. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The use of N isotope values of
different amino acids (δ15N-AA) to retrieve the N source isotope signature of
food webs and estimate trophic positions depends on information about the
δ15N-AA produced by phytoplankton at the base of the food web which is still
poorly understood. This study seeks to explore fundamental scientific questions
to better understand δ15N-AA produced by phytoplankton. 1) Under the same
nitrogenous nutrient and growth conditions, do δ15N-AA patterns vary between
major phytoplankton groups? Are the unique δ15N-AA patterns in diatoms related
to unique aspects of their N metabolism? 2) Do changes in phytoplankton
physiology resulting from nitrogenous nutrient availability, N form utilized
(ammonium, nitrate, and mixed), and/or other growth conditions independently
produce significant changes in δ15N-AA? Phytoplankton samples will be collected
from controlled culture (e.g., chemostat) experiments and from field studies in
the Gulf of Mexico and Chesapeake Bay, especially during near-monospecific bloom
events. By taking the advantage of newly developed analytical approaches, new
knowledge of compound and intramolecular δ15N of poly-N AA such as arginine,
asparagine, glutamine, and histidine in phytoplankton will be generated for the
first time. This ground-truthing work will advance the understanding of δ15N-AA
pattern produced by key phytoplankton species critical to the biological pump
and harmful algal blooms under environmentally relevant physiological
conditions. The expected outcomes from this work will enable new applications
and more sophisticated trophic position analyses, studies of the efficiency of
the ocean’s biological pump, and paleo-oceanographic reconstructions using amino
acids preserved in natural archives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded
by the Biological and Chemical Oceanography Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.