* 2242009
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Designing Access for Disabled People. Negotiating Barrier-Free Environments
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2024
* Michele Friedner, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 01/31/2024
* USD 25,200.00

Disability affects large swaths of the global population but is variably defined
and operationalized, affecting a broad range of issues, from identity, to
accommodation, access, and equity. This doctoral dissertation project leverages
unique natural experiments in cities that are both retrospectively and
prospectively designing barrier-free spaces to understand how variation in the
experience and understanding of disability impact the implementation of
accessible spaces as they are rolled out in different contexts. Contributing to
urban studies, anthropology, and disability studies, the investigators provide
new materials to consider the effects of prospective and retrospective design on
inclusion and access. This project supports a graduate studentâ€™s training and
shares its findings broadly with academic and non-academic audiences and
stakeholders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project uses a comparative
lens to inform how different stakeholders interpret, understand, and enact
access. In two cities promoting barrier-free environments, the investigators use
a variety of synthetic ethnographic and archival methods to engage three related
questions: (1) Whose expertise determines how barrier-free is defined and
implemented? (2) How do people with heterogeneous disabilities engage with
barrier-free environments? (3) How do regional politics impact the valuation of
expertise and variable experiences of barrier-free environments? By
understanding access from a comparative perspective, this project will help to
inform cutting-edge issues in scientific disability studies, urban planning,
political anthropology while informing key debates on identity and
inclusion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.