* 2242959
* Computational Studies of Solid Electrolytes
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Natalie Holzwarth, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 03/31/2025
* USD 186,395.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports computational
research, software development, and education aimed at investigating candidate
solid state battery materials. The world-wide need for improved energy storage
technologies is well recognized even in the popular press. Among the many
promising approaches toward this goal is the development of all-solid-state
batteries which can increase the efficiency and reliability for many energy
storage technologies. Computational studies of battery materials can not only
help in understanding various properties of known materials, but they can also
help in the prediction of new materials and model likely mechanisms of how ions
are transported inside batteries. Thus, they serve as an important aid to
experimental work and to the implementation of the batteries themselves. In this
project, the PI and her team will employ state-of-the art computational methods
implemented in public domain software to make a detailed examination of several
promising families of electrolyte materials. A second thrust of this project is
focused on further development of software tools that are widely used by the
community to allow accurate and efficient modeling of materials. Finally,
educating graduate and undergraduate students in the field of materials research
and in computational techniques is an equally essential component of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports computational research, software development, and education aimed at
investigating candidate solid state battery materials. Basic research on solid-
state battery-related materials provides a challenge for collaborative research
on probing, testing, refining, and extending the state-of-the-art in materials
simulation theory and tools. In particular, solid electrolytes form a large and
diverse class of materials whose interesting properties can be reasonably
modeled within their ground electronic states and compared with experimental
measurements. The first thrust of this project is on a family of lithium ion
conducting (thio)boracites with and without aluminum substitution. These
materials are characterized by a framework backbone material of high symmetry
which forms a void structure conducive to Li ion conduction. The challenge is to
understand likely mechanisms for ion conduction in terms of single particle and
collective particle motions. The PI and her team will also examine in detail
additional ion conducting materials with the help of experimental
collaborations. The second thrust of this project is focused on continuing to
update the PI's ATOMPAW software that is widely used by the community to
accommodate new developments in density functionals, specifically those which
make use of both the electron density and the electron kinetic energy density.
Finally, educating graduate and undergraduate students in the field of materials
research and in computational techniques is an equally essential component of
the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.