* 2242716
* Collaborative Research: Curating, digitizing and disseminating results from an unparalleled collection of fossil vertebrates from the Late Cretaceous of Madagascar
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2025
* Natalie Toth, Denver Museum of Nature and Science
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Herron
* 12/31/2025
* USD 261,635.00

The goals of this project are to conserve one of the most scientifically
significant collections of fossil vertebrate animals from the southern
hemisphere, to make it more broadly accessible to researchers worldwide, and to
enhance its already high value for education and public outreach. The
collection, currently housed at the Denver Museum of Nature &amp; Science, was
recovered over the last three decades from Upper Cretaceous (approximately 67
million years old) strata of Madagascar through collaboration among several
American and Malagasy institutions. The collection includes about 25,000
specimens of fishes, frogs, turtles, lizards, snakes, crocodiles, dinosaurs,
birds, and mammals. So far, 21 new species have been described, most of them
represented by skeletons that are the most complete and best preserved for
entire large groups of vertebrate animals. These specimens have provided
fundamental insights into an important interval of evolutionary history and have
been used to test hypotheses about how and when the southern hemisphere broke
apart into the landmasses we know today. Specimens from the collection have been
on display in 36 museums in North America, Europe, Asia, and Madagascar,
reported in countless media outlets, and used as a fruitful training ground for
high school, undergraduate, and graduate students, as well as lifelong-learning
museum volunteers.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The specimens in this important
collection will be prepared, rehoused, cataloged, and digitized to modern
standards so that the Late Cretaceous vertebrate fossil record of Madagascar can
continue to be documented and conserved in perpetuity. This will include final
preparation of all specimens out of their entombing rock matrix and construction
of archival support structures for the largest specimens. By formal agreement
with government and university partners in Madagascar, one-half of the remaining
specimens must be returned to Madagascar upon completion of study. As such,
exact replicas (casts and 3D prints) will be made for important specimens slated
for permanent return to Madagascar; digital datasets will be made available via
the NSF-supported repository MorphoSource for current and future researchers and
educators. Ultimately, all specimen records will be exported to the NSF-funded
data aggregator Integrated Digitized Biocollections (iDigBio) in order to be
made available to other researchers. This project, and continued research on
specimens made accessible through this award, will further expand educational
and public engagement efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.