* 2242215
* CIF: Small: Risk-Aware Resource Allocation for Robust Wireless Autonomy
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Dionysios Kalogerias, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* James Fowler
* 07/31/2026
* USD 600,000.00

Wireless autonomous networked systems (WANS) are virtually everywhere around us,
performing all kinds of often complex and pervasive data-centric manipulations,
such as sensing, processing, learning, and acting (i.e., decision-making).
Examples include modern wireless communication networks (e.g., based on 5G/6G,
mmWave/THz technologies), drone swarms, mobile or robotic networks, unmanned
aerial vehicles (UAVs), self-driving cars, and the Internet of Things (IoT).
While WANS and their applications present a high potential for societal and
economic growth, the operation of such systems requires not only to be efficient
and driven by actual, observable data but also to meet often strict design
specifications. These specifications are induced by the need to maintain
performance robustness and resilience, which, in turn, translates into latency,
reliability, fairness, and trustworthiness guarantees. Such criteria and
constraints are fundamentally connected to intrinsic risks associated with the
operation of wireless systems; those risks are due to inherent uncertainties
caused by naturally occurring phenomena such as nontrivial statistical
dispersion of the wireless medium as well as randomness in the behavior of
multiple users and devices, often with complex and heterogeneous features and
objectives. This project puts forward a new principled methodological framework
for systematic risk-aware resource allocation in wireless systems, bridging the
operational gap between ergodic risk neutrality and minimax conservativeness.
The investigation focuses not only on formulation and dual-domain variational
analysis of new constrained risk-aware resource-allocation problems but also on
the development of theory as well as efficient methods for both model-based
synthesis and model-free reinforcement learning of optimal risk-aware policies.
It is expected that this work will establish a new paradigm in wireless systems
resource allocation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Preliminary results on basic stylized
resource-allocation problems - as simple as single-user power-constrained rate
maximization - demonstrate clear advantages of risk-aware policies against both
their ergodic (i.e., risk-neutral) and minimax counterparts. However, obtaining
optimal risk-aware policies in more realistic and useful settings is nontrivial:
in risk-aware problems, the role of expectations is played by more general
functionals, called risk measures, for which fundamental properties of
expectation - such as linearity, homogeneity, or the tower property - are
generally absent. Such complications are naturally amplified within a
constrained optimization setup. This project concentrates on such risk-aware
problems within the context of constrained resource allocation for wireless
systems and is divided into three main thrusts: 1) Lagrangian duality in risk-
aware resource allocation, 2) model-based data-driven synthesis of risk-aware
resource-allocation policies and 3) model-free learning of risk-aware resource-
allocation policies. The principal investigator anticipates that the project
will be instrumental in ameliorating inherent challenges under the risk-aware
setting, such as the presence of risk-measure-based variational stochastic
constraints, infinite dimensionality of resource policies, nonconvexity of
random services, and channel/system-model availability, ultimately rendering
risk-aware wireless-system resource allocation an intellectually accessible and
computationally affordable task. The project will also be relevant to several
areas beyond wireless autonomy - such as finance, economics, energy, and
robotics - and may trigger new developments in the intersection of
communications, information theory, statistics, and optimization, as well as
inspire new tools in risk-aware and constrained
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.