* 2242829
* RII Track-1: Harnessing the Data Revolution for Vermont: The Science of Online Corpora, Knowledge, and Stories (SOCKS)
* O/D,OIA
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Peter Dodds, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Cooperative Agreement
* Eric Lindquist
* 05/31/2028
* USD 3,731,616.00

"Distant reading" involves the use of computational methods to analyze literary
texts. It is a concept with enormous unrealized potential. For example, no
individual can read 100 million tweets or a century's worth of literature or all
the New York Times articles ever written. However, by scaling up and harnessing
data, a distant reading system can be created that does. The "Science of Online
Corpora, Knowledge, and Stories" (SOCKS) project will undertake a grand
challenge. The challenge will entail the construction and broad application of
distant reading to advance the computational social sciences and digital
humanities in the age of massive text-as-data online, in the same way that
telescopes and microscopes have done for the physical and life sciences. This
research capacity will assist in answering some enduring questions. How do
ecologies of stories evolve? What insights can be derived from providing social
scientists and humanities scholars with new computational instruments reflecting
language use in their domain? To answer these questions and enable new programs
of computationally aided research, SOCKS will advance a data-driven,
computational, "science of stories." SOCKS tools will harness the data
revolution by supporting transdisciplinary research in data science,
computational social science, digital humanities, and complex systems. SOCKS
will be administered by the University of Vermont &amp; State Agricultural
College in collaboration with five predominantly undergraduate universities:
Champlain College, Middlebury College, Norwich University, Saint Michael's
College, and Vermont Technical College. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SOCKS will advance
initiatives grounded in principled theory and methods through the quantitative
measurement of sentiment and stories across a diverse portfolio of corpora. New
insights into the power and use of stories and narratives will be provided
across a broad array of social, economic, and health domains through integrated
data and teams. Stories are fundamental to how people comprehend, explain, and
potentially shape their lives, the lives of others, and the world around them.
Yet despite the power of stories, academic interest across many disciplines, and
abundant online text-based corpora, a commensurate and accessible scientific
platform for the measurement of stories that can support economies and
communities, shape regional business strategy, and inform public policy is
lacking. Building on the existing research infrastructure designed to measure
and describe the shapes of stories within specific domains through meaning,
characters, events, and narratives, new tools will extend n-gram analysis to the
study of story-arcs and plots, and to apply theory-driven analysis to the study
of stories and characters. Impacts from these data instruments will describe
stories in an array of spaces including literature, mental health, public
health, climate change, local and regional news media, immigration, and social
media to discover plot lines, sentiment, new angles for digital marketing, and
conspiratorial or mis-information campaigns. The platform will function in near
real-time for social media and news; retrospectively for digitized literature,
archival documents, and other recorded texts; and will extend to any evolving
complex system comprising distinct narrative components. SOCKS will train the
next generation of students in Vermont in complex systems and data science,
computational social science, and provide teacher training for computer and data
science to secure the long-term future of Vermont's technology industry and its
associated economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.