* 2242033
* Impacts of Arctic freshwater export on the subpolar North Atlantic Ocean circulation
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2026
* Thomas Haine, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2026
* USD 466,423.00

This study seeks to understand how the melting of Arctic ice and extra Arctic
precipitation can influence the ocean currents in the North Atlantic. The study
also asks how much of the Arctic meltwater and precipitation can be attributed
to humans (anthropogenic influence)? The project will use verified and tested
ocean models to determine the fate of Arctic water and the sources of unusually
fresh water in the subpolar North Atlantic. Arctic waters will be tracked with
several novel approaches, including artificial intelligence. For broader
impacts, the project will provide understanding on the changes in the Arctic
attributable to humans and their impact on the North Atlantic currents. These
changes should influence global climate through the weakening of the climate-
related Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation. Moreover, the project will
support one graduate student and undergraduate students in research experiences.
Results will be disseminated through typical academic activities and outreach to
the general public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study seeks to observe, understand
and anticipate the export, propagation, and impacts of Arctic-derived fresh
water on the subpolar North Atlantic. The study will identify the timing and
character of the Arctic anthropogenic freshening signal in the subpolar North
Atlantic through specific activities related to a) the fates of Arctic
freshwater anomalies, b) the sources of subpolar North Atlantic freshwater
anomalies, and c) preparations for the impacts of Arctic freshwater export on
the subpolar North Atlantic. Novel tools will be applied for Eulerian anomaly
tracking and Lagrangian trajectory analysis to outputs from model state
estimates (ECCO, ASTE), reanalysis (ORAS5), forced high-resolution ocean model
(LLC4320), and coupled projections (CESM2 LENS). For broader impacts, the
project will provide understanding on the Arctic anthropogenic freshening and
its impact on the subpolar North Atlantic, which influences global climate
through the buoyancy-forced weakening of the Atlantic Meridional Overturning
Circulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.