* 2242070
* Icelandic Coastal Current interactions with peninsulas, bays, winds, and ocean currents controlling freshwater export and retention
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Michael Whitney, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 03/31/2026
* USD 671,610.00

The Icelandic Coastal Current is a buoyant (brackish) current that moves past
coastal headlands and bays. This project will use the Icelandic Coastal Current
as a case study to advance understanding of and quantify transport of water
across the continental shelf caused by coastal land-forms, bottom variations,
winds, and offshore flows. The project will draw information from drifting
floats and computer simulations to track waters from the Icelandic Coastal
Current. Computer simulations will also analyze the sensitivity of buoyant
transport to shifts in river discharge variations associated with 21st and 22nd
century warming. Simulations will track buoyant waters with artificial tracers
that will provide information on the time it takes for these waters to flush out
of the region. Simulations will leverage hydrographic observations by Iceland’s
Marine &amp; Freshwater Research Institute, and satellite measurements that
distinguish the edge of the buoyant current. As broader impacts, the project
will support one postdoctoral researcher and one graduate student. It will also
incorporate findings into undergraduate and graduate classes, and post YouTube
videos on river influences in the marine environment. The PI will participate in
educational events at a public school system with a diverse student
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will examine freshwater export from
Icelandic rivers to the North Atlantic Ocean. Iceland is the study region as it
has an assortment of shelf conditions (e.g., wide and narrow shelf widths, high
and low river input regions, extensive canyons and no canyons, headlands of
different radii of curvature, upwelling and downwelling conditions) that allow
exploration of a wide range of shelf-ocean interactions. In addition, the system
is a gateway to the Arctic with a complex hydrological cycle (having river
systems fed by glacial melt and precipitation) that are being impacted by
climate change. Several specific objectives pertain to the offshore transport of
coastal buoyant water in the presence of complex coastal topography, wind, and
open ocean forcing. The research will address these objectives with doubly-
nested realistic ROMS simulations with an outer resolution of 4km and an inner
resolution of 0.5 km, and with drifter releases in the context of the buoyancy-
driven Icelandic Coastal Current. Numerical simulations will be validated with
data from Iceland’s Marine &amp; Freshwater Research Institute and the drifter
releases. Simulations will investigate different climate change scenarios
focused on predicted changes in the hydrological cycle. Analyses will quantify
shelf-ocean exchanges including tracer fluxes across the shelf break,
calculations of Eddy Kinetic Energy fields, and residence
times.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.