* 2242822
* Beyond static metabolic maps - Understanding the cellular organization and dynamics of lipid flux for enhanced seed oil production
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Jay Thelen, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* David Rockcliffe
* 02/28/2026
* USD 1,278,068.00

Plant oils are a valuable renewable resource of reduced carbon (fatty acids)
used for food, fuels, and chemicals (plastics, paints, cosmetics, etc.). To meet
the rising demand of an increasing human population for plant oils will require
increased oil production and optimization of plant oil fatty acid compositions
for societal applications. Current knowledge indicates that plant oil
biosynthesis overlaps with essential membrane lipid production required for
cellular function. This research is elucidating how plants balance accumulation
of oil with synthesis of membrane lipids so that crop breeding and plant
bioengineering efforts can optimize plant oil production without affecting the
properties of biological membranes. The project uses genetic mutants,
overexpression lines, protein localization and dynamic interactions, in vivo
isotopic labeling, and mathematical modeling of non-stationary flux to produce a
quantitative description of lipid metabolic network function and dynamics. New
engineering strategies based on project results may provide alternative sources
of nutritionally valuable food oils, or chemically reactive lipids that can
functionally replace petroleum in chemical syntheses. Project results could also
lead to the development of new value-added crops that can reinvigorate low-
income rural farming communities. This project collaborates with the EXploring
College Emerging Leaders (EXCEL) program at Washington State University that
seeks to increase participation of Native American communities in STEM subjects.
The three postdoctoral scientists, one post bachelor researcher, and multiple
undergraduate students are being trained in scientific research and outreach to
become the next generation of scientific leaders who will face future scientific
challenges and enhance agricultural output for societal gain.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Valuable plant oils and essential membrane lipids are
assembled by an overlapping metabolic network. The path of fatty acid flux
through the network ultimately determines the final oil fatty acid composition,
yet how plants control fatty acid flux through this network of lipid assembly is
unknown. An important particular unknown is how plants control the use of key
intermediates (diacylglycerol) between membrane and oil biosynthesis. This
research leverages the expertise of a multi-disciplinary team to elucidate lipid
metabolic network structure, fluxes, and sub-cellular spatial organization. A
combination of genetic mutants, over-expression lines, protein localization and
dynamic interactions, in vivo isotopic labeling, and mathematical modeling is
used to develop a quantitative description of lipid metabolic network function
and dynamics. This quantitative picture includes the cellular organization and
the enzymatic control of fatty acid flux through different branches of the lipid
metabolic network that affect seed oil accumulation and composition. The
knowledge gained will result in a paradigm shift beyond the current network
descriptions of static metabolites that have previously been used to develop
bioengineering strategies. In vivo isotopic labeling-based metabolic flux maps
enhance the quantitative and dynamic understanding of lipid network function and
enable improved engineering efforts. The project also provides important new
tools to help guide the design of better metabolic engineering (or targeted
breeding) strategies to meet the plant oil needs of the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.