* 2242341
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Measuring the Elasticity of Nutrition Among Mothers of Young Children
* SBE,SES
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* John Hoddinott, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2024
* USD 25,000.00

Understanding how food purchasing behaviors by low-income households change in
response to shocks in prices or income is crucial for the design of policy to
counter food insecurity and malnutrition. For rural households with young
children, these shocks are becoming increasingly important as incomes and prices
change unpredictably due to pandemics, wars, and climates change. This research
builds on an on-going field experiment to study how responsive food preferences
are to changes in price and income among women with young children and how
outside information on nutrition alters these preferences. The focus is on
understanding whether providing nutritional information in addition to income
support leads to better nutritional choices than providing income support alone.
The results of this research will improve the design of social protection
programs, such as the bundle of services to provide, and the optimal size of
support. Besides helping researchers to model the economic impacts of adverse
shocks, the results will also help improve the efficiency of social support
programs, thus improving the wellbeing of low-income people as well reducing the
fiscal burden of such programs. The results could also help establish the US as
the global leader in social support programs. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Estimating
unbiased price and income elasticities of nutrient consumption in low-income
rural settings is difficult, even though these are critical to the efficient
design social support programs. This DDRIG exploits random variation in
expenditure in an on-going RCT that randomly assigns households with younger
children to receive cash transfers of various amounts. The project design allows
the PIs to also test whether providing nutritional information in addition to
income support improves nutritional outcomes relative to only income support.
The PIs supplement this expenditure variation with a set of willingness-to-pay
experiments during a lean-season household survey. With random variation in
multiple dimensions, the PIs instrument for prices and income and estimate an
Almost Ideal Demand System to obtain a complete picture of household preferences
for foods and micronutrients. The results of this research will improve the
design of social protection programs, such as the bundle of services to provide,
as well as the optimal size of support. Besides illuminating the modelling of
economic impacts of adverse shocks, the results of this research will also help
improve the efficiency of social support programs, thus improving the wellbeing
of low-income people as well reducing the fiscal burden of such programs. The
results could also help establish the US as the global leader in social support
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.