* 2242057
* Daily Watcher Tracking Survey and Monitoring the Effects of War on Public Opinion
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Grigore Pop-Eleches, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* James I. Walsh
* 02/29/2024
* USD 414,688.00

Participation in an external war test ability of leaders in authoritarian
regimes to coordinate their policies. Yet survey data often indicates that a
majority of citizens in authoritarian regimes continue to support the leader's
military operations. To understand authoritarian leader's strategies and the
domestic implications of these strategic actions, it is crucial to study how the
population perceives the war and how it reacts to developments in real time. The
Watcher Tracking Survey is a daily, nationally representative survey of public
opinion in an authoritarian state that is involved in an external war. The
researchers monitor changes in public attitudes toward a series of political
issues related to the war in and political developments inside the state. They
also use experimental designs to understand how the government’s propaganda and
disinformation campaigns affect citizens’ attitudes and beliefs. Preliminary
data suggest that state media outlets are highly effective at spreading false
narratives within the population, including online. The Watcher survey has the
following Broader Impacts (1) the project provides crucial and real-time
information on the state and direction of domestic public opinion in an
authoritarian state in a time of war, (2) it sheds light on the effectiveness of
state propaganda and disinformation–a major national security concern, and (3)
it generates a uniquely large and fine-grained dataset for policymakers and
scholars of authoritarian politics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scholars still have a
weak understanding of the mechanisms by which an authoritarian government shapes
public opinion and maintains support, particularly during moments of crisis like
external war. Previous public opinion surveys often show that citizens in
authoritarian countries support their government's military operations. Yet the
infrequency of these surveys made it difficult to draw conclusions about the
causes and consequences of changes in public opinion in these countries. To
better isolate the effects of individual events and media narratives, the PIs
launched the Watcher Tracking Survey, a daily, nationally representative survey
of political attitudes and beliefs. The Watcher survey tracks key political
indicators over time and uses survey experiments to assess the effects of
unfolding propaganda narratives. This method of studying public opinion is more
dynamic than traditional surveys, as the treatments respondents receive (e.g.,
shifting propaganda narratives and military developments) are not predetermined,
but rather emerge organically as the war develops. The researchers extend their
data collection through 2023 and use a sample size to 500 respondents that
enables them to detect shifts in public opinion more precisely. This research
makes important contributions to scholarship on topics related to censorship,
propaganda, and public opinion in authoritarian regimes. The Watcher data shed
light on the mechanisms behind state propaganda and its effects on citizen
attitudes. In turn, the research helps scholars understand better how autocrats
sustain public support for high-cost endeavors like military
campaigns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.