* 2242946
* Water in the Earth's lower mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Jie Deng, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy Panero
* 04/30/2026
* USD 284,781.00

The most vital component of the Earth is water. It is not only the source of
life, but also the key ingredient controlling a wide range of solid earth
processes, such as the operation of plate tectonics, the formation of volcanoes,
and the emergence of continents. Plate tectonics and volcanic eruptions lead to
the active exchange of surface water and interior water, regulating the
variation of ocean volumes and continent areas throughout the Earth’s history.
Despite its importance, in present-day the Earth’s surface water accounts for
only 0.02 percent of the planet’s total mass. Most of the Earth’s water is
instead thought to be present in the Earth’s deep interior, but the exact amount
of water stored in the Earth’s interior remains largely unknown. This proposal
will rigorously study the water solubility in bridgmanite, the most abundant
material of the deep mantle. This will be accomplished by using large-scale
computer simulations of bridgmanite and fluid in coexistence, using the latest
innovations in machine learning. The calculations will be referenced to results
derived from high-precision calculations based in quantum mechanics. This work
will support the training of graduate students in cutting-edge computational
techniques using high-performance computing centers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water solubility in the mantle is a fundamental
material property that quantifies the maximum amount of water that can be hosted
within the Earth. Large-scale two-phase simulations of bridgmanite and fluid
coexistence driven by machine learning potentials of ab initio quality will be
carried out to rigorously study the water solubility in bridgmanite. These
simulations will reveal: 1) the solubility of water in bridgmanite and the
effects of Fe and Al across the entire lower mantle; 2) the hydrogen
incorporation mechanisms as a function of pressures, temperatures, and bulk
chemistry; 3) the bridgmanite-water (pseudo)-binary phase diagrams; and 4) the
evolutionary history of the water storage capacity of the lower mantle over the
past 4.5 billion years. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-
funded by the Directorate for Geosciences to support AI/ML advancement in the
geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.