* 2242177
* Public Health Guidance, Neighborhoods, and SARS-CoV-2
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Joseph Galaskiewicz, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 03/31/2025
* USD 440,756.00

This research examines one type of government non-pharmaceutical intervention
(NPI) in the COVID-19 pandemic: government mandates that closed or placed
limitations on business establishments and community organizations. Pandemics
demand that governments respond to the public health crisis to curb the spread
of the virus and prevent excess death. The aim of this project is to see if
these closures affected people’s visits to establishments, and in turn, whether
their visits slowed or accelerated the spread of the SARS-CoV-2 virus, cause of
COVID-19 disease. To study this, cell-phone data that recorded visits to a
variety of neighborhood establishments from February 1, 2020 to February 28,
2022 are used. First examined is whether local governments’ closures of
businesses affected people’s visiting patterns and if this was contingent on the
political atmosphere, built environment, and composition of the metropolitan
area and neighborhoods. Second examined is whether visits to establishments both
within and outside the neighborhood relate to case rates within the neighborhood
over time. The results of this research will inform public health departments
and local governments on the effectiveness of this kind of NPI and the role that
these visits to establishments play in the spread of an infectious disease like
SARS-CoV-2. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study examines twelve urban areas with
different pandemic profiles, i.e., those that had few and multiple NPIs and high
and low infections during the study period. Data examined are case rates at the
zip code level and NPIs from various web sources that describe cases and
initiatives at the zip, city, county, and state levels. These data are paired
with data from the Census Bureau’s American Community Survey (ACS) on
neighborhood demographics and weekly SafeGraph data on visits to neighborhood
establishments and travel patterns across neighborhoods. The latter are based on
the presence of cell phones at the sites of specific establishments within an
urban zip code and also tell how long patrons visited these establishments. The
SafeGraph data also have information on the ‘home’ block group of those who
visited establishments. This enables knowledge of where residents of a given zip
code traveled during the pandemic and if their visiting habits subsequently
affected case rates in their home zip code. Weekly data on 29 different types of
establishments are included. Analysis is through application of a fixed-slope
multilevel model with spatial dependence error term. This research permits
elucidation of how different kinds of public health decisions, especially with
regard to business closures, relate to health outcomes across areas. Since
closures are so impactful for the economy and personal well-being, understanding
which types of organizations contributed more to the spread of SARS-CoV-2
throughout the pandemic will help inform data driven public health decisions
that limit the activity of different businesses and
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.