* 2242878
* Collaborative Research: Resolving thin-skinned and basement-involved deformation within a seismically active broken foreland region, San Juan, Argentina
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Tomas Capaldi, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 06/30/2026
* USD 366,190.00

The cities of Mendoza and San Juan, Argentina, have been repeatedly damaged or
leveled by large-magnitude earthquakes generated by geological structures
associated with Andean mountain building. Because active seismicity occurs along
faults that can be expressed at or hidden below Earth’s surface, the nature and
history of these enigmatic structures remains debated. Several competing
geologic models have been proposed that link the seismicity at depth with faults
and mountain ranges expressed at Earth’s surface. This project will address
these debates through fieldwork to map fault relationships and measurement of
associated sedimentary basin deposits that record the uplift and erosion history
of actively growing Andean ranges. A variety of geochronologic and low-
temperature thermochronologic analytical techniques will be employed to
determine the timing and magnitude of deformation across the geological
structures. Results will be integrated using computational models to help
resolve the debated geologic history for these Andean ranges. New field and
analytical records of long-term fault deformation will be integrated with
geophysical observations and decades of earthquake data with the help of
collaborating Argentinian scientists. This will lead to a better understanding
of how tectonic forces are partitioned among deep and surficial geologic
structures and which faults may generate large magnitude earthquakes,
information that is critical for assessments of Andean earthquake hazards with
the potential to impact human populations and infrastructure. In addition to the
scientific goals of the research, the award supports the development of
infrastructure to support the engagement of diverse and historically
underrepresented high school, undergraduate, and PhD-level students in
geoscience research and education. This will involve mentoring undergraduate and
graduate students at the participating institutions and creating a place-based
educational virtual field trip through the western USA and field area in
Argentina.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tectonic stresses associated with flat slab
subduction have driven deformation 800 km inboard across the broken foreland of
west-central Argentina. Ongoing shortening accommodated within the overlapping
thin-skinned and basement-involved structural provinces makes this broken
foreland region one of the most seismically active places on Earth. However,
there is no consensus on the structural or kinematic links between the thin-
skinned Central Precordillera, the Sierras Pampeanas basement uplifts, or the
enigmatic thrust front of the Eastern Precordillera structural domain. The
principal investigators aim to resolve the temporal and kinematic relationships
among structures by (1) determining the timing and magnitude of deformation in
the Eastern Precordillera thrust front and (2) interrogating how spatial
patterns in exhumational cooling and subsidence coincide with predictions based
on the various structural geometries and kinematics proposed for the region.
Their research plan will integrate geologic and structural mapping, basin
analysis, geo- and thermochronology, and flexural thermokinematic modeling to
discriminate between hypothesized structural models. Evaluating spatial-temporal
relationships among the seismically active, structural domains in Argentina will
inform models of subsurface structural geometries, how shortening transfers from
lower to upper crustal levels, and the long-term interactions between frontal
thrust structures and foreland-basin sedimentation. New results will quantify
the effects of enhanced mechanical coupling between the subducting and
overriding plate during flat slab subduction, which dictates the thermo-tectonic
evolution of orogenesis and topographic growth and decay of mountain
belts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.