* 2242168
* Cultural Consonance, Toxic Stress, and Early Childhood Development in a Context of Poverty
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2026
* Arachu Castro, Tulane University
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 03/31/2026
* USD 359,751.00

Cultural consonance describes the extent to which individuals’ own beliefs and
behaviors match the norms of broader society. Anthropologists have long been
interested in the effects of cultural consonance, especially in relation to its
ability to buffer individuals against adversity. One intriguing but under-
studied extension of this relationship is that one person’s cultural consonance
can affect others who depend on them. This project tests this proposition by
investigating whether children of parents with high cultural consonance are also
buffered from adversity. It does so in contexts of extreme poverty, where even
marginal environmental improvements can have large effects on child well-being.
The project contributes to training a graduate student in scientific cultural
anthropology, disseminates its research findings broadly to academic and non-
academic audiences, and involves collaborative partnerships, including with
policy experts, that improve research capacity and infrastructure. This project
is jointly funded by the Cultural Anthropology Program and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through interviews and questionnaires, the researchers
gather data from caregivers of children ages 2 to 5 who live in poverty and from
their children. First, they will analyze if caregivers who live according to
shared cultural values promote stimulating activities and positive discipline
among their children more frequently than other caregivers. To study this
association, they will collect data from 100 caregivers and their children and
analyze them using rigorous qualitative and quantitative methods. Second, the
researchers will examine if the children of caregivers who live according to
shared cultural values are less likely to suffer developmental delays. For this
part of the research, they will study 1,000 caregivers and their children,
analyze the data statistically, and use predictive models to determine the
cultural factors that buffer the effect of poverty on early childhood
development. The project contributes important extensions of prior theory to
understand the direct and indirect effects of cultural consonance on health and
well-being and a more holistic understanding of which domains of consonance are
most important for doing so.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.