* 2242591
* Coping with Compounding Risk and Uncertainty: A Longitudinal Study of Cascading Collective Stress in a Probability-Based-US Sample
* SBE,SES
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Roxane Silver, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 05/31/2026
* USD 752,057.00

Since 2020, when the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic began, Americans have been coping
with a seemingly endless series of escalating stressors, including inflation and
economic instability, social unrest, extreme partisanship, climate-related
disasters (e.g., flooding, hurricanes, wildfires), global instability (e.g., war
in Ukraine), and low confidence in the scientific and social institutions tasked
with protecting the public. Such compounding or cascading collective
stress/traumas are threats experienced by large groups of people that are often
transmitted via the media to people geographically distal to the event. Direct
and media-based exposure to these unprecedented cascading collective traumas are
likely to have profound effects on the mental and physical health of U.S.
residents. The long-term emotional, cognitive, and behavioral implications of
these compounding exposures over time remain unknown. In 2020 this research team
initiated a study among a large probability-based nationally representative
sample of over 6,500 U.S. residents from the NORC AmeriSpeak panel at the very
beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic and respondents were assessed four times over
3 years. Using this preexisting sample, this new project continues to examine
how people respond when exposed to compounding collective stressors while
simultaneously coping with individual-level stress and trauma. Four additional
surveys (Spring 2023, 2024, 2025, and immediately after a yet unknown collective
trauma) and a randomized experiment assess respondents’ psychological (e.g.,
cognitive and affective risk perception, emotions) and behavioral (e.g.,
protective and prosocial behavior) responses to the compounding crises that
occur during the project period. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, in
collaboration with NORC, this project seeks to follow a nationally
representative probability-based sample of 6,500 pre-recruited participants.
Panelists provided mental and physical health data before the COVID-19 pandemic
began. Initial data for this project were collected in March-April 2020 during
the early weeks of the pandemic in the U.S.; respondents have been surveyed four
times in the 3 years prior to this new research. Four additional surveys and a
randomized experiment assess respondents’ psychological (e.g., cognitive and
affective risk perception, emotions) and behavioral (e.g., protective and
prosocial behavior) responses to compounding collective crises that occur during
the project period. This project examines variability in exposure and response
to stress and trauma by accounting for both direct and media-based exposures to
individual-level and collective traumas over time. Surveys assess exposure to
compounding and cascading collective traumas, co-occurring individual acute and
chronic stress, risk perceptions, media use, emotional responses, and self-
protective behaviors over 3 years. The project has three aims: (1) Examine how
exposure to compounding collective traumas since early 2020 (e.g., pandemic,
climate disasters) is associated with psychological (e.g., distress, world
views, cognitive and affective risk perceptions) and behavioral (e.g.,
protective behaviors, civic engagement) responses; (2) Examine whether exposure
to individual trauma (lifetime, recent) moderates the association between
compounding collective trauma exposure and pychological/behavioral responses,
and (3) Examine whether degree of personal stress related to collective
stressors moderates the impact of compounding collective trauma exposure on
psychological/behavioral responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.