* 2242458
* DDRIG in DRMS: Communicating Controversial Risk Issues - Effects of Inoculation Messages on Selective Exposure to Counterattitudinal Messages and Subsequent Persuasive Outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Yiwei Xu, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Gonzalez-Vallejo
* 04/30/2024
* USD 30,168.00

Public communication surrounding controversial risk and policy issues is often
characterized by competitive messaging, whereby different messengers compete to
frame these risk issues in ways that they believe will shift public and
policymaker opinions in favor of their interests. Inoculation is a long-standing
persuasion theory that describes framing and responses to risk issues. Prior
research suggests that inoculation messages can confer resistance to persuasion
by another competing message. This study expands inoculation theory by testing
people’s tendency to approach or avoid competing messages after being
inoculated. If an inoculation message makes people more likely to proactively
seek out competing information, they might be susceptible to persuasion from
competing information compared to other messaging strategies that do not
encourage people to explore competing information. This research tests and
extends inoculation theory with the goal of helping risk communicators and
policymakers to better understand how people process messages characterized by
competition and controversy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In examining inoculation
theory, the researchers are studying two issues that are characterized by
competition and controversy – gun violence and nuclear energy. This research (N
= 1,500) features a 2 (persuasive strategy – inoculation vs. one-sided) by 2
(issue direction – pro or con) by 2 (preexisting attitude direction – pro or
con) between-subject experimental design, plus an offset control condition. It
tests how people who read an inoculation message differ from other people in
their selective exposure to counter messages or attack messages and subsequent
persuasive outcomes. It further explores how these effects may differ among
people whose initial attitudinal position is either consistent or inconsistent
with the inoculation message advocated position. This research offers risk
communicators theory-informed guidance on how to better employ an inoculation
strategy to communicate with audiences in today’s high-choice media environment.
Findings also shed light on the effects of risk messages among members of the
public who hold a wide range of preexisting issue positions for controversial
risk issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.