* 2242115
* Collaborative Research: Deciphering drivers and variability in salt marsh lateral carbon export
* GEO,OCE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Zhaohui 'Aleck' Wang, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Canuel
* 07/31/2026
* USD 489,998.00

Tidal wetlands remove large amounts of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. Some
portion of this carbon is buried as soil, often referred to as “blue carbon.”
However, another portion of this carbon is exported to the coastal ocean through
tidal flushing of wetland sediments. The amount of carbon exported from tidal
marshes is not well known. This project investigates the processes that control
carbon exports from salt marshes using state-of-the-art methods. The overarching
goal of this study is to develop the first predictive model of carbon exports.
This model will provide a tool for predicting future changes in coastal carbon
budgets with continued sea level rise. Inclusion of lateral carbon exports as a
“blue carbon” sink would greatly increase the inventory of tidal wetland carbon
sinks and add to the suite of ecosystem services that are preserved through
conservation and restoration of wetlands. This project will train two PhD
students and provide research opportunities for multiple undergraduate students.
The researchers will participate in local outreach activities to increase
awareness of the science related to this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Lateral
carbon (C) exports are thought to greatly exceed C burial globally, and by as
much as a factor of five along the eastern coast of North America. However,
these estimates are based on limited data. At present the mechanistic drivers
and environmental variables that control lateral C and total alkalinity (TA)
fluxes across sites are a knowledge gap that limits scaling or modeling efforts
beyond averaging a limited number of field observations. The objective of this
project is to investigate the role of marsh platform inundation frequency and
flooding duration, as determined by elevation within the tidal frame, as a
driver and predictor of lateral C and TA exports. This project will test the
hypothesis that DOC, DIC and TA export increases with decreasing marsh platform
elevation within the tidal frame due to: 1) increased porewater drainage and 2)
a greater proportion of dissolved C flux versus CO2 evasion. A total of six New
England marsh sites at unique elevations within the tidal frame will be
evaluated during a one-month summer period, capturing peak C and TA exports
modulated by spring-neap tidal variation and episodic events. Variability across
each site will be constrained from local measurements of respiration rates and
net ecosystem exchange, soil C content and accumulation rates, and local
environmental conditions. This study will quantify lateral C and TA flux through
tidal creeks from high-resolution, time-series surface water measurements using
an in-situ dissolved inorganic carbon (DIC) sensor, biogeochemical and physical
sensors. The depths of marsh drainage and DOC/DIC/TA export will be determined
from sediment 224Ra:228Th disequilibria and will be compared with fluxes
determined using the surface water approach. Overall, this project will provide
a comprehensive framework for the evaluation of lateral DOC/DIC/TA exports from
tidal wetlands and serve as a basis for the prediction of flux magnitude and
variability into a future, warmer climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.