* 2242064
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: How Perceptions of Social Difference Influence International Engagements
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Laurie Hart, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 02/29/2024
* USD 24,889.00

How do markers of social difference such as race, nationality, and identity
interact to affect approaches to foreign policy? This is a longstanding question
in the social sciences whose answers inform our understanding of what promotes
versus constrains diplomatic versus hostile relationships at multiple levels of
interaction. This doctoral dissertation project investigates the ways that
perceptions of social difference intersect to inform interactions among
individuals working in international relations. In addition to training a
U.S.-based graduate student in scientific cultural anthropology, the work
promotes participation of under-represented minorities in science and
distributes its findings broadly to academic and non-academic audiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project leverages recent changes in how international
diplomacy is conducted by members of under-represented minorities to ask whether
and how race, nationality, and identity interact to affect approaches to foreign
policy. The student investigator conducts participant observation among career
diplomats, foreign relations experts, and other stakeholders to understand the
day-to-day means by which identity factors inform policy understandings,
development, and implementation. The researcher complements this activity with
interviews and media analysis to place insights within broader contexts of
dynamic international politics. The project provides insights regarding how
various aspects of identity intersect to affect relationships among individuals
and the extension of these to international diplomacy, adding nuance to theories
that have considered identity in a more compartmentalized
fashion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.