* 2242443
* Social Tipping Points and Norm Change in Large-scale Laboratory Experiments
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Nikos Nikiforakis, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Eric Bahel
* 04/30/2026
* USD 513,030.00

This research project will use large-scale laboratory experiments to investigate
norm change and provide an empirically validated framework to analyze social
tipping points. The authors will study situations where norms, or a lack
thereof, damage a society’s welfare: discriminatory norms, norms that curtail
female labor force participation, norms that support unhealthy behaviors (e.g.,
smoking or drinking), or the absence of environmental norms. Understanding how
norm change can occur spontaneously and how policy can help such processes is
essential for addressing global challenges such as economic inequality, global
warming, or public health issues. The social tipping framework developed and
tested in this research project will provide an inexpensive way to evaluate
policy interventions that aim to alter social norms, such as taxing harmful
practices, dispensing information, and incentivizing agents of change who hold
prominent social positions and can spread positive change. Another aim of the
research project will be to improve how social scientists and large survey
companies conduct surveys on socioeconomic issues. Traditional surveys ask for a
person's opinion on a topic, but responses may not be truthful. Traditional
surveys also ask static questions that are uninformative about whether or not
norm change can occur. This project will develop a new method to design surveys
with dynamic and incentivized questions, allowing researchers to understand the
potential for norm change across different social issues. The project’s results
will be socially and economically beneficial because they can contribute to a
better allocation of resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The authors will
empirically validate a theoretical and experimental framework to advance our
understanding of social tipping points and norm change. The framework combines a
theory of tipping points, large-scale lab experiments, and incentivized
representative surveys. The main objective will be to organize societal and
economic factors affecting norm change in a unified framework. This framework
will enable researchers to study social tipping points and norm change depending
on a society’s structure, e.g., people’s tolerance toward norm deviations,
diversity, social networks, social fragmentation, information and filter
bubbles, political institutions, individual beliefs, risk and fairness
preferences, and behavioral biases such as the sunk cost fallacy. The framework
will serve as a tool to evaluate policy interventions, helping to answer
questions like, “Which interventions can raise people’s willingness to get
vaccinated?” and “Are more diverse societies more likely to experience positive
norm change?” The authors will further leverage the social tipping framework to
design a new type of representative survey to determine whether or not a
particular society, e.g., Californians, Texans, racial groups, or religious
groups, is ripe for change for different social issues such as affirmative
action, immigration, or climate change. A crucial methodological contribution of
these surveys will be to allow researchers to detect the potential for norm
change rather than focusing on static societal beliefs and
expectations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.