* 2242014
* Significance of one and two carbon photoproducts in the photolysis of marine dissolved organic matter
* GEO,OCE
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* David Kieber, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 06/30/2026
* USD 683,778.00

Marine dissolved organic carbon (DOC) is one of Earth’s major carbon reservoirs,
but despite many years of study, the pathways and rates of DOC production and
removal are poorly constrained. It is important to identify major pathways and
determine rates in the oceans to better predict how DOC cycling will change in
the future, and how these changes will alter the global carbon cycle. One
potentially important process that affects marine DOC is photochemistry, the
breakdown of organic molecules by sunlight. This project will investigate
photochemical destruction of DOC. Findings from the work will be of interest to
biologists, chemists, ecologists, climate scientists, and ocean-atmosphere
modelers. The project will foster research and educational opportunities for one
postdoctoral scholar, a graduate student, and several undergraduates. The
project team will engage in public outreach and education through a project
website, videoconferencing, online discussion forums, and an interactive blog in
partnership with the State University of New York, College of Environmental
Science and Forestry’s Louis Stokes Alliance of Minority Participation Program
and the local American Chemical Society’s Project SEED for economically-
disadvantaged high school students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research plan is
to re-evaluate two long-held assumptions: that dissolved inorganic carbon (i.e.,
carbon dioxide) is the main product produced from the photochemical breakdown of
marine DOC, and that sunlight-driven chemistry is an important process in the
removal of DOC from the oceans. The project will investigate three interrelated
questions: (1) Are coastal-to-offshore transects in production rates of acetone,
pyruvate and C1- and C2-carbon photoproducts nonlinear functions of CDOM
absorption, as observed for DIC? (2) Is DIC the main carbon photoproduct
produced from the photolysis of DOC in the open ocean? (3) Is the production of
C1- and C2-carbon photoproducts, together with acetone and pyruvate,
collectively a significant removal mechanism for DOC in the oceans on an annual
basis? To address these questions, the project will combine laboratory
experiments and a 19-day research cruise. The project will focus on low
molecular weight carbon compounds because these are the main products produced
from the photolysis of DOC, and yet no one has co-measured photochemical
production rates of these compounds in seawater. Compounds to be considered
include carbon monoxide, dissolved inorganic carbon, formaldehyde, acetaldehyde,
acetone, glyoxal, glyoxylate, pyruvate, formate, and acetate. The team will
measure photochemical production rates and determine wavelength- and
temperature-dependent apparent quantum yields (AQY) for the production of these
compounds. Using AQY data, they will model depth-resolved photochemical carbon
fluxes using remotely sensed ocean color to determine the impact of this process
in the marine DOC cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.