* 2242530
* Conference: 2023 Stochastic Physics in Biology: Bridging Stochastic Physical Theories with Biological Experiments
* MPS,PHY
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Jie Xiao, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Krastan Blagoev
* 11/30/2023
* USD 20,000.00

This award will partially support a Gordon Research Conference (GRC) on
Stochastic Physics in Biology, to be held in Ventura, CA, January 15-20, 2023.
The meeting aims to bridge stochastic physical theories with biological
experiments by bringing together an outstanding and diverse group of physicists,
mathematicians, engineers, and biologists at the forefront of research. It will
address emerging challenges in understanding complex behaviors of biological
systems using principles and theories in stochastic physics. The conference is
preceded by a Gordon Research Seminar (GRS), a unique forum for graduate
students, postdoctoral fellows, and other junior scientists to present new,
unpublished research. The 2023 GRS in conjunction with the 2023 GRC Stochastic
Physics in Biology is titled “Multiscale processes of cellular organization”.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference is organized to optimize collaboration and
communication among researchers from diverse disciplines. Sessions foster cross-
disciplinary communication by including speakers from different disciplines,
with introductions by discussion leaders that bridge the different disciplines.
The program is organized around nine sessions that define the frontiers of
Biological Physics: 1) Stochastic Physics in Gene Expression, 2) Sensing and
Signaling, 3) Modeling if Cellular Processes, 4) Thermodynamics if Biological
Systems, 5) Inference of Biological Models and Pathways, 6) Microbial Behaviors
in Singles and Communities, 7) Pattern Formation in Biological Systems, 8)
Growth and Development, and 9) Spatial Organization of Biological Functions and
Activities. The program promotes networking through scheduled and informal
discussion times, poster sessions, social hours, and Power Hour
™.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broader impacts of this award include fostering
interdisciplinary science, increasing the diversity, equity, and inclusivity
(DEI) of the Biological Physics community, and the training and career
development for early career researchers. The 2023 GRC Stochastic Physics in
Biology is committed to developing a diverse program and inclusive conference
atmosphere. Participants were selected to ensure proportional representation of
women and underrepresented minorities. To increase the participation of
underrepresented minority (URM) scientists at the meeting, the organizers will
reach out to known URM networks: (1) the Black Women in Computational Biological
Network, (2) Bouchett Honor Graduate Society, (3) Society for the Advancement of
Chicanos/Hispanics and Native Americans in Science - SACNAS, (4) Annual
Biomedical Research Conference for Minoritized Scientists -ABRCMS, (5) UMBC
Meyerhoff Scholars Program Alum Association, and (6) Black in Biophysics
@BlackInBiophys/Twitter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.