* 2242090
* Residential and School Mobility after Receiving a Housing Choice Voucher: The Effects on Student Academic Outcomes
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Jeremy Fiel, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 07/31/2027
* USD 400,000.00

When low-income households receive a housing choice voucher (HCV), this rent
subsidy may make it possible to move to neighborhoods where children have access
to schools that improve their educational outcomes. This study examines how
receiving an HCV shapes families’ residential choices and neighborhood contexts,
and how this influences their children’s school enrollment and school
characteristics. Additionally, through an analysis of the students’ academic
records, this study examines how HCV receipt and subsequent relocation shapes
students’ short- and long-term educational outcomes. By advancing understanding
of the relationship between housing voucher receipt, school enrollment, and
educational outcomes, this study informs the decision-making of housing
authorities responsible for implementing housing voucher policy and practice and
school districts working to support low-income students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study addresses four objectives: 1) document changes
in neighborhood contexts and school enrollment patterns of students whose
families receive housing choice vouchers (HCVs); 2) identify structural barriers
to accessing different school catchment areas for these families; 3) assess how
housing and school choices mutually influence voucher use and affect subsequent
residential and school mobility; and 4) identify the effects of voucher receipt
on student educational outcomes. The study leveraged four levels of data
spanning the years 2000-2022: student level, family level, school level, and
neighborhood level. Through a combination of geospatial analyses, discrete
choice modeling, and difference-in-difference analyses, this project assesses
where families move with their vouchers, how their residential trajectories
align with school enrollment, and how voucher receipt impacts student outcomes,
including test-scores, high school graduation, and college
enrollment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.