* 2242072
* Collaborative Research: HNDS-R: Polarization, Information Integrity, and Diffusion
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2025
* Soroush Vosoughi, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Melanie Hughes
* 04/30/2025
* USD 213,000.00

The aim of this project is to deepen understanding of polarization as the vortex
in which misleading statements go viral. The civic promise of social media was
universal access to the knowledge needed to inform and motivate broad political
engagement on controversial issues. Instead, social media have become the Petri
dish for epistemic polarization – the division of the public into red and blue
realities. The spread of polarizing unverifiable statements over social media
erodes the shared knowledge needed for constructive disagreement and allows
foreign adversaries to mount toxic communication campaigns with frightening
virality. Through analysis of old and new social media data and development of
new analytic methods, the research in this project brings a greater
understanding of the diffusion dynamics of misleading statements. This will be
useful in improving the trustworthiness of
cyberspace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using previously collected ten-year Twitter
archive, along with new data to be collected, curated, and anonymized, in this
project the impact of polarization on the dissemination of misleading statements
in online networks is investigated. The new data set will be the largest
publicly available data set of its kind, contributing to future research on this
topic. In addition, analytical methods are developed to evaluate the ideological
content, veracity of messages, alignment of users, and the structural and
temporal characteristics of misleading statement cascades, such as reach,
velocity, and virality. What results from this work is a deeper understanding of
the diffusion dynamics of misleading statements. This can inform an early-
containment counterstrategy that can more effectively identify, track, and
neutralize diffusion before the contagion can spread out of control. This
project is funded jointly by the Sociology Program, Human Networks and Data
Science – Research (HNDS-R) Program, and Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace
(SaTC) Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.