* 2242864
* Collaborative Research: cis-Regulatory architecture of color pattern convergence
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Sean Mullen, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Carling
* 07/31/2027
* USD 715,834.00

Understanding the origin and maintenance of biological diversity requires
connecting patterns of genetic variation at the molecular level with
morphological differences among individuals, populations, or species. Over the
last decade, many examples of adaptive trait variation have been linked to
developmental changes in gene expression. Regions of the genome that lie in
between genes contain “regulatory elements” that regulate spatial and temporal
patterns of gene expression. These regulatory regions are thought to play an
essential role in trait adaptation. However, our understanding of the specific
mechanisms through which regulatory elements have driven morphological
diversification remains limited. Do changes involve a small number of elements
with large effect, or many elements of minor effect? Do new gene expression
patterns appear via origination of new elements, or changes in older ancestral
elements? How do the functions of individual elements change? To what extent
might some elements facilitate the convergence of traits across different
linages? This project aims to address these questions. In doing so, it will
decode some of the rules governing the structure, function, and evolution of
regulatory elements. Specifically, the investigators will couple comparative
biology with mechanistic studies of regulatory elements to understand the
regulatory basis of repeated color pattern evolution in butterflies. The work
will include public engagement at the Boston Science Museum. In addition, the
work will develop strategies for increasing the recruitment of graduate students
from historically underrepresented groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cis-regulatory
elements (CREs) include promotors, enhancers, and silencers. These elements play
an essential role in phenotypic evolution because they regulate patterns of gene
expression during development. Despite recent progress in identifying and
characterizing CREs responsible for adaptive trait variation, many questions
remain. For example, what is the relationship between sequence divergence, the
genomic architecture of transcription factor binding sites within CREs, and CRE
function? Addressing these questions is complicated. CREs have been hypothesized
to act as relatively independent modules controlling tissue-specific expression.
However, growing evidence indicates that CRE mutations may have multiple
downstream effects. Here, we propose to use the power of repeated evolution
within a comparative framework to decode the rules governing CRE structure,
function, and evolution. Our research addresses three primary questions. First,
how is population-level sequence divergence responsible for wing pattern mimicry
related to chromatin accessibility and patterns of gene expression in Limenitis
butterflies? Second, to what extent does deep regulatory homology underlie
repeated cases of convergent evolution across different phylogenetic timescales?
Third, how do deeply ancestral vs. recently derived CREs contribute to color
pattern evolution and convergence? We will answer these questions by identifying
and functionally characterizing CREs controlling the expression of two genes,
WntA and optix. These genes have been shown to underlie adaptive mimetic color
pattern divergence within and between butterfly species. We will then leverage
the widespread occurrence of convergent evolution across three butterfly genera
to study broad-scale evolutionary patterns of CRE gain and loss. Ultimately, our
results will shed light on how cis-regulatory elements arise, how they function
to determine phenotype, and what rules govern their
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the Genetic
Mechanisms program of the Molecular and Cellular Biosciences Division in the
Biological Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.