* 2242962
* Advanced Bayesian Methods for Generalized Choice Response Time Models of Decision-Making
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2026
* William Holmes, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 03/31/2026
* USD 114,014.00

This research project will develop new tools to study human judgment and
decision making. A significant challenge in studying decision making is testing
how well a hypothesis or theory is supported by data. In many studies, we only
see the outcome of a decision of interest, which makes it difficult to
understand the process that led to that decision and to directly test theories
about that process. Computational models have proven valuable as tools to encode
theories and test them against observations. However, computational models
present technical barriers that limit their usability and constrain the scope of
questions that can be addressed. This project will provide a suite of efficient
yet generally usable computational approaches and tools that facilitate model
construction and analysis. The new methods to be developed will broaden the
scope of investigations that are possible and the researchers who can carry them
out. To ensure their broadest possible usability, the tools will be disseminated
in freely available software packages. The investigators will use these tools to
study the properties of multi-alternative, multi-attribute choice and assess how
context influences people's choices in naturalistic settings. Students supported
by this project will be trained in state-of-the-art computational methods which
are becoming increasingly more common in science and
industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop advanced Bayesian
methodologies for performing parameter estimation for choice-response time (RT)
models. The time it takes for people to make decisions (RTs) provides valuable
information about the dynamic process responsible for those decisions. For this
reason, models that predict both choices and RTs are used to study decision
processes. However, it is challenging to fit these types of models to data,
which is a necessary step in assessing the quality of the theories they encode.
As a result, model-based approaches are most often applied using decades old
models in conjunction with simple experimental designs, both to maintain
tractability. To address these issues, this project will develop a set of
accessible, high-quality probabilistic methods that are documented to be
effective at performing Bayesian parameter estimation for a wide variety of
choice-RT models. Researchers will be able to construct more complex choice-RT
models and utilize more complex experimental designs, which in combination can
facilitate new scientific investigations. As an example of this, the
investigators will study the role of context in decisions involving naturalistic
information encoded in, for example, semantic or image-based stimuli. Machine-
learning models of language or image representations will be integrated with
choice-RT models encoding different assumptions about contextual dependencies.
These models are fit to complex data sets derived from large-scale experimental
designs involving large numbers of participants making naturalistic decisions.
The results of this study will help resolve the debate about whether
naturalistic choices show context-dependency, which is observed with more
artificial stimuli.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.