* 2242100
* DDRIG in DRMS: Measuring Persuasion Without Measuring a Prior Belief:  A New Application of Planned Missing Data Techniques
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* David Budescu, Fordham University
* Standard Grant
* Claudia Gonzalez-Vallejo
* 04/30/2024
* USD 24,552.00

Experiments on advice taking typically require a person receiving advice (an
“advisee”) express their belief about the topic they are being advised about
before receiving the actual advice. Then, after advice is given, the advisee
reports a new belief. Researchers can then study the effects of advice by
looking at how the advisee’s belief changed. However, there is a potential
problem with this setup. Making the advisee explicitly consider their
expectation before receiving advice can change its effects, but there is no way
to study how the advisee’s belief changes without knowing what they believed
beforehand. This research uses cutting edge statistical methods to estimate
advisees’ prior beliefs based on other factors that are known about them,
allowing researchers to understand the influence of advice under more realistic
conditions, where advisees don’t have to directly think about what they believe
before being advised. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific term for situations
where measurement affects subsequent behavioral processes is “measurement
reactivity”. This project’s approach to curing this measurement reactivity is to
treat advisees’ prior beliefs as missing data. Advances in statistical methods
allow researchers to impute missing data with without bias under the right set
of circumstances. These methods are typically utilized when data are missing
incidentally, but this project will experimentally randomize when data are
missing, ensuring the correct conditions for the imputation to work effectively.
Because these advisees never directly report their prior beliefs, the
researchers can study how advice utilization occurs in the absence of
measurement reactivity. This work has important implications for how advisors
can help advisees optimize their expertise in many real-life scenarios. The
methodological innovation of using a planned missing data experimental design to
cure measurement reactivity also has the potential to generalize to other
scientific domains where it is a potential confound.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.