* 2242083
* Collaborative Research: Management Practices and Microbial Communities in Prehistoric Aquaculture
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2025
* Kiana Frank, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 02/28/2025
* USD 87,875.00

This project investigates how early farmers used microbes to maintain and manage
fish production. Archaeological research has identified a highly productive
agricultural systems that produced wetland and dryland crops, such as sweet
potato and taro. Fishpond aquaculture was a critical part of this system and was
used to reliably supply fish for elite households. Stemming from agricultural
practices that originated in Central and East Polynesia, which were brought to
Hawaiâ€™i by Polynesian voyagers, fishponds represent a unique innovation that
created a productive and resilient niche for human habitation. Based upon the
diversity of forms and historically identified practices, fishpond management
must have relied upon the intimate knowledge of the life cycle of various
species, as well as practices that supported the micro-organisms in ponds. The
archaeological investigation of fishpond management in the past aids in
answering several related fundamental questions: how did ecological knowledge
translate to practices that modified the natural environment, and how did these
practices support a growing population well as a dynamic political economy? The
research will be conducted in partnership with the local community and includes
collective fieldwork and laboratory research that supports the transmission of
traditional ecological knowledge along with STEM training for Hawaiian
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will pair methods from
microbiology and archaeology to examine the sediments of the remains of a
fishpond, located within a coastal dunes and wetlands refuge. A team of
archaeologists, microbiologists, paleoecologists, and local community volunteers
plan to investigate a thousand-year sequence of aquacultural production.
Combining sediment cores, archaeological excavations, zooarchaeological analysis
of fish remains, radiocarbon dating, and the genetic analysis of microbes in
sediments, the team will sequence and analyze the succession of management
practices over the history of the fishpond. Sequences will be compared to a
theoretical model that predicts human niche construction and entry-points for
elite management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.