* 2242815
* REU Site - Summer undergraduate research internships in ocean ecology, biogeochemistry, physical oceanography, and marine geology and geophysics in the CEOAS at OSU
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2026
* Kaplan Yalcin, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 02/28/2026
* USD 146,488.00

Oregon State University will host a Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) Site program at its main campus in Corvallis, OR that will support twelve
undergraduate interns each summer for three years. Interns will be mentored by
faculty at the OSU College of Earth, Ocean, and Atmospheric Sciences (CEOAS).
This REU Site offers research experiences in physical oceanography, ocean
ecology and biogeochemistry, and marine geology and geophysics. The project
includes a remote internship option, when feasible for the research project,
that makes the research experience more accessible for students who cannot
attend in person. The objectives of the REU program are to:&lt;br/&gt;1) provide
students a high-quality research experience in ocean science and an
understanding of its interdisciplinary nature;&lt;br/&gt;2) provide students
with professional development and training opportunities facilitating
persistence and retention in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) career pathways; and&lt;br/&gt;3) increase access to and participation in
ocean sciences by students from under-represented groups through recruitment
efforts at regional community colleges and non-research
universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;REU student projects will center around three
themes, including 1) Ocean Ecology and Biogeochemistry, 2) Marine Geology and
Geophysics, and 3) Physics of Oceans and Atmospheres. Ocean Ecology and
Biogeochemistry is concerned with the structure and function of ecosystems
across space and time as revealed by the study of the ocean's biological,
chemical, and geological processes, including feedbacks between land, atmosphere
and ocean. Research backgrounds of OSU faculty include population and community
ecology, biogeochemical cycling, and the deep-biosphere. Marine Geology and
Geophysics includes research on seafloor and seamount volcanism and extends from
the study of magmatic and volcanic processes to tectonic environments in the
ocean basins including spreading centers, subduction zones, and hotspots.
Paleoceanography at OSU focuses on the Cascadia margin and the high-latitudes of
both the Arctic and Antarctic and utilizes premier facilities including the OSU
Marine and Geology Repository, one of the nationâ€™s largest archives of marine
sediment cores. OSU research in coastal and sedimentary processes emphasizes the
nearshore, where ocean hazards intersect with human population and coastal
ecosystems. Other subject areas include marine applications of paleomagnetism
and seismology. Physics of Oceans and Atmospheres: Projects in physical
oceanography include turbulent eddies, internal gravity waves, fronts, and
coastal currents, as well as numerical modeling of ocean circulation on local to
global scales, ocean acoustics, optics, and remote sensing, and coupled ocean-
atmosphere interactions. Research areas within this theme include the study of
physical processes acting across the ocean boundaries at the sea floor, coast,
and sea surface, and of the ocean's role in the Earth's climate system, spanning
a wide range of space and time scales, from turbulence at scales of millimeters
and seconds to global circulations at scales of thousands of kilometers and
centuries or longer. Research within this theme also involves expansion of
observation capabilities in the ocean and atmosphere using an array of ship-
based, buoy, seafloor, autonomous, and satellite platforms, as well as data
assimilation, visualization, and modeling techniques and
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.