* 2242538
* Using AI to Expand the Job Search of Displaced Workers in the Aftermath of the Covid-19 Crisis
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Achyuta Adhvaryu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 07/31/2025
* USD 503,800.00

This award will support research that uses artificial intelligence (AI) and
machine learning to improve matching of low skilled workers to available jobs.
While the US job market recovered well from the COVID 19 pandemic disruption,
the unemployment rate remains relatively high for under-represented groups even
as unfilled vacancies have risen and stayed high. This suggests a mismatch
between the information available to jobseekers and employers. This research
will use field experimental methods to investigate whether AI-assisted
algorithmic matching of skills and psychometric skills to on-line vacancies can
help job seekers get better job matches. This research project has the potential
to improve the functioning of the labor market for workers at the lower end of
the skill distribution, hence increase employment for this group of workers.
Besides providing evidence on the mechanisms through which AI and computational
algorithms can be used to improve labor market efficiency, the results of this
research can provide guidance on policies to increase employment, labor
productivity, and economic growth. Because the research focuses on low wage
workers, the results can decrease poverty as well as decrease income inequality
and help establish the US as a global leader in poverty reduction policies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project leverages data on job seeker characteristics
and the requirements of jobs posted by online job search engines and use a
randomized control trial (RCT) design to investigate whether assigning an AI-
assisted algorithmic matching to job postings improves job matching. The RCT
design has three treatment arms: (i) job offers in the job-seekers field in no
particular order; (ii) vacancies in no particular order but with predicted match
quality; and (iii) vacancies sorted to best match backgrounds and skills of
jobseekers with predicted match quality. The control group are jobs listed in no
particular order and without a match quality attached. The RCT will have a
sample of 2600 job seekers, with heterogeneity across gender and space,
recruited via advertisements posted on Monster.comâ€™s social media accounts.
Comparison of the first group with the control group will answer the questions
of whether treatment reduces search cost hence improves matching, while
comparing outcomes for the second and third arms to those of the control group
and the first arm will answer the questions as to whether treatment help to
lower the cost of incomplete information and improves job match. Besides
providing evidence on the mechanisms through which AI and computational
algorithms can be used to improve the functioning of labor markets, the results
of this research project can provide guidance on policies to increase
employment, increase productivity, and economic
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.