* 2242302
* Automating Analysis of Zoning Codes for the National Zoning Atlas
* SBE,BCS
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2025
* Alexander Rush, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* May Yuan
* 01/31/2025
* USD 400,000.00

This project investigates natural language processing techniques for automating
information extraction from zoning code text. The outcome of this research
contributes better zoning information, as well as data collection, processing,
and mapping tools, to illuminate zoning, one of the most important, yet
understudied, governmental powers impacting our economy and society. First, the
project assembles hundreds of zoning codes, manually reviews them, and
incorporates specific regulatory information into the publicly-accessible
National Zoning Atlas. Then, the research team develops natural language
processing methods to transform these zoning codes to structured data and ensure
data accuracy by comparing the outputs of the automated process to the manual
results. The compiled data and developed tools can facilitate concrete,
actionable insights and unlock secondary research about zoning’s impact on
housing availability, transportation systems, the environment, economic
opportunity, educational opportunity, and our food supply.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the research examines whether contemporary
natural language processing techniques can successfully decipher complex local
zoning codes. The team collects information about zoning codes and uses this
information to train an algorithm for extracting key elements of zoning codes
and regulations. The output data consist of zoning variables, such as zoning
district names and specific rules for each district, ready for analysis and
mapping. The team assesses the algorithm’s performance for accuracy and
precision against human-performed reviews of zoning codes. If successful, the
resulting data tool can offer local policymakers, researchers, and advocates
across the U.S. the opportunity to compare zoning codes and processes in their
state or nationwide with decreased manual effort, and to produce quality data
for improved decision making, participatory planning, and regional
collaboration. Moreover, the approach can guide future researchers interested in
creating natural language processing models for other types of administrative
law texts, including highway safety manuals, building codes, city plans, and
more.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.