* 2242439
* Firm Wages and Amenities
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Sydnee Caldwell, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 04/30/2026
* USD 143,007.00

Firm wage policies explain over twenty percent of the variation in earnings and
earnings inequality across firms and workers. Labor economists argue that this
wage differential is due to differences in non-wage amenities across firms as
firms compensate for low non-wage amenities with higher wages. Existing methods
do not allow researchers to estimate the value of amenities that are not
“compensated for” by lower wages. To estimate the total value of non-wage
amenities provided by firms, the researchers have conducted a large-scale worker
survey that asked workers to rank hypothetical job offers provided by specific
firms. Workers’ choices reveal the total value of non-wage amenities provided by
each firm. The researchers will link these values to the wage and wage premia
offered by firms and use the resulting data to estimate the relationship between
wages and amenities. If high wage firms provide more non-wage amenities than
low-wage firms, existing estimates of inequality (based only on wages) may
understate the overall level of inequality in the labor market; the reverse may
also be true. The results of this research will provide guidance on policies to
reduce labor market inequalities as well as help to establish the US as a global
leader in reducing wage inequalities across firms. In so doing, the research
results could also help improve the efficiency of labor
markets.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines whether
heterogeneity in firms’ provision of non-wage amenities dampens or magnifies
total labor compensation inequality, using data from a large-scale survey of
employees in Germany. The survey asked workers to rank offers from specific
firms with researcher-provided wage offers. One set of questions focused on
offers from researcher-specified firms while another set of questions focused on
firms the worker said they would consider. Workers were also asked to re-rank
offers under the assumption firms did not vary in commuting or in the value of
future wage growth. The survey results allow the PIs to apply standard tools
from the industrial organization literature to estimate the value of non-wage
amenities provided by firms. The PIs link these values to inked employer-
employee data of those firms to estimate the relationship between non-wage
amenities and the wage premia offered by such firms. The researchers will then
examine the extent to what measures of inequality based only on wage premia
understate or overstate inequality in the total value of compensation provided
by firms. The results of this research will provide guidance on policies to
reduce labor market inequalities as well as help to establish the US as a global
leader in reducing wage inequalities across firms. In addition, the results
could also improve the functioning of the labor market, hence increase economic
growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.