* 2242096
* Collaborative Research: Experiments and Modeling of the Fluid Flow of Beating Eukaryotic Flagella
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Xin Yong, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 07/31/2026
* USD 297,217.00

Flagella and cilia are thin hair-like cellular structures which play an
essential role in many basic life processes. By beating rhythmically, flagella
and cilia move fluid in the local environment of cells. This biological function
enables pulmonary mucus clearance in airways and the transport of ovums from the
ovary to the uterus for example. Malfunction of flagella and cilia can lead to a
group of serious human disorders, ciliopathies, which cause a heavy economic and
disease burden on society. However, despite the ubiquity and importance of
flagella and cilia, fundamental biomechanics underlying the fluid transport of
beating flagella and cilia are still poorly understood. Particularly, the
detailed flow field induced by beating flagella and cilia remains unresolved.
Combining state-of-the-art microscopy techniques with data-driven machine
learning, the research team aims to address this difficult biomechanical
problem. This research will investigate the flow field of healthy flagella as
well as those of mutant flagella associated with ciliopathies using synergistic
experimental and numerical modeling efforts. A potential solution to remedy the
flow deficiency of malfunction flagella will be researched. In addition to the
training and research opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students, the
project will produce appealing scientific videos and demonstrations to enhance
the undergraduate curriculum and enrich outreach activities at the local
communities of the two principal investigators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a
generic model for the morphology and dynamics of flagella and cilia, green algae
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, will be studied in this research program. Optical
microscopy will be used to track the three-dimensional (3D) fluid flow around
the beating flagella of a single alga at micron scales with sub-millisecond
temporal resolutions. Both wild-type and mutant algae of different swimming
modes will be investigated. The mechanical efficiency of flagellar dynamics will
be analyzed based on the 3D flow field. Moreover, using the experimental flow
field as a basis of reference and taking advantage of modern machine-learning
algorithms, the team plans to develop a numerical model of maximal simplicity
that can quantitatively capture the algal flow. The model will facilitate the
study of the optimization and synchronization of flagellar dynamics and the
collective dynamics of algal suspensions. Through the collaborative experimental
and modeling efforts, the missing link between the flagellar dynamics and the
resulting microscopic fluid flow will be revealed by this
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.