* 2242268
* The Avocado Connection to Ecosystem Degradation, Violence and Migration
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Kenneth Young, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* May Yuan
* 08/31/2026
* USD 399,999.00

This project examines the social and environmental impacts of an agricultural
commodity boom, particularly how a profitable agricultural export can influence
the integrity of forest ecosystems and the involvement of organized crime groups
in producing countries. “Boom” expansion of one crop can cause rapid
deforestation in a producing region. Moreover, as criminal groups become
involved in the industry, rural workers and small landholders are often
dispossessed of land and forced to migrate. Violence, deforestation, and forced
migration have each been associated with profitable commodities separately, but
the interrelationship between them has rarely been examined holistically.
Building on an interdisciplinary research group, this study addresses three
questions: what type of native vegetation is lost when the cultivated area of a
lucrative agricultural commodity expands? Is the high profitability of a
commodity linked with increased cartel presence, and are women and children
disproportionally impacted and forced to migrate? The project’s results have
implications for commerce, human rights, and national security. Furthermore, it
provides training, mentorship, and professional development to postdoctoral
researchers and to undergraduate and graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As
Land Change scientists collect evidence and develop analytical approaches for
understanding the relationship between global markets and loss of habitats, it
is essential to know how markets create additional social externalities, as
crime and violence flourish in the absence of effective institutions. Using a
mixed-methods approach that integrates geospatial techniques, surveys, and oral
history interviews, this study provides a layered analysis of how global markets
relate to biodiversity degradation and the experiences of individuals forced to
migrate due to organized crime violence. This project represents policy-relevant
research that will result in science-based recommendations for sustainable
production and consumption of commodities, conservation of ecologically
dwindling important areas, and protection of human well-being both within the
growing regions and at the US border with refugees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.