* 2242182
* Submesoscale instabilities and the forward energy cascade in seamount wakes
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2025
* Jacob Wenegrat, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 02/28/2025
* USD 313,825.00

Patterns of energy dissipation and of mixing of heat, freshwater, dissolved
gases and other tracers affect their transport in the global ocean. These
patterns also affect upward motions (upwelling) in the deep branches of the
deep-ocean motions. Seamounts can be sites of prominent mixing of waters with
distinct buoyancy and of energy dissipation in the global ocean, but recent
results suggest that the amount of energy that goes to mixing and dissipation
depends heavily on processes that develop at scales between hundreds and
thousands of meters (submesoscale instabilities). These processes may be
critical in constraining the role of seamounts in ocean energetics and motion.
The proposed research will investigate the dynamics of flows past seamounts with
high-resolution mathematical simulations, to examine the role seamounts play in
the global vertical motions, that is, the overturning circulation. General
circulation models currently approximate only a limited subset of these
processes and do not correctly represent the effects of the transfer of energy
from thousands of meters to meters. This project will investigate the problem in
a wide range of realistic configurations to examine how the patterns of mixing
and energy dissipation change, depending on environmental and seamount
characteristics. This knowledge will inform future approximations that can
eventually include these small-scale impacts in global and climate simulations.
The numerical tools will be readily available in the open-source community
package 'Oceananigans,' which promotes reproducibility of results and provides
these tools to other projects and other researchers. The project supports the
postdoctoral work of an early career researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Submesoscale instabilities extract energy from the
balanced flow field and generate a forward cascade to turbulent mixing. The
energy pathways for this forward cascade in turbulent wakes are not currently
known, nor is the parameter dependence of the energy flux and the nature of the
secondary instabilities that mediate the transition to turbulence. The work
proposed here will address three potentially transformative questions: Q1: What
processes control the forward energy cascade in submesoscale wakes? Q2: How do
submesoscale instabilities impact the integrated (along topography and in the
wake) dissipation and mixing for flow encountering seamounts? Q3: How well are
the energetics of the submesoscale-mediated energy cascade around seamounts
represented in General Circulation Models? These questions will be addressed in
an idealized numerical domain with turbulence-resolving nonhydrostatic Large-
Eddy Simulations (LES) using Oceananigans, which is an open-source, flexible
fluid dynamics solver that uses a finite volume discretization based on that of
MITgcm. Two options for LES turbulence closures are available, with which the
project PIs will investigate the subgrid-scale model dependence. The LES
approach differs from Reynolds-Averaged approaches (RANS - which most other
recent work on related topics has used) in that LES allows the relevant scales
of the energy to be resolved, including the vital role of centimeter-scale
turbulence in the forward energy cascade. A small number of complementary RANS
simulations will also be performed to evaluate how accurately turbulence
closures represent topographic wake turbulence using the GCM CROCO, which is
based on a formulation of the Regional Oceanic Modeling System (ROMS). CROCO
uses a topography-following sigma- coordinate with a higher order pressure
gradient force scheme to minimize errors at steep topographic features and has a
variety of available BBL turbulence closures, making it well-suited for
investigations of flow-topography interaction
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.