* 2242796
* Magnetism, Spin Texture and Magnetotransport Phenomena in Covalent 2D Magnets
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2026
* Hao Zeng, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 03/31/2026
* USD 504,816.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project explores
the properties of a new class of magnetic materials with thicknesses of only a
few-atomic layers. Conventional two-dimensional (2D) materials like graphene are
made of atomic layers weakly bound to each other. The materials to be studied
here have extra atoms that are covalently bonded to the individual layers,
acting like a glue to hold the atomic layers together and change the way they
behave. The exotic properties of these 2D magnets make them particularly
interesting for fundamental scientific research and practical applications. The
ultimate goal is to control their properties through material design, electric
fields, and physical strain. This project will help to pave the way for novel
memory and logic devices operating at ultrafast speed with low power
consumption. Such devices could impact applications such as sensing and quantum
information processing. The investigators will strive to broaden the
participation of underrepresented groups by mentoring and targeted recruiting.
The partnership between the University at Buffalo and Bryn Mawr College will
enable the participation of female undergraduate students through summer
exchange and research experiences at national
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research program symbiotically combines the expertise of the investigators to
synthesize new self-intercalated covalent 2D magnets and magnet/semiconductor
heterostructures, and to explore and tune emergent spin-based topological and
magnetotransport phenomena. The project objectives are (1) to grow high-quality,
large area covalent 2D magnets and related heterostructures by chemical vapor
deposition and dative epitaxy; (2) understand the mechanisms of real space spin
textures and momentum space Berry curvature, their correlation with self-
intercalated cation concentration, and the effects of their intertwining on
electrical carrier transport; and (3) achieve active control of spin-based
topological phenomena in real and momentum space by electric gating, strain, and
foreign ion intercalation. The rich phases achievable by varying the
concentration of self-intercalated cations in these covalent 2D magnets and
their interactions with different vdW templates provide broad material design
parameter space that could bestow new spin properties unattainable in existing
magnetic materials. This project will advance the fundamental understanding of
these materials, decipher the effects of intertwined spin structures and Berry
curvature on magnetotransport, and expand the library of materials to chemically
stable covalent 2D magnets with a high Curie
temperature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.