* 2242604
* Collaborative Research: Olfactory learning and neuromodulation in the Aedes aegypti mosquito
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Omar Akbari, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen Lynch
* 05/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

Mosquitoes are important vectors of pathogens of disease, accounting for more
than a million annual deaths worldwide. We know that mosquitos locate and bite
humans by their sensitive sense of smell. However, mosquitoes do not bite
everyone equally – some people are bitten more than others. What causes this
difference in the mosquito’s biting preference? Remarkably, mosquitoes can learn
and remember based on past experiences, particularly the experience of having an
animal or person swat at them. The experience of being the target of a swat can
modify their odor and biting preferences, but we know remarkably little about
how this information is processed in the mosquito brain. This project will use
an interdisciplinary approach that combines novel behavioral and
electrophysiological techniques from Aedes aegypti mosquitoes to understand how
odor learning takes place to modify their biting behaviors. These projects will
also incorporate training opportunities for undergraduates, graduate students,
and postdoctoral associates with the aim of preparing them for independent
scientific careers. High School students in the Upward Bound Program will also
participate in the project through summer seminars and lab experiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, we build on our recent findings that
dopamine-mediated learning and modulation in the mosquito’s primary olfactory
system, the antennal lobe, is critical for Aedes aegypti mosquito host
preferences. Using an interdisciplinary approach, our collaborative team will
elucidate the role of dopamine-mediated plasticity in olfactory circuits. We
accomplish this with three Objectives: (1) We will test the hypothesis that
mosquitoes only learn certain odors, corresponding to the tuning of specific
antennal lobe glomeruli. (2) To test that “learnable” odors are encoded by
antennal lobe glomeruli that receive dense dopaminergic innervation. And (3) to
test the hypothesis that coincident dopamine and odor input cause plasticity of
antennal lobe project neurons and allows mosquitoes to learn important olfactory
stimuli. We suggest that our proposed experiments may provide a basic framework
for understanding the contribution of dopaminergic plasticity in early olfactory
circuits. Moreover, olfactory behaviors, including learning, are critical for
mosquito preferences and biting of human hosts, and thereby spread diseases that
afflict nearly a billion people annually. Therefore, unraveling the neural bases
of learning in mosquitoes has important potential for developing new strategies
for their control. The project will also introduce students to interdisciplinary
research and broadly communicate insect neurobiology's importance to high school
students. High School students in the Upward Bound Program will participate in
the project through summer seminars and lab experiences. Finally, the project
includes training undergraduates, graduate students, and postdoctoral associates
and helps prepare them for independent scientific
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.