* 2242824
* Investigating mechanisms of RNA polymerase II transcription and regulation using single molecule fluorescence
* BIO,MCB
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2027
* Jennifer Kugel, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 02/28/2027
* USD 1,079,254.00

Expression of genes encoded in DNA starts with transcription – the process
whereby one strand of DNA is copied to make RNA. Transcription requires that
many different proteins and the DNA assemble into large complexes to enable
accurate and timely gene expression in appropriate cellular contexts. This
project will study the assembly and disassembly of key complexes involved in the
early stages of transcription using microscopy techniques that allow observation
of single molecules. Monitoring individual molecules will reveal new insights
into diverse behaviors of proteins and DNA that are important for controlling
gene expression. This project will also have broad educational impacts through
training of graduate and undergraduate students, development of a new laboratory
curriculum, and increased participation of underrepresented minority and women
scientists in STEM research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific objectives of the
project are to investigate the macromolecular interactions that govern binding
of architectural proteins and transcription factors to nucleosomes, and the
molecular transformations that occur in RNA polymerase II (Pol II) transcription
complexes. The experiments employ in vitro single molecule fluorescence
techniques, which are ideally suited to study rapid on/off interactions,
molecular scanning, and heterogeneity in the systems under investigation, thus
providing deep insights into function. One objective is to investigate how the
human architectural protein HMGB1 is able to rapidly traverse nucleosomes and
aid transcription factor p53 in binding its recognition site. The second
objective is to resolve how the binding/dissociation of general transcription
factor TFIIE to Pol II complexes controls transcriptional activity. Unique to
this study, active and inactive complexes will be distinguished, thereby
directly relating TFIIE behavior to transcriptional activity. The knowledge
gained from this research will stimulate new models that will increase
understanding of transcriptional regulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.