* 2242786
* SHF:Small:Concurrency In Reversible Computations
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Clement Aubert, AUGUSTA UNIVERSITY RESEARCH INSTITUTE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 02/28/2026
* USD 582,562.00

Most computers today are designed to operate unidirectionally, but novel
adiabatic, quantum, and biological computers require bidirectional, that is,
forward and backward flow of computations, because such computations are
reversible in nature. Such novel technologies have already started to
revolutionize not only the very essence of computing, but also of communicating.
The communication protocols they utilize are drastically different from the ones
currently in use, and much more complex, since the protocols must account for
the possibility that any participant may undo any computation. This project
provides a complete and satisfactory set of definitions to specify reversible
protocols, demonstrate their equivalence, and reason about independent events.
The project's novelties are to propose direction-agnostic definitions whenever
possible, treating backward and forward executions as equal, and to leverage
reversibility to question choices inherited from forward-only formalisms. The
project's impacts are in the development and adoption of reversible languages,
that will allow the creation of energy-efficient systems and protocols; but also
improve security and reliability thanks to built-in forensic
capabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project concurrently refines the
definition of independence for reversible systems; implements a specification
language for reversible systems; enriches current definitions of contextual
equivalences; and strives to take inspiration from different fields to strike
"the right" set of operators to represent reversible communications. The
project's advances include a greater homogeneity between the different
representations of reversible protocols, a better insight into the principled
development of reversible languages, and a better integration between the
formalism used to specify protocols and its application to reasoning about
modern reversible systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.