* 2242763
* RII Track-1: Building Capacity across Iowa to Meet Human Needs from Things that Grow
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Monica Lamm, Iowa State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Jose Colom
* 07/31/2028
* USD 4,564,578.00

The vision of the "Building Capacity across Iowa to Meet Human Needs from Things
that Grow" (“Chemurgy 2.0”) project is for Iowa to become an advanced
biomanufacturing leader by adapting and modernizing the concept of “chemurgy” –
i.e., applied chemistry with a focus on producing industrial products from
agricultural material. The project will advance this vision by building and
integrating research capacity in biosciences and advanced manufacturing, two key
areas identified as important to the State of Iowa. Chemurgy 2.0 will focus on
the manufacturing of proteins, vaccines and therapeutics; the manufacturing of
biochemicals and biofibers; 3D-printing and composite fabrication processes that
utilize biochemicals and biofibers; and applications of data science and
artificial intelligence. The development of plastics for additive manufacturing,
fibers for flexible and rigid materials, and proteins for diagnostics and
therapeutics will benefit society by providing bio-based and sustainable
materials for health and consumer applications. With this project, research
infrastructure will be improved not only at Iowa research universities but also
at predominantly undergraduate institutions in Iowa. Research experiences and
educational opportunities will be provided for preservice teachers and for
undergraduates from groups traditionally underrepresented – including first-
generation and rural students. Chemurgy 2.0 will be administered by Iowa State
University in collaboration with the University of Iowa, the University of
Northern Iowa, Dordt University, and Central College of
Iowa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Chemurgy 2.0 research program will build capacity
in meeting human needs from things that grow in three thematic areas: (1)
Plastics for Additive Manufacturing (PAM), (2) Fibers for Flexible and Rigid
materials (FFR), and (3) Proteins for Diagnostics and Therapeutics (PDT). The
structure of each thematic area supports a “discover” – “optimize” – “scale-up-
to manufacture” pipeline that forms an iterative and interconnected loop
spanning from the discovery of bio-inspired building blocks to manufacturing
applications. PAM links the biomanufacturing of monomers to the Additive
Manufacturing (AM) sector. FFR links biofibers to AM, textiles, and medical
product manufacture. PDT focuses on larger bio-derived molecules, such as
proteins and cell products, and connects them with diagnostics and therapeutics
production. Data science is a cross-cutting theme throughout all focal areas.
Overall, Chemurgy 2.0 addresses three intersecting problems: biomanufacturing,
which is under-developed in Iowa relative to other sectors; the critical
physical and cyberinfrastructure needs for biomanufacutring that are currently
lacking; and workforce capacity, which is severely constrained in the state.
Chemurgy 2.0 is expected to increase research infrastructure and workforce in
the basic and applied science and engineering fields related to biomanufacturing
and digital industrial technologies. Data-driven educational interventions and
the implementation of outreach activities across the state will increase and
diversify the Iowa biomanufacturing workforce. Project-based communications with
Iowa residents and beyond will build scientific literacy and understanding of
Chemurgy 2.0’s role in achieving advanced biomanufacturing in
Iowa.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.