* 2242732
* EA: Upgrade of the X-ray tomographic microscope to expand operations at the University of Missouri X-ray Microanalysis Laboratory
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Tara Selly, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Keen-Zebert
* 06/30/2025
* USD 624,996.00

The University of Missouri's (MU) X-ray Microanalysis Laboratory is an
analytical and scientific imaging facility run by faculty members PI Selly and
Co-PI Schiffbauer. While capable of analyzing an array of samples, the facility
specializes in imaging paleontological specimens. The PI team consists of five
expert paleontology faculty members from across MU's campus. Their research
encompasses a wide range of topics, from studying the evolutionary history of
crocodiles to investigating Precambrian tube worms. One of the primary
instruments in the facility is the Zeiss Xradia 510 Versa X-ray tomographic
microscope (micro-CT), which will be upgraded to the more capable 610 model,
which includes a flat panel extension detector system, two new optical
objectives, and a higher-power X-ray source. This upgrade will allow the lab to
better serve the needs of Earth science researchers and those in other STEM
disciplines by accommodating larger and denser samples, dramatically enhancing
imaging speeds, and improving larger sample resolution size. Moreover, these
improvements will offer a more engaging and hands-on experience for visitors and
students. Rather than simply dropping off samples and receiving the data later,
imaging can now be completed in significantly reduced timeframes, thereby
enabling rapid and achievable opportunities in classroom and workshop
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The projects that will directly benefit from this
upgrade include novel investigations into: the origins of the bilaterian body
plan; selective preservation bias in the smally shelly fossil record of the
earliest Cambrian Period; the evolution of soft-tissue locomotory and
craniodental systems using contrast-enhanced scanning; the evolution of
musculoskeletal systems; and soft-tissue degradation and feature loss during
decay.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.