* 2242190
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Drone Pilots, Remote Warfare, and Militarism
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Alison Cool, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 02/29/2024
* USD 12,096.00

Shifts toward remote warfare have disrupted the prior division between
deployment and home life. The decompartmentalization of work and home is like to
affect how members of the military engage in the work of remote warfare and to
affect family relationships as households are less fully separated from military
activities. To understand these dynamics, this doctoral dissertation project
uses qualitative methods to investigate how the boundaries between home and work
and between military and civilian life are being redrawn for service members and
their families. The work advances our understanding of the dynamics of military
operations as they spill over increasingly into home life. The project trains a
graduate student in scientific cultural anthropology and disseminates results
broadly to academic, non-academic, and stakeholder audiences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The labor of warfare has always seeped in some ways into
homelife, but remote warfare has made the boundaries between work and home and
between military and civilian life blurrier than ever before. To understand how
porosity in these boundaries impacts military operations, this doctoral
dissertation uses semi-structured interviews and participant observation of
service members and their families to investigate the following: 1) how military
personnel share military experiences with their families; 2) whether and how
conducting warfare from home affects the conduct and experience of military
operations; and 3) how military personnel and families understand and experience
the shifting boundaries between work and home. The study advances scholarship in
the anthropology of labor, kinship theory, and identity theory and more
generally sheds light on questions of work-life disruptions that have been
pervasive during the Covid-19 era.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.