* 2242263
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Belief Formation and Adaptation to Climate Change
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Gautam Rao, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Bahel
* 01/31/2024
* USD 25,000.00

Climate change poses an existential crisis to hundreds of millions of the
world’s poor, threatening both their livelihoods and lives. These
households—often out of reach of government support—must take steps themselves
to address the dramatic shifts already occurring in their local environments.
Appropriate reaction therefore relies not only on access to the right tools to
respond to the harmful effects of global warming but also on the knowledge to
implement these measures in the first place. Yet several characteristic features
of climate change, such as the small, incremental steps through which the
environment evolves, make learning in this domain particularly challenging. This
research project will explore these frictions to belief formation using new
survey data among farmers in rural areas and test the extent to which they
inhibit people's capacity to adjust to the environmental changes around them.
Using an experiment correcting farmers’ beliefs about the harmful consequences
of global warming on their own plots, this project will evaluate the scope for a
low-cost policy to improve technological adaptation. The results of this project
will contribute to our understanding of how individuals adapt to climate change,
and the new datasets measuring both beliefs and the incidence of environmental
shocks will be made freely available to other
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will delve into farmers’
underlying mental models to understand how these households update about
decision-relevant features of their local environment that have been impacted by
global warming. Increased soil salinity threatens to dramatically reduce crop
production without shifts in irrigation techniques and seed choice. Like with
many dimensions of climate change, learning about rising soil salinity presents
significant challenges: the underlying causal process is opaque (impacted by
rising sea levels, depleting groundwater reserves, and increasing flooding) and
changes often happen incrementally embedded in seasonal patterns. Economic
theories of limited attention suggest that small shifts will remain neglected,
generating mistaken underestimation of true salt levels. This project will
elicit quantitative beliefs among farmers about salinity on their plots to
provide direct measurement of expectations about their local environment. Using
natural experiments in salt levels due to the interaction of flooding and water
salinity calculated using recent advances in remote sensing, this project will
test mental models of belief formation by assessing which signals trigger
updating by farmers. By randomly providing information based on direct soil
salinity measurements from farmers’ own plots, this project will measure the
elasticity of technological adoption with respect to beliefs, providing an
evaluation of a low-cost policy to improve adaptation to climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.