* 2242507
* Inequality, Participation, and the Design of Local Development Projects: Experimental Evidence
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Krister Andersson, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 05/31/2026
* USD 420,000.00

Governments and donors often prioritize the participation of local people in the
design and implementation of development projects in low- and middle-income
regions. In practice, however, broad participation appears difficult to achieve
because it is often disproportionately skewed toward relatively wealthy
community members, members of historically dominant groups, and men. This
inequality is a threat to the effectiveness of development projects because such
inequality can make local development priorities less responsive to the needs of
marginalized community members. This project generates new evidence regarding
how development projects can be designed to be more inclusive and participatory.
The research seeks to understand citizens’ preferences regarding participatory
development projects, and to identify specific project features that help to
lower the barriers to participation among participants who are marginalized
based on their economic status, ethnicity, or gender. These findings are
directly actionable for governments and non-governmental organizations
interested in addressing issues of inequality in their own participatory
programs. The research team engages with local, national, and international
development organizations to co-produce the research protocols and ensure that
the findings feed back into development practice. The project also provides
training and professional experiences to students from diverse backgrounds at
multiple U.S. universities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project contributes to
existing social science work on participation behavior and development
institutions. Specifically, the study provides new theory and evidence regarding
the institutional features of projects that elicit unequal participation, and
that shape incentives and motivations to participate. A series of experiments
test the effects of project features on decisions to participate in projects
related to natural resource governance and WaSH (water, sanitation, and
hygiene), especially among marginalized populations. The experimental data,
supplemented with observational data on study participants’ participation
decisions, allow the research team to explore how contextual factors moderate
the effects of the project features, how much the effects vary within and across
communities, and how the findings replicate across regional contexts. Finally,
in providing data on the causal mechanisms underlying the experimental results,
the research team can show that participation is driven by both material and
non-material motivations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.