* 2242995
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Cycling of dissolved organic matter in blue carbon ecosystems
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Warren De Bruyn, Chapman University
* Standard Grant
* Catherine O'Reilly
* 07/31/2026
* USD 106,449.00

Blue carbon refers to carbon stored in coastal systems like sea grass meadows
and marshes. These ocean plants play an important role in carbon cycling by
making, storing and releasing carbon. These plants release carbon as dissolved
organic matter into the water. Dissolved organic matter is made of very large
carbon-containing molecules with complex structures. It is formed when plant
matter, like leaves, breaks down. These dissolved molecules are a part of the
global carbon cycle, but we do not know very much about the different types of
dissolved organic matter or how it changes over time. This research will study
how salt marshes and eel grass beds in Padilla Bay create, alter and store
dissolved organic matter. Padilla Bay is a large bay in the coastal waters of
Washington state. Measurements will be made of how the amount and type of
dissolved organic matter flowing out of the salt marshes and Bay change from
high tide to low tide and in different seasons. This research will help
scientists understand the role and importance of blue carbon systems in carbon
cycling in coastal waters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed activities
incorporate a system and process approach to evaluating DOM sources and cycling
in salt marshes, mudflats, and eelgrass beds. Surface waters, sediment pore
waters and plant leachates will be studied to assess their contributions to DOM
cycling using a combination of spectroscopic, stable isotope (C-13), dissolved
organic carbon, water quality and hydrodynamic measurements. The primary goal is
to examine the composition, photochemical and biological transformations, and
amount of DOM exported from a salt marsh into the Padilla Bay estuary. Secondary
goals are to assess how carbon flow is modified by eelgrass beds and mudflats in
the estuary. Padilla Bay has several degraded salt marshes slated for
restoration, and DOM will also be studied in these systems, providing a baseline
for monitoring carbon flow changes at different stages of marsh restoration in
the future. This study will help researchers make better predictions about
changes in climate and anthropogenic influences on coastal ecosystems, as well
as improve management of the coastal zone and wetland
restoration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.