* 2242805
* MagStar Phase-II: Supporting Cost-Effective, Long-Term Access to Scientific Data
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Jennifer Gannon, Computational Physics Inc
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 07/31/2025
* USD 399,930.00

Measurements of the Earth's magnetic field are used to understand how Solar
activity affects the Earth. During periods of high activity, the magnetic field
changes rapidly, which can cause damage to power grids, interference with
communication and navigation satellites, and disruption of air traffic. The data
obtained from the MagStar magnetometer array inform research into the multiple
scientific domains supporting end-users in each sector. The array also provides
real-time data to various power utility partners and independent system
operators (ISOs) for hazard awareness and the NOAA Space Weather Prediction
Center. It is one of only two currently operating scientific-grade magnetometer
arrays in the contiguous United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MagStar
project, originally funded through the NSF Distributed Array of Small
Instruments (DASI) grant NSF-193304, has successfully deployed 13 real-time
operational magnetometers in observational gaps across the contiguous United
States. The data are provided in real-time (less than 1 second), at high-quality
for research and operations (0.1nT resolution), and up-time/data capture at most
locations exceeds 99%. As we head into solar maximum conditions and geomagnetic
activity increases, the research efforts that MagStar supports will become
increasingly more prevalent. It is important that continuity of these data
streams is maintained through this high-activity period of the solar cycle. The
next phase of this project will support long-term data availability for
scientific use by continuing to maintain and operate the array for two years,
including developing better support for data transfer to the SuperMag and
Madrigal databases for ease of public access, and maintaining real-time data
transfer to users through the existing API.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.