* 2242802
* Research Infrastructure: RII Track 1: Integrating Montana's Environmental Research with Smart Sensors (IMERSS)
* O/D,OIA
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Lu Hu, Montana State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* J.D. Swanson
* 07/31/2028
* USD 3,385,154.00

Prescribed fire is increasingly being employed across the western U.S., as it is
needed to mitigate and manage wildfire risk. This "Integrating Montana's
Environmental Research with Smart Sensors" (IMERSS) project will improve the
understanding of prescribed fire dynamics and the impact of prescribed fire on
Montana’s communities and public lands by producing new sensor technologies to
characterize fuel types and smoke emissions. The novel, smart optical sensor
systems will contribute to the region’s economic infrastructure through
partnerships with Montana’s expanding optics-based industry. Outcomes of IMERSS
research will enable managers of prescribed fires to develop and refine
strategies for deploying prescribed fires effectively to mitigate wildfire risk,
a benefit that will extend to local and federal agencies tasked with land
management and wildfire mitigation across the Western U.S. The broader impacts
activities of IMERSS include an extensive internship and workforce development
plan, integration of community and Tribal college participants, and a focus on
K-12 education and outreach to the community. The project will create well-
defined STEM professional development pathways and broaden participation across
Montana in environmental, social, and engineering research. IMERSS will be
administered by Montana State University in collaboration with six other
institutions: University of Montana, Montana Technological University, Salish
Kootenai College, Little Big Horn College, Flathead Valley Community
College.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;IMERSS research will focus on: 1) how prescribed
fire’s energy and emissions depend on fuel properties, topography, and
environmental conditions, and 2) how smoke emissions from prescribed fires
affect individuals and communities. To answer these questions, IMERSS will
develop a new generation of smart optical sensors that couple emerging
engineering technologies with advances in artificial intelligence (AI) and
machine learning (ML). IMERSS will then deploy the new instruments to measure
prescribed fire behavior in real time, acquiring spatially accurate, real-time
data about fuels, smoke aerosol type, smoke plume height, smoke trajectory, and
social acceptance of prescribed fire and smoke. The acquisition of this data
will allow managers of prescribed fires to make better-informed decisions about
when and where to burn, and for how long. These decisions can be shared with
individuals and Montana’s community leaders to minimize the adverse effects of
prescribed fire. Thus, IMERSS will produce scientifically grounded strategies
for selecting the locations and the timing of prescribed fire events to maximize
their benefits and mitigate wildfire and smoke risk. In doing so, IMERSS will
build capacity in Montana by forging ties between researchers in environmental
science, remote sensing, optical engineering, AI and ML, and social science.
Four new faculty hires are planned in the first two years of the project, all in
AI and ML. The core research program is well integrated with education,
workforce development, and diversity plans that span academic, Tribal, public,
and private sectors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.