* 2242588
* The Impacts of Predictable Income Volatility and Income Risk on Economic Outcomes and Behaviors
* SBE,SES
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2025
* Leandro Carvalho, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 02/28/2025
* USD 300,884.00

The income of poor people is not only low, but also unstable and unpredictable.
Despite this income instability and its potential costs on the wellbeing of the
poor, economists, measure of the effects of this instability and
unpredictability is limited. This research will use field experiments to study
how income instability affects the economic behavior and wellbeing of the poor.
The project involves experimentally manipulating the labor demand for casual
work of low wage labor during a period when little other work is available and
then study the impact of income instability on consumption, savings, investment
other activities as well as investigate the strategies households use to cope
with income instability. The research will also collect data on individuals
perceived costs of income instability to measure their willingness to pay to
avoid income instability. The project will provide evidence on the importance of
stabilizing incomes as a policy goal. The results of this research will provide
guidance on labor market policies that will improve the lives of low-income
workers. In so doing, it will help to establish the US as a global leader in
improving the living standards of low-income
workers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will study the causal
effects of income risk and of predictable income volatility on economic outcomes
and on welfare. To generate exogenous variation in income instability, the PIs
experimentally manipulate the labor demand for casual work during a time when
there are no alternatives. The RCT design has three arms: the Stable (S) arm has
fixed pay scale and workdays; fluctuations in pay scale and workdays in the
Predictable Volatility (PV) arm will be known in advance to workers while
fluctuations in pay scale and workdays in the Risky Income (RI) arm will be
unknown to the workers. The expected, number of workdays and pay of all three
arms will be the same. Besides baseline data, high frequency panel data on
consumption, expenditures, income, savings and assets, loans and debt, and
transfers will be collected. The design and empirical analysis will allow the
PIs to study the impact of income instability on consumption levels and
smoothing and to investigate in detail the strategies used to cope with income
instability. In addition to reduced-form analyses, the research will estimate a
structural model to conduct a welfare analysis and simulate policy
counterfactuals. The PIs will measure the perceived welfare costs of income
instability by eliciting individualsâ€™ willingness to pay to avoid predictable
income volatility. The PIs will use the structural model to shed further light
on mechanisms, to estimate the welfare costs of income instability, and to
simulate policy counterfactuals. The results of this research will help guide
labor market policies that stabilizes worker incomes and thus improve the living
standards of the working poor.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.