* 2242475
* Planning: Mississippi EPSCoR RII Track-1 Planning Grant
* O/D,OIA
* 01/01/2023,09/30/2023
* Adam Smith, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 09/30/2023
* USD 100,000.00

Over a one-year period, this planning grant will focus on addressing four goals
to mature a selected project concept and research team, using a collaborative,
inclusive approach. First, the planning grant seeks to critically review and
document the existing research and development infrastructure in Mississippi
necessary for establishing a regional biotechnology hub. Second, the project
will identify future research, development, and capacity-building needs within
the selected research topic that could be addressed through multi-disciplinary,
jurisdiction-wide coordination. Third, the research team will develop a
workforce development plan aligned with research and biotechnology industry
needs. Fourth, the project will also establish a robust framework for an
interdisciplinary, fully-integrated, collaborative research project that
broadens participation and secures the sustainability of the capacity-building
investments within the jurisdiction. Key project activities include workshops,
project-wide meetings, and logic-model development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
planning project from Mississippi State University has the potential to develop
the intrastate teamwork needed for a future EPSCoR Research Infrastructure
Improvement Track-1 proposal on the topic of “Engineering Polymeric
Nanomaterials for Biomedical Applications,” which is properly aligned with
Mississippi’s Science and Technology Plan. The plan identifies emerging
technologies in Advanced Materials and Biomedical/Healthcare as foci for future
STEM excellence. The polymeric nanomaterials project aims to identify new
delivery mechanisms with minimal immunogenic responses; establish novel, non-
invasive technologies; and radically improve delivery efficiency over existing
technologies. The focus on nanobiology and immunoengineering will catalyze the
planning of an interdisciplinary, multi-institution materials research program
across the state’s four research universities: Jackson State University,
Mississippi State University, the University of Mississippi, and the University
of Southern Mississippi.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.