* 2242124
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Measuring Variation in Water Pollution Impacts and Water Insecurity Infrastructures Across Socioeconomic Status
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Donald Nelson, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 12/31/2023
* USD 15,763.00

While research has consistently shown how poorer communities as an aggregate
tend to bear with the most of negative consequences associated with
environmental pollution, less is understood about whether pollution from a
common environmental source is differentially experienced along class lines, and
if so, to what extent. This research takes place in an urban landscape where
both middle- and lower- class residents are impacted by water pollution. The
project would train a graduate student in scientific cultural anthropology and
its results would be disseminated to academic and non-academic audiences. The
project also broadens the participation of historically underrepresented groups
in the production of scientific knowledge. The findings will be disseminated to
the broader public through public media channels and a photovoice exhibit, as
well as non-academic reports to the main stakeholders involved in the
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project examines perceptions of environmental
pollution by measuring variation across a comparative sample of upper-class,
gated communities, and informal settlements where lower-income residents live.
It also investigates the infrastructures, tools, and behavioral mechanisms
enacted by different social groups and individuals to understand the
complexities of human-environment interaction. Comparative in nature, this
research employs conventional ethnographic methods like semi-structured
interviews and participant observation, as well as nontraditional techniques
such as walking interviews and photovoice. The project makes important
contributions to urban political ecology, theories of water insecurity, and
environmental studies and inequality broadly within the fields of geography and
anthropology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.