* 2242636
* RAPID: Infrastructural Failures and the Role of the Built Environment: The Case of the Winter Storm in Houston, Texas
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,09/30/2023
* So-Min Cheong, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Daan Liang
* 09/30/2023
* USD 31,020.00

This Grants for Rapid Response Research (RAPID) project addresses the research
question of how the built environment – housing and neighborhood – impact the
susceptibility of older adults to infrastructure failures during the winter
storm in Houston, Texas. Extreme weather events can have life threatening
consequences for elder populations that are often more limited in mobility and
hence more likely to stay in and around their residences. These threats can
potentially be compounded by housing type and structure, neighborhood-scale
infrastructure, and amenities, especially when accompanied by critical
infrastructure failures such as power outages. Despite the significance of these
built environmental factors, their significance and impact on the vulnerable
population such as the older adult during disasters has not been examined
closely. The arctic waves that hit Texas in 2021 provide an opportunity to fill
these gaps and advance our understanding of how the built environment and
neighborhood characteristics can have compounding or mitigating consequences for
our elderly population’s vulnerabilities during extreme weather events. In
addition, project findings can serve as starting points for the development of
age-specific interventions, and potentially lead to the establishment of
programs to improve geriatric disaster response thereby supporting NSF's mission
of advancing the health, prosperity, and welfare of our nation’s
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, this RAPID project investigates
how elderly individuals were impacted based on single vs. multiple family
housing (single family attached and detached, multi-family under and over 5,
townhomes), housing qualities (insulation, ventilation, housing materials,
energy efficiency, heater availability), and neighborhood amenities (shelters,
generators, social service organizations, hospitals, transportation access,
street conditions, safety). The project will also examine local responses by the
government and social service organizations and their innovative solutions to an
unprecedented disaster. Project findings will contribute to advancing knowledge
on the role of housing types and structure as well as neighborhood-scale
infrastructure in disaster impact and response to extreme weather
events.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.