* 2242927
* RCN-UBE: Deepening and Expanding the Mission and Outcomes of the Re-Envisioning Culture Network
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Terrell Morton, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 09/30/2025
* USD 500,000.00

People who identify as Black are disproportionately underrepresented in the
number of undergraduate degrees awarded in the biological sciences. This has
implications for scientific innovations as it specifically relates to Black
people within the United States. This project thus strives to address challenges
with retaining and matriculating Black students in the biological sciences by
focusing on transforming the culture and context of undergraduate biology
teaching and learning. The work builds significantly on the existing Re-
Envisioning Culture Network through expanding membership, development of the
teaching and mentoring resources, fostering thinktanks to promote continued
investigations into innovative approaches, and supporting newly formed
collaborations that advance the network goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing
attempts to address the challenge with retaining and matriculating Black
students in undergraduate STEM education often propose solutions that focus on
either student or faculty development. While beneficial with helping Black
students obtain specific resources and opportunities, endeavors focused on
student development often fail to address structural and systemic forms of
oppression that both explicitly and implicitly impact Black students’ holistic
well-being and, thus their success. Though faculty development endeavors focus
on interpersonal and professional development that support inclusive or justice-
oriented teaching and mentoring, these endeavors often fail to provide tangible
resources and sustained infrastructure to ensure faculty members’ successful
implementation of said strategies within their classroom spaces. In recognizing
these challenges and their implications for Black science learners and the Black
community writ large, this project seeks to implement a new approach that
strives to transform the culture and context of undergraduate biology education
by situating biology teaching and learning within critical, strengths-based
frameworks of Blackness. Leveraging critical, strengths-based frameworks of
Blackness to create undergraduate biology curricula, lessons, assessments, and
teaching resources presents the opportunity to implement and examine the impact
that science content, classroom ethos, and pedagogical praxes have on Black
students’ success. This project will further investigate innovative ways to
address challenges with retaining and matriculating Black students by hosting
annual thinktanks and community strategizing endeavors. Lastly, this project
will facilitate the formation of new networks and collaborative endeavors that
advance research and teaching focused on centering Blackness onto-epistemologies
within science, technology, engineering, and mathematics teaching and learning.
This project is being jointly funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences,
Division of Biological Infrastructure, and the Directorate for Education and
Human Resources, Division of Undergraduate Education as part of their efforts to
address the challenges posed in Vision and Change in Undergraduate Biology
Education: A Call to Action
(http://visionandchange/finalreport/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.