* 2242581
* HNDS-R - Collaborative Research: An Integrated Analysis of the COVID-19 Crisis on Labor Market Outcomes and Mortality
* SBE,SES
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Till von Wachter, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 05/31/2026
* USD 779,475.00

This research tests an important labor market theory by evaluating the economic
and health impacts of unemployment insurance (UI) programs on workers across
communities before, during, and after the COVID-19 pandemic. The study will
assemble a large, detailed, and innovative data set over 20 years from several
sources for the empirical part of the project. The first part of the study
focuses on take-up rate of UI by various groups, the second part studies the
impact of the generosity of UI on labor supply, job stability, and several labor
market outcomes before, during and after the pandemic, while the third part
studies the effects of UI expansion on CODI-19 mortality rates among different
groups. The results of this research will substantially increase our
understanding of the effects of the UI program on individual, neighborhood, and
state-level actors, and help policymakers better respond to future recessions
and pandemics. The results of this research project will make significant
contributions to labor economics as well as contribute to better design of
unemployment insurance policies, hence help to establish the US as a global
leader in UI policies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project combines
several data sets and merges it with individual-level data for all covered
employees in California, over 20 years, that covers periods before, during, and
after the COVID-19 pandemic. This data infrastructure will then be used to
investigate three fundamental questions about unemployment insurance (UI)
program: how does worker, firm, neighborhood characteristics, and worker
interaction affect the take-up rate of UI programs by different groups; what is
the causal impact of UI on the cost and benefits on several outcomes, especially
on labor supply, employment stability, job mobility and earnings; and finally
the effects of UI on COVID-19 mortality. By answering these fundamental
questions about UI programs, this research project makes significant
contributions to labor economics and provides guidance on how to improve
unemployment insurance policies to make them more effective. The results could
also help improve labor market policies as well as help establish the US a
global leader in unemployment insurance innovation. The results of this study
will also substantially advance the literature in the fields of economics and
statistics, through improved measurement and implementation of new research
designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.