* 2242453
* Using Large-Scale Network Data to Measure Social Returns and Improve Targeting of Crime-Reduction Interventions
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Monica Bhatt, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 04/30/2025
* USD 347,793.00

Many randomized experiments have tested whether policies surrounding punishment,
work, and education can prevent criminal behavior. Evaluations of prevention
programs typically assume that one individual’s behavior does not affect anyone
else’s. If individuals exposed to crime intervention transmit their improvements
in skills, beliefs, or time use to their peers, ignoring these spillovers could
understate or alternatively overstate an intervention’s total impact. This
project will document how changes in criminal behavior spread through social
networks by combining four existing experiments with measures of social networks
derived from multiple sources of administrative data. It will quantify the
direct and indirect effects of these violence-reduction interventions on
participants and their peers. The results will generate a better understanding
of the overall effect of each program, as well as the role of peers in shaping
criminal decision-making more broadly. The project will provide actionable
information on how to effectively target crime prevention programs in the future
by describing whom program operators should serve to maximize net crime
reduction benefits. The results will also help to establish the US as global
leader in crime reducing policies. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will estimate the effects of social networks on crime intervention programs.
Estimating social spillovers faces two key challenges: measuring social networks
and causally identifying peer effects. This research addresses the first
challenge by combining population-wide administrative police and school records
in Chicago to capture different kinds of social connections. The PIs solve the
second challenge by combining the network information with exogenous variation
in crime and violence generated by four existing RCTs in Chicago, all focusing
on low income youth. Using these data, the PIs will construct the social network
between individuals at the time each intervention was randomly assigned. The
random variation from the RCTs will allow the PIs to test whether and how
treatment changes behavior—both via direct participation and via indirect
exposure to treated peers—as well as which types of social ties matter. The PIs
will test for heterogeneity in peer effects based on demographic, criminal
history, and network characteristics of individuals to help understand and model
how social interactions generate criminal decisions. Finally, the PIs will us
the model to evaluate alternative targeting strategies for future RCTs. The
results of this research project will provide important inputs into policies to
decrease crime and thus improve public safety in the US. The results will also
help to establish the US as global leader in crime reducing
policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.