* 2242094
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Preassembly Methods for Cognitive Diagnostic Multistage Adaptive Testing
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Jungwon Rachael Ahn, Fordham University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 02/29/2024
* USD 5,400.00

This doctoral dissertation research project will advance test preassembly
methods for Cognitive Diagnostic Multistage Adaptive Testing (CD-MST). This type
of computer-administered educational test identifies which skills students have
successfully learned with a short, yet reliable, test that is individualized for
each student. CD-MST with module preassembly allows test developers to review
the quality of test forms before test administration and provides detailed
diagnostic information about what topics students have mastered alongside an
evaluation of their achievements. However, only a few methods have been proposed
to preassemble tests in CD-MST. In addition, there are unique challenges when
using CD-MSTs when other constraints need to be met, such as ensuring that the
test provides an even balance of all content areas covered by the test. Current
methods require strict assumptions and cannot accommodate multiple test
constraints. The test development strategy to be developed in this project will
advance classroom assessment systems in which tests can serve as a part of
learning process rather than as a tool to rank students by learning outcomes.
Providing accurate, specific, and real-time feedback on multiple criteria for
each student is essential for effective learning and remedial instruction.
Classroom assessment systems that adopt this new test mode will provide short
adaptive tests throughout the year that instantly yield valid and reliable
personalized competency diagnoses aligned with educational standards. As a
Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, support is provided to enable
a promising student to establish a strong, independent research
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation research project will
develop a holistic Cognitive Diagnostic Multistage Adaptive Testing (CD-MST)
preassembly method that will simultaneously consider numerous types of test
constraints. To take full advantage of CD-MST, it is crucial to develop
preassembly methods that incorporate not only statistical constraints (e.g.,
maximizing reliability), but also content constraints (e.g., ensuring all
contents tested) without sacrificing estimation precision. Currently, most CD-
MST applications have employed on-the-fly CD-MST that assembles modules during
an in-progress test session. However, this approach may lead to difficulties in
ensuring different versions of equivalent tests and satisfying the non-
statistical constraints because the tests are assembled during the testing
session. The holistic method to be developed in this project will adapt methods
that have been previously proposed for somewhat different contexts: item
selection during an in-progress test session and preassembly for diagnostic
adaptive assessment. Simulation studies will be conducted to evaluate the
accuracy of the newly developed method. The following three questions will be
addressed: 1) Is the holistic CD-MST preassembly method computationally
feasible? 2) How well does the holistic CD-MST preassembly method perform across
different cognitive diagnostic models and test lengths? 3) How does the
performance of a holistic CD-MST preassembly method change with multiple content
constraints? The feasibility and performance of the holistic method will be
evaluated in terms of the number of constraints violated, examinee
classification accuracy (i.e., whether examinees are found to have the skill set
that they actually have), the proportion of the item pool used, and the
distribution of examinees classifications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.