* 2242036
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Transitional Justice and State Intervention in Kinship
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Clara Han, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 02/29/2024
* USD 25,199.00

The relationship between governments and families has long been complex. There
is significant variation across contexts in the extent to which and in what ways
states govern what constitutes a family and the limits imposed on family
activities. This doctoral dissertation research project leverages transitional
justice as a way of querying how families respond to changes in governmental
policies regulating their structures and functions. It complements research that
attempts to understand why governments regulate kinship by focusing instead on
how families respond to governmental interventions and policies. Specifically,
this research contributes to social scientific theories that relate kinship to
the state by focusing on the survivor familiesâ€™ experiences of transitional
justice procedures. In addition to supporting the training of a graduate
student, the findings of this research are disseminated broadly to academic,
non-academic, and stakeholder audiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transitional
justice offers an opportunity to understand how state adjudication of past
familial grievances impacts family relationships and activities. In this
context, this doctoral dissertation research poses the following questions: 1)
How do transitional justice courts decide which families' grievances are merited
and what evidence do they muster to support decisions? 2) How are family
relationships and activities affected by government decisions regarding claims
of familial grievances? To answer these questions, the investigators conduct a
multi-sited ethnographic study involving semi-structured interviews, participant
observation, and archival analysis. In so doing, this doctoral research
contributes to social science studies on the relationships between states and
families by providing more nuanced theory via interrogation of these
relationships in contexts marked by violence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.