* 2242365
* Collaborative Research: The role of temporally varying specific storage on confined aquifer dynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2024,12/31/2026
* Ryan Smith, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Hendratta Ali
* 12/31/2026
* USD 328,981.00

Access to clean drinking water continues to be a growing concern as climate
change, population growth and industrialization increase the prevalence of water
scarcity. In response to dwindling surface water supply, many regions turn to
water from porous rocks or sediments known as aquifers that hold most of the
world’s liquid freshwater. Confined aquifers, which are typically deep and
pressurized, hold the majority of freshwater in the world’s aquifers. Predicting
whether water storage in a confined aquifer will increase, decrease, or remain
constant given variations in human activity such as pumping, and climate change
is critical for preserving aquifers for future use, but has been challenging to
estimate. Changes in confined aquifer storage are typically estimated by a
parameter known as storativity, which is obtained by multiplying changes in
water levels measured in wells. In this project, the researchers will determine
how storativity changes over space and time, and how accurate estimation of
storativity can help scientists and engineers to accurately estimate aquifer
storage, and improve our ability to effectively manage groundwater use.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In confined aquifers, storativity can vary significantly
over time, leading to inaccurate predictions in traditional groundwater models
if the storativity is assumed constant. The compaction of clay layers, which can
be observed from satellites, causes changes in storativity. If clays are
present, assuming that storativity is constant can lead to overly optimistic
estimates of aquifer recharge which, if implemented in management practices,
could result in rapid aquifer depletion. In this research, the investigators
will develop groundwater models for the Parowan Valley in Utah, a region with
well-constrained groundwater use, and that shares similarities with other high-
use aquifers of the world. They will develop two types of models, (1)
traditional models that assume constant storativity, and (2) more robust models
that allow storativity to vary with time and compare the model performance
against well measurements and satellite data. Through this research, scientists
will quantify the effect that time-varying storativity has on aquifer storage,
and contribute to improving estimates of recharge and aquifer parameters such as
hydraulic conductivity. During the project, they will collaborate and work with
community stakeholders, and train graduate and undergraduate students in both
research and science communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.