* 2242904
* Tracking sodium in Earths deep mantle
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Susannah Dorfman, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 07/31/2026
* USD 456,134.00

Sodium is concentrated in regions of the Earth where fluids cycle within the
planet as well as in oceanic crust sinking and mixing into the mantle. Because
sodium affects melting of rocks and increases electrical conductivity of fluids,
its chemistry at high pressures and temperatures of Earth’s interior is
important to understanding deep Earth carbon and water cycles. This study will
observe the quantity and mineral forms of sodium in the Earth’s largest layer,
the lower mantle. Experiments and computer simulations will test sodium storage
in the most abundant oxide mineral in the planet, which has the same atomic
structure as rock salt. The project will support training for a graduate student
and undergraduate assistant and a partnership with the MSU Museum to produce,
present, and evaluate modular exhibits on salt geology and crystal structures
for a public audience.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The host phase and capacity for
sodium in Earth’s mantle are important for modeling deep Earth cycles of
essential volatiles and reading the mantle record of plate tectonics. (Mg,Fe)O
ferropericlase may be the major host for sodium in Earth’s interior. Systematic
experiments using laser-heated diamond anvil cells will measure the
concentration of sodium in (Mg,Fe)O under sodium-saturated conditions and in
equilibrium with the other major lower mantle phases bridgmanite and/or
davemaoite. Complementary density functional theory calculations will test the
relative favorability of mechanisms for dissolving sodium in lower mantle
phases. In combination these methods will be used to determine the dominant
lower-mantle host phase for sodium and the seismic properties of Na-bearing
lower mantle. Improved constraints on the high-pressure mineralogy of sodium can
be applied to update thermodynamic and geophysical modeling of the mantle for
more accurate determination of mantle composition and heterogeneity. The
incorporation of archetypal alkali metal sodium into (Mg,Fe)O oxide will also
produce insights into systematics of salts and bonding at high
pressure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.