* 2242467
* Excellence in Research: Spontaneous Nucleation Strategy for High-Quality Perovskite Films
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Qilin Dai, Jackson State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 05/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solar energy is believed to be one of
the most promising renewable energies to solve the energy crisis problem because
it is clean, free, and has no carbon emissions. Solar cells can convert sunlight
directly to electricity to power electronic devices by the photovoltaic effect.
Currently, state-of-the-art solar energy conversion technologies, for example,
silicon solar cells cannot meet the requirements of low cost and high energy
conversion efficiency to enable broad use. Alternatively, perovskite solar cells
(PSCs) represent a family of promising photovoltaic systems for low-cost and
high energy conversion efficiency. To date, PSCs have achieved a certified power
conversion efficiency of 25.7% since 2009. The perovskite films are
predominantly prepared by the antisolvent-assisted method. The antisolvent-
assisted method is not suitable for practical applications in terms of high
reproducibility, large-scale production, and large-size devices. This Excellence
in Research (EiR) project addresses the use of volatile solvents to prepare
high-efficiency perovskite solar cells by a non-antisolvent method. The proposed
research method exhibits significant potential in the fabrication of high-
quality perovskite films because the film growth is caused by solvent
volatilization via a spontaneously and simultaneously supersaturated nucleation
strategy. This project will provide a critical understanding of the perovskite
precursor prepared and adjusted by volatile solvents and additives to control
the high-quality perovskite film growth via a non-antisolvent method. This
project will also study the relationship between solvent-solute chemistry and
PSC device performance in the non-antisolvent method.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This EiR project,
based on adjustable perovskite film growth by non-antisolvent methods and
advanced characterization techniques, will provide insights into tailoring the
solute-solvent chemistry in crystal growth in the presence of volatile solvents
and develop perovskite film growth principles by non-antisolvent methods. The
proposed investigations will provide the bridge between film growth and cell
performance comprehensively including chemistry bonding, coordination,
nucleation and growth, and cell performance. This project will 1) Probe the
iodoplumbates evolution during the precursor preparation and perovskite crystal
nucleation process during the solvent volatilization and investigate the
relationship between iodoplumbates, solvents, and additives in the solution. 2)
Investigate film growth in terms of film coverage, thickness, defects, cracks,
and pinholes as a function of solvent volatilization, precursor aging, and
iodoplumbate coordination complexes. 3) Study the phase transition from wet
films to solid perovskite films and the photovoltaic properties of the
perovskite films. 4) Optimize the oriented perovskite crystal growth toward high
quality, few defects, large grains, large area, and high reproducibility films.
This project will lead to a revolution of perovskite film fabrication by non-
antisolvent methods via solute-solvent interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.