* 2242866
* Collaborative Research: Combined Tribological and Bactericidal Effect of Bioinjectable Nanodiamonds on Biological Joints
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Diana Berman, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 05/31/2024
* USD 101,896.00

Collaborative Research: Combined Tribological and Bactericidal Effect of
Bioinjectable Nanodiamonds on Biological Joints&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:
&lt;br/&gt;PART 1: NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Osteoarthritis is
a common condition that affects the joints, especially those in the hips and
knees. As people age, the cartilage in their joints can break down, causing
pain, stiffness, and reduced mobility. This makes performing everyday
activities, like walking, climbing stairs, and even getting out of a chair, very
difficult. Although there are treatments available for osteoarthritis, like oral
pain medication and injections, they only provide temporary relief and do not
cure the disease. As a result, surgery that replaces the damaged joint with an
artificial one could be the only viable option. However, this surgery is a very
difficult procedure that requires a lengthy recovery period and carries
additional risks for seniors with underlying health conditions. Use of
nanoparticles can potentially help in treating the early stages of tissue
failures but there is a lack of knowledge about their interactions with
biological tissues. That is why the goal of this project is to understand the
processes happening upon nanoparticles contacting heathy and damaged tissues.
The researchers propose to focus on diamond nanoparticles as a controlled system
of study. The project will focus on understanding the mechanisms of interactions
of these tiny particles with biological tissues and immune cell. In addition to
the research itself, this project also aims to provide educational opportunities
for students in the fields of materials science, biomedical engineering, and
surface science. By engaging more students, especially women and minorities, the
project will create a more diverse and inclusive scientific community, enabling
new discoveries and innovations in the STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PART 2: TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;In
the early stages of osteoarthritis, the cartilage in the joints breaks down and
the joint becomes inflamed, leading to pain and reduced mobility. One of the
major challenges preventing the development of effective osteoarthritis
treatment is the lack of understanding how the different mechanical,
biochemical, and cellular processes within the joint interact with each other.
This project aims to address this challenge by studying how diamond
nanoparticles interact with joint cells and tissues to reduce damage and
inflammation. The researchers will examine the effects of diamond nanoparticles
on biological tissues and how they impact cell health as a function of the
surface functionalization. The functionalized nanodiamonds will be analyzed for
their ability to stay dispersed in body fluids and to escape macrophage attack
to establish the correlation between the functionalization and the
biocompatibility potential. Acquiring this essential knowledge will aid in
comprehending the interactions between nanomaterials and biological cells, which
will have a significant broader impact on the advancement of nanoparticle-based
treatments and therapies. This will be particularly useful for treating joint-
related conditions such as osteoarthritis, leading to decreased pain, improved
mobility, and the prevention of further joint damage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.