* 2242907
* Closing Critical Knowledge Gaps in Rates of CO2 Mineralization in Soils, Rocks, and Aquifers as a Scalable Climate Change Mitigation Solution
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Chen Zhu, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 06/30/2026
* USD 736,412.00

Currently, numerous start-up companies, large corporations, and government- or
non-government-organization-sponsored research and pilot projects are diligently
investigating the feasibility of turning carbon dioxide into carbonate minerals
(carbon mineralization) as a climate mitigation strategy. Carbon dioxide can be
mineralized by spreading mineral and rock powders onto croplands, forests, and
oceans, injecting carbon dioxide into basalt and sedimentary aquifers, and mine
tailings. Scaling-up these options globally can potentially capture and store
billions of tons of carbon dioxide per year. However, as a 2021 US long-term
strategy report [1] stated, techniques of “… enhanced mineralization, are still
in nascent stages of research and development, so the potential magnitude of
reductions and the timeframes over which these technologies might deliver
reductions is unknown.” Currently, there are knowledge gaps in the basic science
of carbon mineralization rates, the resolution of which is critical to
discovering cost-effective carbon-dioxide-water-mineral interaction-based
climate mitigation options. This research project meets this urgent societal
need by both filling the knowledge gaps in geochemical reaction rates and
mechanisms in multi-mineral systems and disseminating geochemical kinetics and
modeling knowledge. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To acheive these science objectives,
this project will carry out multiple isotope tracer (Si, K, Sr, Ca, Mg, Fe, K C
isotopes) experiments for crushed basalts to determine the coupling of mineral
dissolution and precipitation reactions. Additionally, the researchers will
perform innovative geochemical simulations to interpret the experimental results
using an ensemble of models and evaluate model uncertainties. To meet the
broader impact objective, researchers will leverage the national computational
infrastructure and internet-based delivery technologies for training a diverse
workforce for a carbon-neutral economy. A geochemical modeling web portal will
be built to deliver modeling tools and databases as well as virtual short
courses and online lessons for thermodynamics, geochemical modeling, and
kinetics. This open science approach makes geochemical sciences accessible to
all regardless of socioeconomic status and encourages unselfish cooperation from
all sectors and all parts of the world for achieving the common goal of meeting
the challenges of global climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;[1] US Government,
“The Long-Term Strategy of the United States: Pathways to Net-Zero Greenhouse
Gas Emissions by 2050” (2021); https://www.whitehouse.gov/wp-
content/uploads/2021/10/US-Long-Term-Strategy.pdf&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.