* 2242455
* Spatial Unit Roots
* SBE,SES
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Ulrich Mueller, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 03/31/2026
* USD 201,690.00

When data series, such as inflation or unemployment rates are highly correlated
over time, it is difficult to establish the direction of causation. Not
accounting for such high correlation over time leads to wrong conclusions.
Economists have therefore developed methods to correct for such correlation when
drawing conclusions from data that are highly correlated over time. There are no
methods to correct for strong correlation among economic variables that are
measured at different locations, such as income, housing prices, or crime rates,
across different US commuting zones. This research develops new methods to
correct for strong correlation among economic variables across space to help
researchers make correct inference. The research develops a formal framework to
study such effects, derives tests to detect strong spatial correlation, and
suggest methods to restore valid conclusions from strongly correlated spatial
data. Since strongly correlated spatial data is quite common, this research
could have important implications for how to draw correct empirical conclusions
in the social sciences and beyond. The results of this research will improve
policy making that involves consideration of space, such as housing and crime
policies in US urban areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research uses four
projects to investigate the consequences of "unit root"-type strong spatial
dependence. The suggested methods echo corresponding concepts and results in the
time series literature: The project suggests a model for general spatial "unit-
root"-type I(1) processes; it then establishes a Functional Central Limit
Theorem justifying a large sample Gaussian process approximation for such I(1)
processes. The I(1) model is then generalized to a spatial "local-to-unity"
model that exhibits long-range, stationary dependence as well as characterize
the large sample behavior of regression inference with spatial I(1) variables
and establish that spurious regression is as much a problem with spatial I(1)
data as it is with time series I(1) data. Finally, the research develops
asymptotically valid spatial unit root and stationarity tests, inference for the
local-to-unity parameter, and suggest strategies for obtaining valid inference
in regressions with persistent (I(1) or local-to-unity) spatial processes.
Besides contributions to the econometrics literature, the results of this
research will improve policy making, especially urban policies, where spatial
dependence tends to be very strong. The results will also help establish the US
as a global leader in spatial econometrics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.