* 2242163
* Collaborative Research: Submesoscale frontal dynamics and exchange at an upwelling bay
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Thomas Connolly, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 08/31/2026
* USD 405,733.00

This study will examine physical processes associated with fronts that develop
off a coastline point in San Luis Obispo Bay, at the transition of zones exposed
to and protected from winds. Information for the study will be derived from
measurements of flows, temperature, salinity, and dissolved oxygen obtained from
instruments carried on a ship and fixed to the bottom of the ocean. These data
will be supplemented by computer model results at different spatial scales, able
to resolve the fronts. Additionally, the processes at fronts will be compared to
theoretical considerations. The study will suggest ecological implications of
the physical processes that generate and dissipate the fronts. The project will
support early-career scientists and will recruit historically underserved
students. It will generate graphic art related to the project’s findings that
will be displayed in an aquarium and used for outreach activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work has the goal of examining cross-shelf
submesoscale exchange processes associated with persistent thermal fronts
downstream of topographic features in an upwelling bay, concentrating on the
influence of sea breezes. The goal will be addressed with coordinated high-
resolution measurements of turbulent mixing (surveys and moorings of
hydrography, velocity and microstructure profiles) together with high-resolution
modeling efforts. The study focuses on a frontal feature in a bay, San Luis
Obispo Bay, that is impacted by hypoxia and algal blooms. Biologically relevant
measurements (notably DO) will enable examination of the biological implications
of the proposed cross-front exchange mechanism. The primary dynamical mechanism
that will be evaluated at the cross-front exchange is the role, and validity, of
the turbulent thermal wind balance. As broader impacts, the study will involve
four researchers from different institutions. It will provide measurements of
dissolved oxygen and will include particle-tracking calculations for larval
connectivity. The project will support two early-career researchers, will adopt
a field code-of-conduct and will recruit students from ‘diverse non-PhD granting
institutions.’ Results will be portrayed in graphic art with descriptions in
English and Spanish, to be included in a local aquarium and used in various
outreach efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.