* 2242447
* Regularization for Nonlinear Panel Models, Estimation of Heterogeneous Taxable Income Elasticities, and Conditional Influence Functions
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Whitney Newey, National Bureau of Economic Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 04/30/2025
* USD 195,660.00

Individual wants (preferences) and abilities may partly determine prices or tax
rates. The resulting simultaneous changes in prices (or taxes) and preferences
make it difficult to estimate policy effects of tax or price changes. Panel
data, which are repeated observations on individual agents, can help isolate
policy effects of price (or tax) changes. If prices change over time while
preferences are stable then variation in choices over time can be attributed to
price changes. The proposed research will use three projects to develop panel
data methods to estimate the effect of price and tax rate changes on economic
outcomes and welfare. One project will use big data methods to flexibly model
the relationship between preferences and prices while imposing few constraints.
The results will be applied to estimate welfare effects of price changes. The
second project will estimate a panel data model of taxable income choice given
the tax schedule that allows more general heterogeneity than in previous work.
This approach will be applied for tax policy evaluation. The third project will
develop new methods that can be used to check sensitivity of results from other
projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With panel data, the distribution of
individual preferences given prices (or tax rates) in all time periods is an
important, unknown nuisance function that is high dimensional when the number of
time periods T is moderate or large. However, time invariance of individual
preferences restricts the size of coefficients needed to approximate the
nuisance function, suggesting that restricting the size of the coefficients
could be useful in practice. The proposed research will use such restrictions to
estimate panel data models for moderate to large T. Also, the elasticity of
taxable income (ETI) with respect to the net of tax rate is a key parameter for
predicting the effect of tax reform and designing income taxes. Recent evidence
points to substantial heterogeneity in the ETI across individuals. The proposed
research will use panel data to estimate and analyze individual specific ETI’s.
The proposed research will also develop and analyze conditional influence
functions. This work will extend influence function analysis to estimate local
sensitivity and construct estimating equations that can be used in debiased
machine learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.