* 2242282
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Dissecting Piece Rate: Evidence from a Natural Experiment in a Garment Factory
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2023,08/31/2023
* Alex Zhou, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Kwabena Gyimah-Brempong
* 08/31/2023
* USD 14,792.00

Piece-rate wage system is a popular payment mechanism in the manufacturing
sector, but some employers find it difficult to switch to this system for many
reasons. While theoretical work argues that piece-rate wage motivates individual
worker effort, it is unclear whether switching from a fixed-wage to piece-rate
wage system increases overall worker productivity since piece rates affect labor
productivity through multiple channels that may conflict with each other. This
research project takes advantage of an on-going process of change from a fixed
wage to a piece-rate wage system in one garment manufacturing plant to study the
effects of piece-rate wage on productivity. The researchers will study how
piece-rate wage payment system affects productivity through increased
performance monitoring, motivation of individual efforts, as well as recruitment
and retention of more productive workers. The innovative research design will
allow the researchers to unbundle the separate effect of each productivity
changing mechanism. The results of this research will guide US businesses on how
to implement wage systems that reward productivity, hence increase economic
growth and improve the well-being of citizens.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This DDRIG research project will leverage the
introduction of piece-rate wage system in a garment factory to study whether
piece-rate wage system increases overall labor productivity relative to a fixed
wage system and if so, the mechanisms through which these labor productivity
changes occur. The factory will implement two interventions---performance-based
wage scheme and a worker monitoring system. The implementation of these
interventions is staggered, and this staggered roll-out allows the PIs to
distinguish the mechanisms---increase monitoring, motivation of individual
workers, or recruitment and retention of highly productive workers---through
which performance-based wages affect labor productivity. Turnover and
heterogeneous treatment of performance-based wages will allow the PIs to analyze
sorting of workers into different performance groups. The results of this
research will guide US businesses on how to implement wage systems that rewards
productivity, hence increase economic growth and improve the well-being of
citizens.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.