* 2242394
* DDRIG in DRMS: The Impact of Normative Influence on Competitive Framing of Risks on Social Media
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2024
* Katherine McComas, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Robert O'Connor
* 03/31/2024
* USD 50,494.00

Social media contains an abundance of misinformation on about risk issues that
can disproportionately harm vulnerable populations. Competing information can
create uncertainty, leading people to turn to available social cues to form risk
judgments and make decisions. This research revolves around two questions: (1)
To what extent do social norms reflected in user comments shape risk attitudes
and behaviors in competitive information environments? (2) To what extent do
dynamic norms in risk messages pre-empt or counter the effects of
misinformation, even more so than social norms in user comments? The findings
offer risk regulators valuable insights on how to craft risk messages that can
cut through the clutter of misinformation to promote pro-social
outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers investigate these questions using
two survey experiments that integrate research on competitive framing and social
norms. Competitive framing research has primarily focused on how individual
perceptions (e.g., cognition and emotion) influence persuasive outcomes, but
there is limited understanding of the role of social perceptions on outcomes.
Given that social media are inherently social in nature, social perceptions are
central to this work. The research also explores the impact of dynamic norms,
which highlight the change in a minority behavior over time, thus departing from
conventional social norms research that focuses on static norms (e.g.,
description of prevalent or socially approved behavior). The intellectual merit
of this research lies in advancing knowledge about the underlying mechanism of
social perception influencing risk judgments and decisions in competitive
information environments. It also illuminates the relative impact of dynamic
norms compared to static norms and the role of minority influence on risk
attitudes and behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.