* 2242696
* Understanding the mechanistic origins and evolution of gene body DNA methylation
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Robert Schmitz, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 06/30/2026
* USD 880,000.00

DNA methylation is a fundamental feature of eukaryotic genomes. The primary
studied role of DNA methylation relates to its role in inactivating gene
expression. However, DNA methylation is also found in the bodies of a subset of
expressed genes and how this DNA methylation originates at these genes and its
exact function is unknown. It is curious that gene body DNA methylation exists
in these expressed genes, which points to possible new roles for DNA methylation
independent of gene regulation. This project will support training of
undergraduate, graduate and postdoctoral researchers in both experimental and
computational biology. The graduate students will also participate in mentoring
high-school summer intern students from the Young Dawgs program sponsored by the
University of Georgia. This award will also support a graduate course in
research communications and professional development taken by graduate students
in the Department of Genetics at the University of Georgia. Multiple outside
speakers that have pursued scientific careers outside of academia will be
invited to this class to present their career path and spend the entire day
interacting with graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to understand the molecular basis for the origins of gene body DNA
methylation using plants as model systems. We discovered that gene body DNA
methylation has been lost in Eutrema salsugineum. The loss of gene body DNA
methylation was accompanied by the loss of CHROMOMETHYLASE 3 (CMT3), a DNA
methyltransferase that maintains heterochromatin associated DNA methylation.
This discovery was independently validated in multiple independent plant species
suggesting that CMT3 is important to the origins and maintenance of gene body
DNA methylation. Our previous work showed the expression of Arabidopsis thaliana
CMT3 led to ectopic methylation at a subset of genes leading us to hypothesize
that machinery required for maintenance of heterochromatin also functions in
gene bodies in euchromatin. In this proposal, we will explore the role of the
histone modification H3K9me2 and small RNAs in the establishment of gene body
DNA methylation. We will also investigate the evolutionary conservation and the
role of an H3K9 demethylase in sensing genome-wide levels of heterochromatin and
shaping gene body DNA methylation patterns. These lines of query will help us
establish the mechanistic origins of gene body DNA methylation, and potential
expression-independent functions of DNA methylation in
eukaryotes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.