* 2242205
* HNDS-R: Understanding Drivers of Trust in Cryptocurrency Using Big Data and Ethnographic Approaches
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Ameeta Agrawal, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Siobhan Mattison
* 08/31/2026
* USD 362,517.00

The cryptocurrency market represents an increasing share of global economic
markets, yet is considerably more volatile. This volatility is shaped in part by
the trust that cryptocurrency users place in the cryptocurrency market.
Accordingly, crises in cryptocurrency markets offer critical windows for
understanding relationships between trust, markets, and regulatory actions. This
project leverages crises and recoveries in cryptocurrency markets to investigate
impacts on the levels of and underlying rationales for adjusting trust based on
market dynamics. Project investigators attend to important variation across
stakeholders and disseminate research findings broadly to policymakers,
regulators, industry professionals, and scientists. The project also provides
training for undergraduate and graduate students in scientific methods of data
collection and analysis and includes underrepresented students and scholars in
scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project tests several non-mutually
exclusive hypotheses that suggest that trust can be maintained i) when
perturbations in cryptocurrency markets are seen as acute versus long-term, ii)
when investments are seen as more versus less game-like, iii) when participation
in communities facilitate trust; and iv) due to variation in underlying beliefs
in cryptocurrency market systems. A unique collaboration between anthropologists
and researchers in technology management and computer science is leveraged to
synthesize theory and method to motivate cutting-edge analyses of large-scale
data capturing broad and deep relationships between trust and stated
cryptocurrency market involvement. Specifically, the investigators combine big
data methods, using natural language processing analysis of social media data
surrounding catastrophic market downturns, with ethnographic methods, including
netnography, participant observation, surveys and interviews. Such longitudinal
analyses provide unique insights into the ways trust in market systems shift
over time and in relation to individual characteristics and broader regulatory
scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.