* 2242211
* Calcium Carbonate Dissolution Mechanisms in the Ocean
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Jess Adkins, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Henrietta Edmonds
* 03/31/2026
* USD 636,362.00

The rate at which calcium carbonate dissolves in seawater is an important piece
of the ocean carbon cycle. It is a key factor in the oceansâ€™ ability to absorb
fossil fuel carbon dioxide. It is also important to understanding and predicting
ocean acidification and may play a role in new technologies to curb climate
change. Despite this importance, a great deal remains uncertain about the
mechanism and rate of calcium carbonate dissolution. This project will conduct
laboratory experiments using new methods to study calcium carbonate dissolution
at several different conditions. The project will support two early-career
investigators including a graduate student. Results will be shared with the
public, including through support of an animation artist.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In previous work, this team and their collaborators have
made several improvements to our understanding of the carbonate dissolution rate
law in the ocean. Using a novel carbon isotope tracer technique in the lab, and
in situ in the water column, they can measure the dissolution rate 20-200x more
sensitively than other techniques. This is especially true near equilibrium
where rates are slow, but also where most of the ocean resides. Their previous
work demonstrated that the rate law has two critical thresholds between three
separate modes of surface dissolution mechanisms: near equilibrium, dissolution
proceeds as the advance of step edges; with further undersaturation, the free
energy in solution opens fast-dissolving etch pits at lattice defects in the
solid; furthest from equilibrium, etch pits begin to form homogeneously on the
2-D solid surface leading to maximal dissolution rates. However, understanding
of the full chemical control on the rate law, and its interplay with these
surface energetic features has yet to be determined. This project will seek to
experimentally and theoretically constrain the mechanism behind the rate law for
marine carbonate dissolution. The saturation state will be systematically
changed as a function of other aspects of the chemistry to test the elementary
reactions that have been successfully used for years to describe dissolution in
freshwaters. The saturation state will be varied over a range of sulfate
concentrations, calcium/carbonate ratios, and magnesium/calcium ratios in
independent experiments. Both the initial time dependence of the raw data, and
SIMS microprobe profiles of the experimental solids will allow determination of
the gross precipitation and gross dissolution rates in conjunction with the net
rate constraints from slopes of dissolved carbon isotope ratios produced versus
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.