* 2243822
* NRT-HDR: Computational Research for Equity in the Legal System" (CRELS)
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Philip Stark, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 06/30/2028
* USD 3,000,000.00

The criminal legal system is an important driver of inequities and social and
economic polarization, and legal institutions are at the leading edge of use –
and misuse – of artificial intelligence. The increasing availability of “big
data” from (and about) criminal legal systems – and the people who are enmeshed
in them – provides a new opportunity to illuminate inequities and their sources.
This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to the
University of California, Berkeley will develop novel interventions to reduce
inequities and their resulting harms in criminal legal systems. New scientific
knowledge will be generated through the development of tools for large-scale,
"human-in-the-loop" analysis of criminal justice data, and will be used in the
generation of new insights regarding legal system processes, impacts, and
institutions. Faculty and trainees will collaborate across disciplines to
simultaneously address social-science and policy questions regarding equity and
criminal legal institutions, the development of tools and methods for leveraging
newly available data from the criminal legal system, and ethical and social
implications of big data and AI in the context of criminal justice. This NRT
will train a new generation of researchers interested in computational
approaches to equity and legal systems, enabling them to develop and evaluate
public policy solutions that can mitigate social and economic polarization. It
will also train a diverse workforce with flexible and transferrable
computational skills, while also training social and data scientists in ethical
AI and its social implications. It will create a transformative, cross-
disciplinary model for graduate training at Berkeley and elsewhere, while also
developing a broad-based recruiting and mentoring program to enhance training of
students from underrepresented groups, which, in turn, helps to diversify the
STEM workforce. The project anticipates training 50 PhD students, including 25
funded trainees, from the Social Sciences, Computer Science, and Statistics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent public and policy interest in the criminal legal
system coupled with new government efforts to make data public and leverage data
for public policy creates new opportunities to study the criminal legal system,
but only if such data can be made ready for analysis. The criminal legal system
is critical terrain for evaluating how pervasive data collection and algorithmic
decision-making can be brought into the service of society, while addressing
potent challenges that can accompany these approaches. Big data and AI can give
us broader and more precise knowledge of the dynamics of social systems and hold
potential to increase transparency and support fairer decision-making. At the
same time, areas relating to criminal justice have seen a massive expansion of
surveillance, data production and reuse, and algorithmic decision-making often
without oversight, recourse, or evidence about effectiveness in addressing
underlying issues. Data technologies in criminal justice have grounded new
social schema of classification and accompanying social hierarchies – from
recidivism risk scores to predictive policing – with important implications for
opportunity and life chances. Our goal is to develop tools for continuous
ingestion, integration, and cleaning of structured and unstructured data, and
the analysis of such data. Using a combination of large pre-trained AI models
coupled with data management and human-computer interaction techniques, we will
develop tools to ingest information from various government and online sources,
turning it into structured data for analysis. These efforts will lead to novel
and generalizable tools for semi-autonomous and continuous data processing, as
well as integration at scale, that also preserves privacy and promotes
equity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.