* 2243854
* REU Site: Summer Undergraduate Mathematics Research at Kansas State University
* MPS,DMS
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2026
* Dinh-Liem Nguyen, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 02/28/2026
* USD 323,546.00

This award supports the renewal of an REU Site in pure and applied mathematics
at Kansas State University. This summer research program hosts ten undergraduate
students per year for eight weeks. Students conduct original research on a
variety of topics in pure and applied mathematics, and publish results in peer
reviewed mathematics journals when possible. In addition, the program offers
professional development activities, including workshops in mathematical
typesetting and presentation tools, training in computational tools as needed to
work on the projects, and talks by philosophy faculty on logic, mathematical
epistemology and ethics. The REU program includes a student-organized mini
conference. Social activities are coordinated with other REU sites on the Kansas
State University campus. The recruitment plan emphasizes community colleges,
Historically Black Colleges, minority-serving institutions, and regional liberal
arts colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants in this REU site work on
problems in the areas of complex analysis, computational imaging, topology, and
number theory. Professional development components of the program include
workshops on mathematics presentation tools as well as computational tools such
as MATLAB and Python programming. The program is committed to promoting
participation of women, under-represented minorities and economically
disadvantaged individuals, and refers a number of students to become Math
Alliance scholars. Past participants in this renewal REU site have published the
outcomes of work done during the program in research journals in the topical
areas described above.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by
the Division of Mathematical Sciences Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) Sites Program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.