* 2243678
* I-Corps: Magnetic steering and tracking for minimally invasive medical procedures
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2023
* Hamidreza Marvi, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of technology that enables a vast variety of surgical/interventional
procedures including intra-vascular/airways/GI tract and intra-tissue/organ
procedures with minimal tissue damage and without any exposure to radiation. In
particular, magnetic steering can be used in all medical procedures that involve
needles or catheters such as biopsy, stent placement, balloon angioplasty, and
microelectrode array placement in the brain. The tracking system can also be
used along with any tethered medical device. In addition, this technology will
benefit patients through eliminating human error and shorter waitlists;
interventional surgeons through eliminating radiation exposure, improving
catheter/needle manipulation, and enabling real-time, high-resolution, 3D
tracking; and hospitals through reducing chances of adverse events and lawsuits
and catching up to the demand. Thus, this system is a fit for the interventional
surgical robot market as it addresses the pain points of the customers, end-
users, and patients. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of technology to improve catheter/needle steerability while
eliminating the need for X-ray imaging and radiation exposure. The novelty of
the magnetic steering technology is in replacing the conventional mechanical
pushing with a magnetic pulling mechanism that significantly improves controlled
tip placement and steering in the difficult-to-reach areas in the body.
Moreover, there is no need for a load-bearing needle shaft and it can be made of
arbitrarily soft materials. This, in turn, eliminates the excessive tissue
damage and enables the steering of the catheter/needle on high-curvature 3D
paths and accessing locations that are not accessible with current robotic
technologies. In addition, the current technology for tracking steerable
surgical tools in interventional procedures is X-ray fluoroscopy which suffers
from excessive radiation exposure and the inability to capture the image of soft
tissues. The proposed tracking system is designed to directly address these pain
points. Besides, the tracking system contributes to the stability of the
magnetic pulling mechanism by restraining the deployment speed of the
catheter/needle. Thus, the proposed technology significantly improves the state-
of-the-art catheter/needle steering and tracking and directly addresses the pain
points of conventional technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.