* 2243981
* Collaborative Research: REU Site: Advancing Data-Driven Deep Coupling of Computational Simulations and Experiments
* CSE,OAC
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Xiaokun Yang, University of Houston - Clear Lake
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 04/30/2026
* USD 46,706.00

This project establishes a Research Experiences for Undergraduate (REU) site at
Washington State University Vancouver and University of Houston Clear Lake. The
REU site hosts a diverse cohort of ten undergraduate students across the nation
per year for three years to participate in various research projects on
developing and optimizing data-driven and data-intensive scientific workflows
used for arrhythmia detection, intelligent monitoring of health behavior, cancer
cell detection. The REU site provides an excellent platform for undergraduate
students to gain new insights into and potential interests in high-performance
computing (HPC) and data-intensive workflows. The project informs a generation
of teaching modules on various aspects related to scientific data analysis,
large-scale simulation in mechanical engineering, and optimization of HPC
systems. The REU site provides underrepresented students, from community
colleges, primarily undergraduate institutions, and Hispanic-serving
institutions, opportunities to gain experience in interdisciplinary research
from a group of researchers representing different races, genders, and
cultures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Data-intensive workflows (i.e., scientific
workflows) are widely used in most data-driven research disciplines today, often
exploiting rich and diverse data resources and parallel and distributed
computing platforms. In the proposed summer research program, undergraduate
students participate a variety of projects focusing on various aspects of
developing data-intensive and data-dependent scientific workflows, from their
use as a technique to analyze and process large-scale, real-world data from HPC
applications to investigating the underlying computer software and hardware
support for accelerating the execution of those workflows. The REU site focuses
on real-world scientific problems, including flow simulations for managing large
wind farms, droplet ejection modeling for advanced manufacture, microfluidic
cancer cell detection in liquid biopsy. The site activities include students
training on using data-driven approaches (e.g., machine learning, advanced
system software, and emerging hardware) to address the big data issues in the
study of these scientific research problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.