* 2243431
* Catalyzing STEM Education: Bringing K-12 Educators, College STEM and Education Faculty together to recruit, prepare, and retain future STEM educators
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Kathleen DaBoll-Lavoie, Nazareth College of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Julio Soto
* 03/31/2024
* USD 74,979.00

The project aims to serve the national need of building capacity in preparing
high-quality science and math teachers in high-need districts. In many
districts, there is a high percentage of teachers who teach outside of their
subject area. While the demand for people with STEM backgrounds in the workforce
is increasing, the number of college students pursuing STEM teacher preparation
is very low. K-12 student success in STEM is linked to high quality instruction
by teachers who have strong STEM backgrounds. In order to counter this problem,
this project will run a series of workshops to connect college faculty with K-12
teachers and administrators to understand what knowledge, skills, and other
characteristics future STEM teachers need to be successful. The outcome will be
the creation of a group of college faculty well-prepared to teach STEM content
to pre-service teachers. College administrators will then be able to attract
prospective college students to the field of STEM education with a well-deigned
STEM teacher preparation program. The premise of this work is that getting
teachers, college faculty, and administrators at the table to discuss teachers'
needs and abilities will make STEM teacher preparation more successful in the
long run.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Nazareth College includes
partnerships with the Rochester City School District and Greece Central School
District. Project goals include 1) deepening partnerships with two regional
high-need school districts; 2) ascertaining the knowledge, skills, and
dispositions those districts need in future STEM teachers; 3) developing
curriculum, learning experiences, and assignments/assessments at Nazareth, both
in STEM content and Education classes that will develop the requisite skills,
content knowledge, and dispositions in future Noyce Scholars; 4) providing
professional learning for Nazareth faculty to support their utilization of said
pedagogies; and 5) identifying the best ways to recruit and retain future
educators, from and for those districts when possible. Curricular materials
developed will include assignments, lessons or lab activity descriptions, course
syllabi, and curricular maps and plans. Once these deliverables are used in the
classroom and likely refined by the instructors, dissemination can occur as
poster presentations at STEM educator conferences or submitted to Peers Data
Hub, “Partnerships for Expanding Education Research in STEM” an NSF-funded
“research data hub and collaborative space for diverse STEM education research
communities to build and advance knowledge through sharing innovative ideas,
methods, and tools.” &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Capacity Building project is
supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The
Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to
become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to
become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports
research on the effectiveness and retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.