* 2243793
* RUI: Development of New Reagents and Synthetic Methodologies Based on Hypervalent Iodine Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Viktor Zhdankin, University of Minnesota Duluth
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 06/30/2026
* USD 357,254.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Viktor V. Zhdankin of the University of Minnesota Duluth (UMD) is
studying the development of new reagents and synthetic methodologies based on
the organic chemistry of iodine. The project is exploring the preparation and
fundamental chemistry of new hypervalent iodine compounds. The ability of
hypervalent iodine species to modify organic compounds when coupled with their
efficiency and sustainability makes them useful among academic and industrial
scientists. This utility is the result of iodine behaving much like a transition
metal in many applications. The continued exploration and utilization of these
similarities is leading to the development of new useful methodologies for
modern organic chemistry. More broadly speaking, this project is at the
interface of organic and inorganic chemistry and is well-suited for
undergraduate, graduate, and more advanced researchers including researchers in
industry. The project is expected to provide high level of education and
training for students, many of whom are underrepresented in science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A broad study of new, metal-free, iodine-mediated
reactions and an exploratory search for new and potentially useful hypervalent
reagents is proposed. Specific objectives include: (i) the development of
pseudocyclic arylbenziodoxaboroles as benzyne precursors and highly efficient
electrophilic arylating reagents under neutral, aqueous conditions, (ii) the
exploration of 4-iodonium substituted arylboronic acids as para-benzyne
precursors, (iii) the study of the synthesis and reactivity of stabilized
iodonium derivatives of porphyrins and dipyrromethenes, and (iv) the search for
new types of polyvalent iodine compounds that are stabilized by internal halogen
bonding. New synthetic methodologies based on these efforts will contribute to
the discovery of environmentally benign methods for chemical synthesis as they
utilize non-toxic iodine compounds in water as catalysts or as
recoverable/recyclable reagents. The successful development of this methodology
will have an impact on the areas of science where the synthesis of organic
molecules is required, such as in academia and in the pharmaceutical, chemical,
and agricultural industries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.