* 2243698
* Collaborative Research: Ideas Lab: RNA-encoded Molecular Memory (REMM)
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Saad Bhamla, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 04/30/2026
* USD 50,000.00

In most organisms, the genetic information is composed of the molecule
deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). But only a fraction of DNA in the genome—the
“coding DNA”—contains biochemical instructions for generating the proteins that
perform the vast range of activities essential for life. Indeed, 99% of the
human genome is regarded as “non-coding” DNA. Intriguingly, the DNA in this
“non-coding” part of the genome can still generate RNA, even though these non-
coding RNAs are not translated into proteins, in contrast to the "messenger"
RNAs generated by coding DNA. Surprisingly, the functions of non-coding RNAs,
which represent a large percentage of the genome, are still largely unknown. A
major goal of the present project is to explore potential roles these non-coding
RNAs could play in the encoding of memory. At present, memories are widely
thought to be stored as changes in the strengths of connections among neurons in
the brain. The project will build on prior evidence that some forms of simple
memory may instead be encoded as changes in RNA molecules. The project will
examine whether one simple form of memory—behavioral sensitization—can be stored
by non-coding RNA, or whether non-coding RNA can produce downstream molecular
changes that store memory. In addition, the project will enhance the training of
future scientists, including graduate students and postdoctoral researchers.
Finally, undergraduate and minority students underrepresented in STEM will
participate in the proposed research under the mentorship of the principal
investigators, and thereby gain a deeper understanding of scientific
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A previous study by one of the principal
investigators (PIs) showed that long-term memory (LTM) can be transferred by
injecting RNA from trained animals into untrained animals. In this prior work,
RNA was extracted from the nervous systems of sensitized (“trained”) marine
snails (Aplysia californica), purified, and then injected into untrained snails;
injected RNA from trained animals produced sensitization in untrained animals,
whereas RNA from untrained donor animals did not. The PIs hypothesize that the
expression or post-transcriptional state of one or more non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs)
is selectively induced by sensitization training and that this molecular change
mediates persistent sensitization memory in Aplysia. To test this hypothesis,
the PIs will perform differential RNA-seq on purified RNA from trained and
untrained animals and identify species of ncRNA with changes that correlate
significantly with LTM. Initial experiments will determine whether the
expression levels of specific ncRNAs change as a consequence of sensitization.
Based on these results, additional aspects of ncRNA structure, modification
state or protein interactions will be probed to explore whether sensitization
training induces persistent changes in these ncRNA properties that could mediate
memory encoding in Aplysia. This work would set the stage for a future project
in which candidate ncRNAs be screened for mnemonic potency by disrupting them
with antisense oligonucleotides (ASOs) and assessing the effects on neuronal
excitability and synaptic connectivity of Aplysia sensory and motor neurons, as
well as the effect of the ASOs on LTM in intact
animals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by the Directorate for
Biological Sciences, and the Neural Systems Cluster in the Division of
Integrative Organismal Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.