* 2243668
* Incubating Infrastructure to Improve STEM Learning by Leveraging Data from Digital Educational Games
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* David Gagnon, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jessaca Spybrook
* 06/30/2025
* USD 499,055.00

Digital educational games provide a unique opportunity to study STEM learning in
context. However, infrastructure is needed to systematically collect, store, and
process data from digital educational games so that it can be leveraged by STEM
researchers. This Mid-Scale Research Infrastructure Incubator is developing a
data and distribution infrastructure that will enable researchers to study how
STEM learning occurs in these contexts and how digital interventions can be
designed to serve different audiences and address different learning goals.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Incubator activities will include asynchronous
discussion/surveys, in-person workshop events, and report-writing workgroups
geared toward planning of the infrastructure. Six focal research areas will
guide the planning: (1) using digital educational games as instruments for
developing and refining learning and cognitive science; (2) understanding how
these games support STEM learning; (3) developing and evaluating digital
assessments; (4) understanding how these games are and can be leveraged in
classrooms; (5) developing practices, tools, and methods to support educational
data mining; and (6) understanding the affordances of educational game-based
learning for diverse audiences. By addressing the most significant gaps in the
conduct of STEM educational research with digital educational games, this
project will allow for entirely new forms of research to be conducted and
provide mechanisms for new researchers to participate.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported through a partnership with the
Bill &amp; Melinda Gates Foundation, Schmidt Futures, and the Walton Family
Foundation. Funding is also provided by the Research on Emerging Technologies
for Teaching and Learning (RETTL) program at NSF.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.