* 2243491
* Incorporating Communities of Practice and Research Experiences into the Preparation of High School STEM Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Teresa Bixby, Lewis University
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 06/30/2028
* USD 410,138.00

This project aims to serve the national need for preparing highly qualified high
school STEM teachers. It has the important goal to prepare 30 high school STEM
teachers across the subjects of Biology, Chemistry, Physics, and Mathematics to
serve in high-need schools in Illinois. The project is designed to support the
development and retention of STEM teacher candidates in multiple ways. These
future teachers will participate in an on-going support community during their
preparation and early teaching years. This STEM education community aims to
bring together teacher candidates, university faculty, mentor teachers, and
teacher alumni of the program. In addition, prospective teachers will complete
extensive classroom field experiences and coursework focused on culturally
responsive teaching practices to prepare them to be successful in STEM
classrooms in high-need schools. Finally, prospective teachers will have the
opportunity to participate in laboratory research experiences and be supported
in developing curricular materials that translate their research experiences
into classroom lessons for their future students. Through a combination of
financial and programmatic support, the project aims to produce high school STEM
teachers who can succeed and persist in STEM classrooms in high-need schools and
inspire future generations of students to pursue STEM learning and
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Lewis University includes
partnerships with three high-need school districts in the Greater Chicagoland
area in Illinois: Valley View Public School District U365, Joliet Township High
School District 204, and Bremen High School District 228. Project goals include
recruiting, supporting, and retaining 30 undergraduates, who obtain degrees in a
STEM discipline, and become secondary STEM teachers. Support of these Noyce
Scholars in their early years of teaching is intended to enhance their retention
as classroom teachers. Teacher candidates will be recruited from undergraduate
Biology, Chemistry, Physics, and Mathematics majors, which include significant
numbers of transfer students and students who identify as members of racial and
ethnic populations that are underrepresented in STEM disciplines relative to
their numbers in the general population. A new Equity in STEM Education course
will be developed to expand secondary STEM teacher preparation in culturally
responsive teaching practices. Learning community activities aim to provide STEM
professional development to area K-12 teachers in addition to prospective STEM
teachers. Project activities are designed to support prospective teachers in
deepening their content knowledge, developing skills in culturally responsive
teaching practices, engaging in communities of practice, and experiencing STEM
research within their discipline. Activities are designed to improve the
retention and effectiveness of future secondary STEM teachers in high-need
schools in the region. Project evaluation aims to measure the extent to which
the project develops prospective teachers’ self-efficacy in culturally relevant
teaching practices, as well as how the learning community model impacts their
efficacy in STEM classrooms and attitudes towards STEM teaching careers.
Further, the project aims to investigate how prospective teachers’ learning
through STEM research experiences may be translated into STEM classroom
teaching. These and other findings will be shared through multiple venues,
including the University’s social media outlets and at regional and national
STEM teacher education meetings and conferences. This Track 1: Scholarships and
Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors
and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced,
exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school
districts. It also supports research on the effectiveness and retention of K-12
STEM teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.