* 2243434
* Contested Values and Sustainable Livelihoods of Artisanal Alcohol
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Mark Patterson, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Koster
* 06/30/2026
* USD 313,827.00

Alcohol is a unique commodity, as it can be both a liability and asset to
societies worldwide. The objective of this project is to investigate the
dynamics, opportunities, and downsides associated with artisanal alcohol in the
context of economic retrenchment and regeneration opportunities through cultural
asset management. The interdisciplinary researchers aim to study the
complexities of artisanal alcohol as a commons problem that has the potential to
both empower and imperil livelihoods. The researchers explore if and how urban
and rural communities fashion and protect their heritage while working to
mitigate harm to their people. This study helps to clarify how and why artisanal
alcohol can become a contested symbol of place, culture, tradition, economics,
and health. The researchers partner with crafters of artisanal alcohol, local
academicians, students, and policymakers to uncover knowledge, determine best
practices, build local capacities, and inform culturally sensitive and effective
alcohol-related policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed case study explores
artisanal alcoholâ€™s heritage in the form of community identity, value, health,
and social relations, and mobilizes collaborative ethnography to investigate its
place in the local economy and society. Interviews, surveys, consumption
diaries, and a socioeconomic network of self-portraits are used to generate open
access online StoryMaps and publications. The project also includes scientific
analysis and examination of the societal impacts of artisanal alcohol to daily
life. Capacity-building endeavors include support of underrepresented
institutional priorities and student training goals. Advancing theory in the
field of economic anthropology, the study reveals the extent to which the
valorization and contestation of cultural assets, development, and wellbeing are
intertwined, and the study elucidates how producers and consumers may be better
positioned for crisis response and economic resiliency when they are closely
tied economically, socially, and spatially.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.