* 2243580
* RAPID: The black urchin (Diadema antillarum) massive resurgent die-off: Causes, demographic and community consequences
* GEO,OCE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2023
* Filipa Godoy-Vitorino, SOCIEDAD AMBIENTE MARINO INC.
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 199,919.00

In recent decades, many marine species in Caribbean coral reef ecosystems have
been impacted by disease. A well-documented mass mortality event affecting the
long-spined black sea urchin Diadema antillarum in the early 1980s stands out
because it had wide-ranging impacts on reef ecosystems. The urchins function as
gatekeeper grazers, feeding mainly on macroalgae and preventing algae from
overgrowing reefs. In the 1980s, an unknown disease killed over 90% of these
urchins across the Caribbean, changing the reefscape from coral to algal
dominated. Nearly 40 years later, black sea urchin populations have yet to
recover. In early 2022, a new mortality event of D. antillarum was reported
along the Caribbean, including Puerto Rico. This RAPID project is identifying
the microbes involved in the current mortality event. The investigators are also
assessing urchin populations under contrasting environmental conditions and
disease incidences. Results are providing a better understanding of the causes
and consequences of disease in Diadema, and insights learned may help prevent or
mitigate future mortality events. The project is providing training for
underrepresented undergraduate and graduate students in microbiology,
bioinformatics, biochemistry, and ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With use of
multi-omics technology, this RAPID project is advancing our understanding of the
current die-off of Diadema in the Caribbean, including host-pathogen
interactions and how these are influenced by environmental factors. The
investigators are pursuing the following questions: (1) Are the microbial and
biochemical profiles of diseased urchins similar to healthy ones? (2) Do
environmental factors, i.e., temperature, salinity, pH, and dissolved oxygen,
influence disease incidence? (3) Are different size classes of urchins
differentially being affected by the disease? This project is focusing on four
study sites along the eastern and northern coast of Puerto Rico, where
demographic and biochemical data have been previously collected. At three-month
intervals, healthy and diseased D. antillarum urchins are being evaluated for
changes in the microbiome using metagenomic and untargeted metabolomic
strategies. In addition, urchins from eight transects per site are being counted
and measured to determine how disease modulates life-history traits, i.e.,
population size-structure and density, and to assess disease incidence. The
relationship between disease incidence and environmental measurements is being
assessed. These multidisciplinary approaches and cutting-edge techniques,
combined with the existing demographic and microbial data, make this a one-of-a-
kind project to study the progression and effects of the disease at the
metabolic, microbial, population, and ecosystem
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.