* 2243590
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Stratigraphic records of microplastic pollution in coastal and wetland sediments
* SBE,BCS
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2024
* Kam-biu Liu, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 01/31/2024
* USD 24,900.00

This doctoral dissertation project investigates the stratigraphic distribution
and abundance of microplastic in the sediments of coastal wetlands. Coastal
sediments have been surmised to be a significant microplastic “sink,” but few
studies have been completed on microplastic below the surface layer.
Additionally, this study investigates the impacts of hurricanes on microplastic
transport and burial in coastal sediments. Understanding the deposition rates of
microplastic in coastal sediments is extremely important as plastic in the
marine and coastal environment has been categorized as a global problem directly
resulting from human activities. Data from this study can inform environmental
policy-making on plastic pollution, positively influencing the health of
sensitive coastal communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigating the
stratigraphic signature of microplastic in coastal sediments is an emerging
field of study and contributes to a better understanding of environmental
pollution and estimates of microplastic abundance. This project includes field-
based data collection to inform environmental modeling to produce large-scale
estimates. This research will investigate (1) if rates of microplastic
deposition since their initial widespread use in 1950 CE increased in line with
increased production, (2) whether sediment deeper than the surface is a
significant sink of microplastic, and (3) the role hurricanes play in the
transport and deposition of microplastic. These topics will be addressed using
sedimentological, geochemical, and micropaleontological techniques producing a
full view of the prevalence of microplastic in coastal sediments. Data gathered
and conclusions made from this study are of value to policy makers and other
stakeholders tasked with addressing microplastic pollution in the natural
world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.