* 2243991
* REU Site: Theoretical and Application-Driven Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2026
* Padmapani Seneviratne, Texas A&M University-Commerce
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Tyson
* 02/28/2026
* USD 385,387.00

The REU Program in Theoretical and Application Driven Mathematics at the Texas
A&amp;M University-Commerce recruits twelve undergraduate students per year into
an eight-week summer research experience designed to develop a diverse, globally
competitive STEM workforce. Student participants investigate innovative,
application-driven research projects in mathematics, working in a collaborative
research environment under the supervision of faculty mentors. The program will
motivate students to pursue graduate studies in mathematics and will prepare
them to be successful future competitors in the job market. It aims to increase
diversity, equity, and inclusion in the mathematical sciences by enrolling and
encouraging participants from underrepresented groups, including minorities,
first-generation college students, women, and students from regions with limited
resources and opportunities in research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU program
employs novel concepts and results in both theoretical and applied mathematics
to provide research opportunities for students with various backgrounds in
mathematics. Some projects use data-driven tasks to model real-life
applications. Others employ computer algebra systems to simulate sophisticated
mathematical concepts and to illuminate theoretical mathematics results. In
addition to ample time spent conducting research and collaborating with faculty
mentors, students receive professional development through dedicated sessions
involving external visitors from academic institutions and industry, along with
internal, round-table discussions on internship and employment opportunities,
the peer-review and publication process, collaborative work, and presentation
skills training. The program provides students with hands-on experience in
mathematical research and the skills needed to thrive in demanding academic and
industrial environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.