* 2243461
* Making STEM Matter: Transforming Learning through Teacher Leadership, Justice-Centered Pedagogy, and Makerspace Technology
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Mary Stapleton, Towson University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 06/30/2028
* USD 843,180.00

This project aims to serve the national need of developing highly effective
teacher leaders of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) who
can create sustainable improvements in middle grades and secondary STEM
education. The five-year project establishes a professional learning community
with 15 Master Teacher Fellows (MTFs) who are experienced and exemplary STEM
teacher leaders in a large urban school district in Maryland, and committed to
culturally responsive teaching. The goal of the learning community is to support
MTFs’ in transforming their instruction by: (1) integrating equity- and justice-
centered STEM pedagogies and (2) leveraging makerspaces to introduce new
opportunities for community-oriented STEM learning. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
collaborative project at Towson University and Morgan State University includes
partnerships with Prince George’s County Public School System and Open Works, a
nonprofit makerspace in Baltimore. The project aims to increase capacity for
STEM teaching in Maryland by empowering a cohort of experienced and exemplary
STEM teachers to become expert makers, culturally responsive classroom
practitioners, and teacher leaders. The project structure is designed to provide
a scaffolded pathway that allows MTFs to enhance their knowledge of justice-
centered STEM pedagogy and emerging technologies commonly found in makerspaces
as they evolve as both teachers and teacher leaders. Through a series of planned
leadership opportunities, the MTF program aims to allow MTFs' to share their
knowledge by designing, implementing, and reflecting on multiple iterations of
professional learning experiences, as well as offering practical knowledge to
prospective and practicing teachers both within their district and across the
state of Maryland. This project will also produce a repository of maker-enhanced
social justice STEM lessons, professional learning experiences for teachers,
national and statewide presentations, refereed journal articles, and other
dissemination products. This Track 3: Master Teaching Fellowships project is
supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The
Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to
become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to
become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports
research on the effectiveness and retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.