* 2243275
* Leveraging Technology Resources to Encourage University STEM Students to Explore and Persist in Teaching Careers
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* J. Michael Wyss, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 07/31/2028
* USD 866,277.00

The project aims to serve the national need to prepare high-quality and highly
effective science, technology, engineering and mathematics teachers who will
develop the next generation of leaders for the USA. The importance of these
areas and their associated careers has greatly accelerated; and K-12 students
are becoming more adept at using the latest technologies, thus challenging
schools to implement new technologically advanced learning tools. Colleges and
universities need to develop secondary teachers who can use technology to engage
their students and empower learning. An equally important challenge is to ensure
the well-being of the K-12 teachers, so that they do not experience burnout due
to stresses brought about by the pandemic, recent shortages of teachers, and
demands for raising student’s’ standardized test performance. This project will
provide prospective and early-career practicing teachers with the tools that
they need to succeed, including innovative technology, hands-on experiences in
science, as well as resources of mentoring teams and wellness monitoring and
support. The one-to-two-years of training will develop the next generation of
science and math leaders for the nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at
the University of Alabama at Birmingham includes partnerships with 12 area high
needs school districts and Lawson State Community College (a minority serving
institution). Project goals include the nurturing of 46 undergraduate and
graduate students, providing them with skills and support mechanisms to be
effective, enthusiastic, and confident in their preservice teaching and
throughout their careers. The project is aimed at ensuring that middle and high
school students are given access to the excitement and wonder of science through
these new teachers. To accomplish these goals and promote equity in education,
the project will focus on teachers in “high needs” schools. These teachers, who
typically enter teaching with great passion, skill, understanding and motivation
that can fade if they lack adequate support and mentoring, can suffer from low
teacher retention and lower persistence in teaching careers. The program focuses
on promoting teacher excellence through outstanding pedagogy, team teaching, and
leadership, and training in diverse bidirectional mentorship and wellness
resources, enabling the new teachers to thrive in their careers and foster their
passion for educating the next generation. This Track 1: Scholarships and
Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors
and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced,
exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school
districts. It also supports research on the effectiveness and retention of K-12
STEM teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.