* 2243857
* REU Site: Dynamic Earth in the 21st Century: Undergraduate Research on the Evolution of Earth's Interior, Surface and Climate
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Karen Fischer, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 02/28/2026
* USD 291,598.00

Dynamic Earth in the 21st Century is a National Science Foundation Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site that is collaboratively run by Brown
University’s Department of Earth, Environmental and Planetary Sciences (DEEPS)
and the Leadership Alliance. The primary goals are to enable undergraduates from
groups historically marginalized in the sciences to engage in exciting, well-
mentored summer research experiences; develop key research and professional
skills; and build their understanding of the research process, graduate school
and research careers. In each of three summers, eight undergraduates who attend
schools other than Brown University will come to Brown’s campus for nine weeks
of research, mentored by DEEPS faculty. REU students will be further supported
by research lab teams, a twice-weekly cohort discussion group, and the highly
effective professional development and networking programs of the Leadership
Alliance, a national consortium dedicated to training and mentoring students
from diverse cultural and academic backgrounds for competitive graduate programs
and professional research-based careers. REU students will enhance their
abilities to communicate their work in writing and through presentations at the
Leadership Alliance National Symposium and a summer research symposium at Brown.
In the following year, the REU students will have the opportunity to present
their work at a national science meeting that aligns with their interests.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;REU student research projects will span a range of
research themes, including: 1) Measuring mantle properties with earthquake
waves, and modeling how mantle viscosity affects predictions of sea-level change
in response to melting ice sheets; 2) Assessing the role of subduction zones in
recycling water into Earth’s mantle; 3) Understanding the processes that
contribute to volcanic eruptions and magma chamber stability, and modeling the
formation of volcanic edifices on Earth and other planetary bodies; 4)
Developing new tools to measure rock thermal histories; 5) Measuring the record
of past climate change in lake and ocean sediments, and assessing glacial re-
advances with sediment deformation structures; 6) Modeling the feedbacks between
climate change and vegetation; 7) Assessing the drivers of air and water quality
with a focus on urban landscapes. These projects include implications for
societally-relevant topics such as climate change and its impacts including sea-
level rise, wildfires, and vegetation responses; air and water quality; and
volcanic eruptions. Recruitment will focus on students from historically
marginalized groups or who face other barriers to participation in the
geosciences: students from racial and ethnic groups underrepresented in STEM,
women and non-binary students, first-generation college students, students from
lower income households, students who attend schools where geoscience research
opportunities are limited, and students with disabilities. The program welcomes
students of all sexual orientations, gender identities and expressions, and
students from diverse life experiences and academic paths, including
veterans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.