* 2243243
* CAREER: Metabolic control of Purkinje Cell dendritic development and mouse behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Ileana Soto, Providence College
* Continuing Grant
* Quentin Gaudry
* 03/31/2025
* USD 301,575.00

An important part of neural development involves setting up and refining the
architecture and function of dendrites, the “receiving ends” of nerve cells that
communicate with their partners in circuits. The biological processes involved
in building and maintaining dendrites require high levels of metabolic activity
that needs to be turned on and off repeatedly in a spatially and temporally
restricted way. The metabolic processes that synthesize (anabolism) and break
down (catabolism) complex molecules involved in dendrite building and remodeling
are not completely understood. This project examines the interplay between
anabolic and catabolic pathways during the formation of Purkinje cell dendrites
(which have some of the largest dendritic trees in the brain) within the mouse
cerebellum. Experiments will determine the differential impact that anabolic and
catabolic pathways have on dendritic growth, patterning and synaptic
connectivity of Purkinje cells, including how these changes affect mouse
behavior. This research project will lead to a deeper understanding of how
metabolic processes affect dendritic development and how functional disruption
of these processes lead to behavioral deficits observed in neurodevelopmental
disorders. This research project will involve the direct participation of
undergraduate and graduate students; two project-based laboratory neuroscience
courses for undergraduate and graduate students will expand the impact of this
project to a larger number of students. In order to increase the training and
participation of students from underrepresented and disadvantaged backgrounds in
neuroscience research, this project includes a summer internship program
involving undergraduate students from Puerto Rico who will participate in the
research project in the PI’s laboratory.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Nutrient-rich
conditions (which promote anabolism) and starvation (which induces catabolism)
have significant and opposing effects on dendritic arbor size and patterning of
Drosophila sensory neurons during development, suggesting that nutrient and
energy availability importantly regulate dendritic differentiation. In the mouse
cerebellum, the postnatal growth of Purkinje cell dendrites is increased by
genetic overactivation of nutrient-sensing anabolic pathways. However, it is not
currently known how the metabolic balance between anabolism and catabolism
regulates the differentiation, patterning and synaptic activity of dendrites
during postnatal brain development. This project uses conditional knockout mice,
drug interventions, histological and molecular approaches, and sophisticated
tissue imaging and analysis to more precisely define the contribution of
anabolic and catabolic pathways to Purkinje cell dendritic differentiation,
cerebellar synaptogenesis and mouse behavior during postnatal development. This
research project will significantly expand our scientific understanding about
the role that metabolic balance plays in the development and plasticity of
synaptic connections in the brain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.