* 2243465
* Preparing Mathematics Teachers to Teach for Justice and Joy in High-Needs Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Alejandra Salinas, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 06/30/2028
* USD 398,546.00

This project aims to serve the national need for preparing high-quality
secondary mathematics teachers in high-need school districts. Towards this end
the project will focus particular attention on examples of how mathematical
modeling and analysis can be used to reveal and investigate issues of social
inequity that affect local communities where teachers may be placed. The
investigators posit that such an approach will improve on more traditional
mathematics instruction where students often leave class asking, “Why do I need
to know this?”, and that it will illustrate how mathematics can be used to
create a more socially just world. Additionally, instead of students leaving
with a negative disposition toward the field of mathematics, this project will
support teachers in creating joyful mathematical experiences that excite and
engage students. Students who have a productive relationship with mathematics
are more likely to pursue careers that require a mathematical background.
Moreover, students who understand that mathematics has the power to describe the
world can value mathematics beyond career choices; they can use mathematics to
advocate for themselves and others when they see injustices in their community.
By supporting preservice and beginning teachers in developing teaching
philosophies and practices that highlight justice and joy in their lessons, more
students are likely to engage with mathematics and see it as relevant to their
lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Boston University includes
partnerships with the Boston Public Schools, Malden Public Schools, and Waltham
Public Schools. Over a five-year period, the project intends to recruit a mix of
31 STEM professionals and highly talented post-baccalaureate students who
possess a degree in a STEM discipline, most often mathematics, to teach
secondary mathematics in a high-need school district. This project seeks to
address the need for preparing and retaining highly effective secondary
mathematics teachers in high-need-school districts who are properly trained in
facilitating joyful mathematical experiences in the classroom while
simultaneously increasing students’ critical consciousness of how mathematics
can illuminate issues of racism and other social injustices. This project will
contribute to the improvement of mathematics education at the secondary level by
pursuing the following two objectives. First is to generate an exemplary model
for recruiting, training and retaining a diverse mathematics teacher community
with a commitment to and facility with using examples of how mathematics can be
applied to investigate issues of social justice. Second is to disseminate
findings of this project through publications and conference presentations to
teacher educators and researchers who study how teachers learn to implement and
center justice-oriented mathematics. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends
project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program
(Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and
professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary
K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It
also supports research on the effectiveness and retention of K-12 STEM teachers
in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.