* 2243742
* Taming the Noisy Environment for Photon-Mediated Operations in Quantum Information Processing
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2022,07/31/2024
* Herbert Fotso, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 07/31/2024
* USD 237,052.00

The fundamental building block of Quantum Information Processing (QIP) platforms
is the quantum bit or qubit, which can be thought of as a quantum system with
two energy levels. Transitions between these levels are accompanied by the
emission/absorption of a photon, a particle of light, with the energy/frequency
corresponding to the transition. For many systems, the fluctuating environment
of the qubit induces spectral diffusion, a random drift in time of the
emitted/absorbed photon frequency. This phenomenon limits the efficiency of
photon-mediated operations between different quantum bits, and these operations
are essential for the realization of large scale quantum platforms. The goal of
this project is to develop protocols that will be based on externally applied
control fields for the purpose of making these photon-mediated operations
resilient to fluctuations in the qubit environment and thus improve the
efficiency of these operations for the construction of large scale QIP
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The different systems that have been
successfully implemented as quantum bits each exhibit specific advantageous
physical properties. Thus, for future advances towards large scale QIP
platforms, using different types of qubit in a complementary manner, so that
each system can be exploited for its best suited application, is a viable
avenue. In this context, stationary-to-flying qubit conversion and other photon-
mediated operations are essential and successful implementations depend on their
efficiency. The goal of this project is to study the dynamics of quantum
emitters in diffusion-inducing baths so that their optical properties can be
tailored to specific QIP requirements despite deleterious effects of their
environment. The PI will use a combination of analytical and computational
approaches to evaluate properties of different quantum emitters and their
performance in various QIP operations when they are driven by appropriate pulse
and continuous wave protocols. The PI will consider different configurations of
quantum emitters susceptible to spectral diffusion including two-level, three
level and many-level systems and ensembles of such quantum emitters coupled to
radiation baths in relevant QIP operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.