* 2243012
* Authentic STEM Laboratory Research Experiences for Pre-service Secondary Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Florence Okafor, Alabama A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 04/30/2026
* USD 151,277.00

This project aims to serve the national need for highly effective science and
mathematics teachers by supporting the academic research and professional
development of pre-service teachers who will convey understanding and excitement
of conducting basic scientific research to their students. In this project,
prospective science and mathematics teachers will experience authentic research
methods through work as a member of STEM laboratory research teams. These STEM
majors will be better equipped to incorporate research and other inquiry-based
learning into their future classrooms. They will also participate in
professional development activities to gain pedagogical content knowledge and to
learn best practices for engaging secondary school students in authentic
research experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project at Alabama A&amp;M
University will provide research opportunities for pre-service secondary STEM
teachers, many of whom may be from groups underrepresented in STEM, in exciting
and relevant topics in Biology, Chemistry, Mathematics and Physics. The research
experiences will occur over eight-weeks, through a summer program each year for
three years. Twenty-four talented pre-service secondary teachers will be
recruited, primarily from seven partner institutions in Alabama: Alabama A&amp;M
University, University of Alabama in Huntsville, University of Alabama in
Birmingham, University of West Alabama, Alabama State University, Oakwood
University, and Miles College. Participating students will be actively engaged
in cutting-edge research under the direct supervision of dedicated, experienced
faculty mentors. Additionally, each week two hours will be set aside for
professional development training that will foster connections to teaching. This
project will help to remedy the shortage of high-quality and research-
experienced science and mathematics teachers. Through its evaluation, the
project will generate knowledge about the impact of research on teachers'
content knowledge and teaching. This Noyce Research Experiences for pre-service
teachers project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors
and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced,
exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need districts.
It also supports research on the retention and effectiveness of K-12 STEM
teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.