* 2243328
* Culturally Responsive Education of STEM Teacher Candidates
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Laura Lorentzen, Kean University
* Continuing Grant
* John Haddock
* 04/30/2028
* USD 384,423.00

This project aims to serve the national need to increase the number of STEM
majors entering the STEM teacher-preparation pipeline to fulfill growing
shortages in high-need secondary schools. The project will provide two-year
scholarships and academic and co-curricular support to twenty-eight (28)
talented undergraduate STEM students who are majoring in biology, chemistry,
earth sciences, or mathematics and intend to become secondary STEM teachers. An
important direction of the project will be to provide teacher preparation and
induction that emphasize effective STEM discipline content knowledge along with
culturally responsive and place based pedagogical practices to engage diverse
student populations in successful learning experiences in STEM. An underlying
feature of the project will be the development and implementation of myriad
networking opportunities. Included will be the creation of a professional
learning community (PLC) composed of university faculty, Noyce Scholars, and
STEM teachers at the partnering Local Education Agencies (LEAs). Related to this
learning community, other project components will include a seminar series, an
annual STEM teaching conference, classroom observations, mentoring of Scholars
by college faculty and in-service teachers, and establishment of an online hub
for sharing resources and collaboration. The teacher preparation project
initiatives coupled with induction and an emphasis on culturally responsive
education will develop STEM teachers who will enable high-need schools in New
Jersey and other areas across the United States to provide their students a
strong and inclusive science and mathematics education. In turn, this will help
provide a pathway for many of these same students to establish STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is housed at Kean University, a
minority serving and Hispanic serving institution, and leverages partnerships
with two high-need urban adjacent LEAs in New Jersey, namely the Township of
Union School District and the Lakewood Township School District. The project
will be guided by several goals. First, over five years, the project will
recruit, provide scholarships, and prepare a diverse set of twenty-eight (28)
high-quality students, who are undergraduate majors in biology, chemistry, earth
sciences, or mathematics, to become STEM secondary teachers in high-need
schools. A corollary of this goal is that 50% of the Scholars will be students
who identify as members of racial and ethnic groups that are underrepresented in
their participation in STEM disciplines. A second goal is to provide a variety
of networking activities for the project's Scholars to enhance STEM teacher
preparation, retention, and classroom effectiveness. An underlying thread
through the activities will be an emphasis on culturally responsive pedagogies.
For a third goal, the project will provide Noyce Scholars with strong STEM and
pedagogical content knowledge through STEM discipline coursework and projects as
well as the project's teacher preparation and induction components.
Comprehensive mixed-methods project evaluation will provide formative and
summative assessment and feedback and generate new knowledge with respect to
best practices for professional learning communities and networking
opportunities in general for STEM teacher preparation and induction. Project
investigators will disseminate findings, successes, and challenges through
social media, publications, conference and workshop presentations, summer
outreach activities, exchanges with area K-12 educators, and the project's
online Culturally Responsive Education for STEM Teachers Hub. This Track 1:
Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the effectiveness and
retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.