* 2243003
* Understanding the physical processes controlling the amount of fine sediment and gravel embeddedness in streambeds
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Kyle Strom, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Raleigh Martin
* 02/28/2026
* USD 449,973.00

Excess fine sediment (&lt;2mm in diameter, such as silt and sand) impairs over
40,000 miles of streams in the U.S., degrading habitat quality for many aquatic
species and costing tens of billions of dollars annually. When fine sediment
deposits on a streambed, it can accumulate within pore spaces between coarser
streambed particles (&gt;2mm in diameter, such as gravel). This process degrades
streambed habitat quality. To date, the only way to assess the amount of fine
sediment in streambeds is through direct field measurements. This project re-
envisions fine sediment assessment based on the preliminary finding that flood
flow conditions are the primary control on the amount of fine sediment in
streambeds. Furthermore, this project seeks to make it possible to predict fine
sediment accumulation across entire stream networks from widely available stream
data, which will open up new avenues of research on the influence of river
network branching structure on streambed habitat quality. Ultimately, this will
lead to a transformation in our understanding and management of aquatic
ecosystems and basin-scale geomorphology. Project activities will also
contribute to several additional broader impacts: 1) increasing participation of
women and underrepresented minorities in science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM), 2) improving STEM education, 3) increasing public scientific
literacy and public engagement with STEM, and 4) developing a diverse, globally
competitive STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching research
question driving this work is: How do flow conditions control the amount of fine
sediment present in the streambed? Preliminary results show that the flow
conditions that fill a stream to the top of its banks exert a first-order
control on the amount of fine sediment in streambeds independent of sediment
supply. The main hypothesis to be tested is that the physical process underlying
this outcome is related to the amount of sand traveling along the streambed
versus suspended higher up in the flowing water when full mobilization of the
gravel streambed ceases and any near-bed sand becomes locked into the gravel
substrate. This work will demonstrate that this preliminary finding applies
broadly across the U.S. and elucidate the underlying processes behind these
predictions. This will be accomplished through the following aims: 1)
Demonstrate that fine sediment accumulation is predictable from flow conditions
throughout a wide physiographic extent by analyzing a U.S. EPA dataset, 2)
Measure the temporal variability in fine sediment accumulation from field
measurements, and 3) Quantify the fundamental processes relating flow conditions
to fine sediment accumulation under different sediment grain size and supply
scenarios through laboratory experiments. Broader impacts will involve the
creation and evaluation of a hands-on learning experience engaging the public at
the Virginia Tech Science Festival and engaging fifth graders from Title I
schools during the Hokie for a Day activity, while discussing streambed habitats
and developing awareness of scientists from diverse
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.