* 2243400
* REU Site in Cellular and Molecular Biology at Sanford Research
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2024,01/31/2027
* Lance Lee, Sanford Research/USD
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2027
* USD 378,652.00

This REU Site award to Sanford Research, located in Sioux Falls, SD, will
support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2024 -
2026. It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with
limited research opportunities or from an under-represented group, will be
trained in the program. Emphasis will be placed on students who have
historically faced barriers to participation in science, students with
disabilities, and veterans. The objectives of the program are to provide
exceptional research experiences in Cellular and Molecular Biology to
undergraduate students, support the pursuit of graduate degrees and research
careers, and increase diversity in the scientific community. Students will learn
how research is conducted, and many will present the results of their work at
scientific conferences. Assessment of the program will be done through the
online SALG URSSA tool. The NSF ETAP system will be used to register
participants (https://www.nsfetap.gov/). Students will be tracked after the
program in order to determine their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students
will perform cutting-edge research on projects in diverse areas of Cellular and
Molecular Biology, including signal transduction, intracellular trafficking,
organelle function, cell proliferation and differentiation, and development.
Projects will support laboratory research goals and provide defined goals and
anticipated outcomes for the participant. The program will include a research
experience, together with career and professional development programming,
responsible conduct of research training, and scientific presentation and
writing opportunities. Students will also engage with the community through
outreach activities to increase public scientific literacy and inspire youth to
consider science careers. Students will apply online, and a selection committee
will interview the top candidates by videoconference and make acceptance
decisions. More information about the program and application is available by
visiting https://research.sanfordhealth.org/academic-
programs/undergraduates/spur or by contacting the PI (Dr. Lee at
Lance.Lee@sanfordhealth.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.