* 2243095
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Award: Chemical Analysis to Determine Container Content
* SBE,BCS
* 11/15/2022,10/31/2023
* Kenneth Sassaman, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 10/31/2023
* USD 27,325.00

Circumstances surrounding the use of pottery among hunter-gatherers continues to
be a compelling archaeological topic. The makers and users of North Americaâ€™s
oldest pottery figure prominently in archaeological perspectives on how and why
hunter-gatherer societies worldwide responded to changing environmental
conditions and novel social situations through the use of durable, highly
adaptable technologies. However, despite knowing when, where, and how such
pottery was used, archaeologists do not know what these early ceramics were used
for. There is currently no direct evidence available for the types of foods
processed with this innovation. To address this gap the goal of this project is
to analyze the residues preserved within such pottery walls. This research marks
the first attempt to chemically analyze the resources to document changes in
foodways attending the shift from mobile to sedentary settlement which occurred.
The results of this research have the potential to illuminate the connection
between settlement practices and foodways that affect sustainable land use. In
places across the globe, archaeologists are collaborating with Indigenous
communities to document and revive ancient foodways to help improve and sustain
food security. This potential is hampered where colonial histories of forced
removal of Indigenous people disrupted traditional land use and foodways. Among
those with ancestral ties are descendants of the Cherokee, Chickasaw, and Creek.
Building on existing Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act
(NAGPRA) relations with the Seminole Tribe of Florida, descendants of the Creek,
the results of this project will be incorporated into the curriculum of a
developing graduate certificate program in Indigenous Archaeology at the
university of Florida. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this doctoral dissertation
research project the graduate student is conducting pottery organic residue
analyses spanning the transition from mobile to sedentary settlement. Focusing
on this transition, organic residue analysis will be conducted on samples of
ceramic sherds from multiple sites to determine the types of foods processed
with pottery vessels both before and after communities were sedentary.
Structuring the organic residue analysis is the hypothesis that diversification
of vessel form over this transition reflects increased specialization in vessel
use, notably changes in the types of foods processed therein. In support of
analyses of archaeological residues, the proposed research includes controlled
experiments in indirect-heat cooking. These baseline reference data enhance the
interpretation of changes in foodways registered in archaeological organic
residues that, when placed into broader contexts, contribute to the growing
biomarker database of hunter-gatherer pottery
worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.