* 2243010
* REU Site: Algorithms and Optimization for Sustainability and Biology
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2026
* Brendan Mumey, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 01/31/2026
* USD 323,949.00

Modern interdisciplinary problems increasingly require complex solutions that
incorporate sophisticated algorithmic techniques. Practitioners are needed who
are able to both understand real-world problems and undertake abstract algorithm
development. The goal of this project is to expose undergraduate students to
collaborative algorithm development and problem solving. Students who
participate in this project will develop broadly-applicable research skills that
are valuable in both academic and commercial workplaces. Research projects will
be centered on the broad themes of optimization and sustainability with specific
topics in computational biology, geometry and optimization for applications of
carbon capture technology. An overarching goal is to heighten undergraduate
student interest and participation in innovative research and to increase the
number and diversity of students (especially underrepresented groups) pursuing
undergraduate and graduate degrees in computer science and/or related
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual focus of this REU site is in
developing algorithms and optimization approaches for real-world problems. The
problems considered are computationally challenging (most are NP-hard), so
innovative algorithms and optimization approaches are needed to solve them in
practice. Accordingly, the activities of the REU program are centered on the
following general topic areas: 1. Carbon capture infrastructure optimization, 2.
Combinatorial and geometric optimization, and 3. Graph algorithms for
computational biology. Carbon capture infrastructure optimization requires novel
algorithms to intelligently design pipeline networks that meet industrial carbon
dioxide emission mitigation targets. Combinatorial and geometric optimization is
a traditional computer science research area, however a recent trend in
geometric optimization is to consider more realistic constraints. Finally, the
data revolution in biology has led to a variety of new research topics in
algorithms and computation, including DNA assembly problems and characterizing
gene interactions and networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.