* 2243895
* REU Site: Advancing Chemistry with Cross-Disciplinary Collaboration - Chemical Sciences at CSU
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Garret Miyake, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 08/31/2026
* USD 405,000.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site award to Colorado State
University, located in Fort Collins, CO, supports the training of 10 students
for 10 weeks during the summers of 2023-2025. In this program, funded by the
Division of Chemistry, participants pursue collaborative research projects
across all flavors of chemistry to understand how posing fundamental research
questions can be translated to addressing real world problems in collaborative
environments. Participants also take part in a professional development and
ethics training program, with a focus on science communication and preparation
for graduate school or industrial careers. Through independent research projects
and workshop and seminar series, this site broadens participation in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Individual research projects for students involved
in this program will connect the relevance of our science to current societal
challenges, spanning from the environment to energy to defense to human health.
Participants in this program will perform research with a team mentored by two
faculty mentors on collaborative projects amongst 23 faculty mentors. We will
augment the fundamental research experiences with activities directed toward
scientific professional development, including writing workshops, career panels,
presentation opportunities, and the continuation of our recently developed
scientific ethics component. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is partially
supported by the Department of Defense, in partnership with the NSF REU
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.