* 2243624
* Growth and size in living matter
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* David K Lubensky, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvio May
* 05/31/2026
* USD 260,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Living systems usually have
characteristic sizes: Mice do not grow larger than elephants, and healthy
bacteria generally choose to divide when they reach the appropriate length
rather than to continue elongating forever. In at least some cases, these sizes
appear to be specified with fairly high precision. For example, organs from
human limbs to fruit fly wings exhibit size asymmetry between the left and right
organ in the same animal of about 1%, and in appropriate conditions the
coefficient of variation of bacterial length at division is around 10%. Very
little is known about where these numbers come from. What sorts of noise or
variability inside the living organism ultimately contribute the most to size
errors? Is a 1% difference in wing sizes surprisingly good, close to the limits
of what is possible given basic laws of physics, or would it be easy to imagine
how the difference could be made even smaller? This project with use methods
from the physical sciences to develop the basic theoretical framework needed to
answer questions like these. The investigators will further collaborate with
experimental labs to refine their ideas and apply them to specific living
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will also give students at all levels
an opportunity to pursue research in an interdisciplinary team; in particular,
the principal investigator will work with the University of Michigan’s M-STEM
Academies to recruit a diverse group of undergraduate students to the project
team. The principal investigator will also develop tutorial exercises, based on
his research in biological physics, for the introductory physics course sequence
for life science students at the University of
Michigan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal funds theoretical and computational
research, including collaborations with several experimental groups, to study
the statistical and nonlinear physics of growing, active systems like those
found in living matter. A unifying question is how noise and fluctuations affect
growth and limit the precision with which a given final size can be reached. The
investigators will explore these issues at multiple scales and in multiple model
systems. In particular, they will: (1) Examine lumped, space-free models of
stochastic growth and growth arrest, with applications to (A) size distributions
of cells and organs; (B) size coordination between contralateral wings in the
fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster; and (C) size coordination between
contralateral somites during zebrafish somitogenesis. Formally, these models
will initially take the form of first passage problems in two variables, an
actual and an estimated size. Extensions will include allowing for the presence
of various forms of correlated and non-white noise. (2) Study cell-based models
of spatially resolved growth in tissues. Goals here will be to determine how
correlations in cell size across tissues can be used to draw inferences about
mechanisms of tissue size regulation and to understand what limits the
uniformity of cell size in cohesive tissues. In particular, the investigators
will compare and contrast models in which growth and proliferation arrest occur
simultaneously with models where cell size adjustment and correction occurs
after division has ceased. Theoretical predictions will be compared to
observations in Drosophila wings and dorsal pupal
notum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will integrate education with
interdisciplinary research while supporting a diverse student body, enriching
classroom instruction, and reinforcing efforts to sustain a cohesive
quantitative biology community at the University of Michigan. It will give
students at all levels an opportunity to pursue research in a team where they
will work closely with colleagues from both the biological and the physical
sciences and will support international research experiences for one graduate
student. The principal investigator will work with the University of Michigan’s
M-STEM Academy to involve a diverse group of undergraduates in research early in
their college careers; such involvement has been shown to improve retention of
students from historically under-represented groups in science and engineering
fields. The project further supports the continued development of studio
exercises incorporating biologically relevant examples for the introductory
physics course sequence for life sciences majors and the principal
investigator’s work in organizing an interdisciplinary quantitative biology
seminar and journal club series at the University of
Michigan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.