* 2243301
* I-Corps: Water Treatment with Boron Nitride Materials
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2023
* Michael Wong, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of water treatment technologies. Per/polyfluoroalkyl substances
(PFAS), a group of persistent man-made chemicals, have a widespread presence in
water resources, including drinking water. Tiny amounts of PFAS in drinking
water are considered toxic and can bioaccumulate in humans and wildlife. PFAS
has been linked to developmental and reproductive problems, liver damage, and
cancer. PFAS is currently unregulated at the Federal level in the U.S., but PFAS
regulations in drinking water, groundwater, and industrial wastewater will be
implemented by the U.S EPA before 2024. Driven by the implementation of
regulations and the ineffectiveness of current water treatment technologies,
this project will explore new systems for affected industries. Unlike
conventional water purification technologies, which produce waste streams, this
technology has no toxic byproducts. While there are current commercialized
technologies to remove PFAS with adsorbents or reverse osmosis, these do not
destroy PFAS and hence create PFAS-contaminated waste streams. The extant
commercialized technologies which destroy PFAS, including incineration and
electro-oxidation, are energy-intensive and expensive.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is based on the development of technology based on boron
nitride-based photocatalysts. Parts per quadrillion levels of PFAS in drinking
water are considered toxic and can bioaccumulate in humans and wildlife. The
team seeks to develop technologies that can effectively remove PFAS to
regulatory limits and also permanently destroy PFAS using only earth-abundant
boron nitride-based materials, light, and ambient air. The system does not
produce toxic waste streams and does not need incineration for regeneration, and
thus is efficient, cost-effective, and sustainable. Non-toxic bicarbonate and
fluoride ions are the only byproducts of the process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.