* 2243206
* REU Site: Genomics and Computational biology
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Jonathan Arnold, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2026
* USD 598,691.00

This REU Site award to the University of Georgia located in Athens, GA, will
support the training of 13 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2023-
2025. It is anticipated that a total of 39 students, primarily from schools with
limited research opportunities or are from an under-represented group, will be
trained in the program. The program is run in partnership with Clark Atlanta
University, an HBCU located in Atlanta, GA. The program has been in existence
for 22 years and has trained over 200 REU participants who have contributed to
fundamental discoveries about telomerase, gene regulation, the biological clock,
and the biochemistry of red tides. All REU participants are expected to present
their research at national meetings, and about 15% are expected to publish their
research findings in peer-reviewed journals. Assessment of the program will be
done through the online SALG URSSA tool used by all BIO REU sites. Students will
be required to register their participation in the NSF ETAP system
(etap.nsf.gov) and tracked after the program in order to determine their career
paths. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific focus of this program is on
genomics, computational biology, systems biology, metabolomics, proteomics, and
glycomics. Faculty mentors come from various departments and centers, including
Genetics, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute of Bioinformatics,
Computer Science, Physics and Astronomy, Plant Biology, Plant Pathology, Complex
Carbohydrate Research Center, Microbiology, and Communication. Applications are
done online at http://www.genetics.uga.edu/FGCB. Students from groups under-
represented in STEM and those from schools with limited research opportunities
are especially encouraged to apply. In addition to developing a research project
over 10 weeks, students participate in bioethics and communication training,
seminars, and workshops hosted by seven other interlocking REU sites on the UGA
campus. Past research projects on this REU site have included the study of the
biological clock, telomerase, adaptive immunity through CRISPR/CAS systems,
novel algorithms for network reconstruction, identification of network motifs,
and constructing large scale database tools in systems biology. More information
about the program is available at http://www.genetics.uga.edu/FGCB, or by
contacting the PI (Dr. Jonathan Arnold at arnold@uga.edu) or the co-PI (Dr.
Sharifeh Mehrabi at smehrabi@cau.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.