* 2243560
* Cool Pool Diffusion Flames
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Peter Sunderland, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Harsha Chelliah
* 05/31/2026
* USD 360,000.00

Most of the engines that power land, air, and sea transportation have low
thermal efficiencies and consume nonrenewable fuels. A newly discovered class of
flames, called cool diffusion flames, could contribute to dramatic increases in
these efficiencies – from upper thirties to sixty per cent – and accelerate the
adoption of renewable fuels. These flames could also improve the understanding
of wildland fire spread and smoldering mechanisms. Cool diffusion flames were
discovered in 2012 aboard the International Space Station. They have unusually
low temperatures between 500 – 1000 K, compared to 2000 K for traditional
flames. Their discovery has already resulted in an improved understanding of
ignition, but further progress has been impeded by the high cost and complexity
of the experimental facilities required. This project will reduce this cost by
developing a novel facility that burns fuel pools in cool flame mode. It will
also improve the understanding of cool diffusion flames by performing detailed
measurements and comparing them with computational
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first objective of this project is to
develop new ways to observe cool diffusion flames above pools of liquid fuels
bounded above by a heated ceiling. This will enable any laboratory to build such
a facility inexpensively. Many liquid fuels will be considered, including pure
hydrocarbons, traditional transportation fuels, and renewable bio-derived fuels.
It is unknown which of these fuels can burn in air as cool diffusion flames, and
at what temperatures and mixture fractions. It is also unknown whether they may
support slightly hotter flames, called warm diffusion flames, and whether they
can exist without an external heat source. The second objective will be to
characterize the flame details, namely, the flame temperatures, compositions,
burning rates, and emissions. The third objective will be to perform
autoignition simulations with Cantera software using various chemical kinetics
models and to compare the predictions with the measurements. These simulations
will fill gaps in the measurements and help evaluate and develop models of cool
flame chemistry. The broader impacts of this project include improving engine
efficiency, increasing the use of renewable fuels, and involving graduate
students and undergraduates from diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.