* 2243593
* Reassessing plants and pastoralist foodways in ancient eastern Africa
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Natalie Mueller, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2026
* USD 374,292.00

In the world today, tens of millions of people rely on livestock such as cattle,
sheep, and goat to feed their families and drive local economies. Researchers
and policymakers now recognize that this way of life – known as pastoralism – is
highly dynamic and flexible, and therefore enables people to thrive when climate
change threatens food security and, by extension, creates social or political
instability. In Africa, pastoralism has been a mainstay of life for at least
seven millennia. Yet archaeologists lack basic data with which to understand how
pastoralism developed, expanded across the continent, and changed over time.
This limits the extent to which archaeologists can use data from the past to
inform present-day discussions of land use and pastoralist resilience. In
particular, a key missing element of archaeological research is the plant
component of pastoralism food systems. While it is known that pastoralists
commonly incorporate crops and wild plants into their food systems today, past
pastoralist plant use in Africa is poorly known, due to relatively poor
preservation, and a lack of research in this area. This three-year,
multidisciplinary research project tackles this research gap with fieldwork and
associated laboratory work. The project includes training for undergraduate and
graduate students. Results will be made available to a broader public via a US-
based archaeological open access database.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An international
team of researchers investigates the roles of plants in ancient pastoralist
foodways by focusing on a single location with exceptionally good preservation
and a three thousand year history. Preliminary evidence for the culinary
importance of plants includes plant traces detected in pottery and on grinding
stones. In order to holistically reconstruct past food systems, this project
supports excavation and study of ancient plant and animal remains informed by an
ethnobotanical study. The latter includes interviews with pastoralist and farmer
communities on plant identifications and traditional uses; collection of modern
plant samples for comparison to and improved identification of ancient remains;
and the development of an ethnobotanical database that pairs physical plant
samples with text, audio, and video data on traditional plant knowledge and use.
Broader impacts of this research also includes the creation of a permanent
botanical research collection in two international
locations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.