* 2243339
* Loyola University Chicago Noyce Scholars: Teaching, Learning &amp; Leading with Schools and Communities
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Lara Smetana, Loyola University of Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 04/30/2028
* USD 773,735.00

This project aims to serve the national need of recruiting, developing, and
retaining a diverse and talented group of high school science and mathematics
teachers with the knowledge, practices, and dispositions to enact culturally
relevant STEM education. The project will identify and attract high-achieving
STEM majors through systematic outreach efforts and a "Try Teaching Stipend"
opportunity. Recruitment will target a diverse and qualified pool of applicants
that includes people of color, first generation college students, veterans, and
multilingual speakers. Scholars will complete Loyola University Chicago’s
initial teacher education program, aligned with Illinois’ Culturally Responsive
Teaching and Leading Standards, and designed to support development of teachers’
deep understanding of subject matter and how it can be transformative to
students’ lives. Coursework also embeds preparation for educating multilingual
learners and ensures eligibility for the state's English as a Second Language
(ESL) endorsement. Induction support will include participation in field
experiences and coaching "shadow days" in partner schools, as well as ongoing
mentoring and collaborative professional learning, all designed to support
instructional effectiveness and retention. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project, Loyola’s School of Education, College of Arts and Sciences, School of
Sustainability, and Center for Science and Math Education will partner with
Illinois District 219 and Chicago Public Schools. Five project goals guide the
execution of the project. First is to provide financial and other supports to at
least 19 high-achieving prospective biology, chemistry, physics, and mathematics
teachers who commit to teaching in high-need schools. Second is to increase the
number and diversity of STEM majors and professionals entering teaching. The
third goal is to prepare candidates to work with culturally and linguistically
diverse students, ensuring that 100% of Scholars fulfill requirements for the
state English as a Second Language (ESL) endorsement. Fourth is to retain
teachers in Chicago high-need schools through rigorous preparation combined with
high-quality, multi-dimensional induction support. Finally, the fifth goal is to
study program data to inform understanding of urban STEM teacher preparation,
mentoring, and induction support. Specifically, program research will study
potential connections among culturally sustaining instructional practices,
induction supports, and teacher retention. This Track 1: Scholarships and
Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors
and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced,
exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school
districts. It also supports research on the effectiveness and retention of K-12
STEM teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.