* 2243359
* Teachers Organizing Diverse Opportunities Across a STEM Ecosystem
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Laura Crossey, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 06/30/2028
* USD 918,200.00

This project aims to serve the national need for developing K-12 science teacher
leaders. The project is designed to support the development of science teacher
leaders who will become known as Noyce Master Teaching Fellows (MTFs). These
MTFs will learn to provide their students, as well as other science teachers,
with success in a STEM learning ecosystem. A STEM learning ecosystem refers to
the way a variety of environments, such as schools, community settings,
families, businesses, and museums, converge to create an array of learning
opportunities for students. When teachers connect school science with diverse
ways that science is done across a STEM learning ecosystem, they can likely
support a greater diversity of students in gaining interest in science and
experiencing increased achievement in science. This project intends to develop,
mentor, and retain a cadre of 12 experienced and exemplary science teachers to
strengthen a STEM learning ecosystem by pursuing three objectives. First is to
build relationships and leadership across the STEM learning ecosystem which
includes families, informal and formal STEM organizations, and STEM career and
college pathways. Second is to organize diverse learning experiences that
leverage connections across the STEM learning ecosystem and that broaden student
interest and success in K-12 science. Third, and finally, is to take advantage
of mentoring to become leaders in a science teacher professional association.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at the University of New Mexico includes
partnerships with the Taos, Gallup-McKinley, and Cuba school districts as well
as the New Mexico Science Teachers Association, two national laboratories, two
businesses, two cultural and community associations, and three museums. Over
five years the project intends to provide fellowships to 12 experienced and
exemplary practicing teachers from grades K-12. Project goals include building
capacity for greater formal and informal networking among K-12 science teachers
and other people in the STEM learning ecosystem. The project plans to provide
summer institutes, a system of mentoring and networking, and university online
micro-courses to support science teacher leaders in advancing their leadership
skills, pedagogical skills, and content knowledge. A main goal is for science
teacher leaders to use their new knowledge and network connections to create,
implement, conduct action research, and disseminate lessons with storylines that
connect to family, community, laboratory, and workplace ways of doing science.
The project builds on theoretical knowledge about the STEM learning ecosystem
and a relational form of leadership called Maize leadership. Similar to an
ecosystem perspective, the Maize Model will guide the MTFs to build
relationships and respect for diverse people because of a core purpose of
holistic interdependent balance and well-being in life. It honors Indigenous
values and has demonstrated success in creating pathways to school leadership
for diverse cadres of people in New Mexico. This Track 3: Master Teaching
Fellowships project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors
and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced,
exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school
districts. It also supports research on the effectiveness and retention of K-12
STEM teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.