* 2243692
* Collaborative Research: RESEARCH-PGR: Unraveling the origin of vegetative desiccation tolerance in vascular plants
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* John Cushman, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Kan Wang
* 02/28/2026
* USD 287,014.00

Climate change is increasing the frequency and severity of drought events around
the world, leading to major losses in crop productivity, which affect future
food security. Consequently, the generation of crops with enhanced drought
tolerance represents an urgent need for breeders, scientists, and governments.
Excessive water loss is lethal for most plants, but a few plants, known as
resurrection plants, have the remarkable ability to survive almost complete
dehydration of their green tissues. This ability, known as vegetative
desiccation tolerance (VDT), relies upon a combination of molecular processes
that allow the plant to maintain its viability in the dry state. Interestingly,
all genes involved in VDT are also present in desiccation-susceptible plants, as
most plants produce seeds that can survive for long periods in the dry state
without losing the capacity to germinate upon watering. Therefore, the
difference between tolerant and susceptible plants must be in their capacity to
activate the mechanisms that protect cells against desiccation in green tissues
and not only in the seed. The objective of this project is to identify the
mechanisms of how plants evolved to activate desiccation tolerance in both
vegetative and reproductive tissues. Specifically, this study seeks to identify
the genes that act as master regulators of desiccation tolerance. This
collaborative project will use a multidisciplinary approach to identify common
and specific molecular processes by comparing the dynamic responses of green
tissues and seeds. The results of this project will serve to design molecular
breeding schemes for improving crop resilience to climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Excessive water loss is lethal for most plants, but
a few species, known as resurrection plants, evolved the remarkable ability to
survive almost complete dryness. This ability, known as desiccation tolerance
(DT), relies upon a combination of physiological, biochemical, and molecular
responses that allow the plant to preserve cell integrity in the dry state.
Interestingly, all gene families involved in vegetative desiccation tolerance
(VDT) are present in desiccation-sensitive plants, suggesting that this trait
evolved primarily by changes in the regulatory networks coordinating the
expression of DT genes rather than from the acquisition of new genes. The lack
of accurate comparative analyses has hindered the identification of the
regulators controlling VDT and the study of the evolutionary origin of this
trait in vascular plants. Therefore, this collaborative project will determine
the regulatory networks controlling VDT and infer its origin during vascular
plant evolution by analyzing the DT response of key resurrection lineages using
integrative methodologies. Specific objectives include (1) determining the
kinetics of the global transcriptional changes in vegetative and reproductive
tissues during the DT process, (2) performing kinetic analyses of the global
metabolic changes in vegetative and reproductive tissues during the DT process,
(3) performing in situ and single-cell type kinetic analysis of transcriptional
and metabolomic changes of vegetative tissues during dehydration and recovery,
and (4) conducting comparative analyses of the regulatory networks controlling
DT in resurrection plants. This study will identify genetic-metabolic networks
required to activate VDT, providing the basis for future crop breeding of
enhanced drought tolerance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.