* 2243853
* REU Site: Computing for an Equitable Energy Transition
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* David Irwin, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Jill Denner
* 04/30/2026
* USD 433,765.00

This project establishes a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site at
the University of Massachusetts Amherst. Climate change is a significant threat
to humanity and the natural world. The objective for the Computing for an
Equitable Energy Transition (CEET) REU site is to expose undergraduate students
to the important and significant role that computing will play in the transition
to sustainable energy, both as an increasingly significant energy consumer and
in optimizing society’s energy- and carbon-efficiency. The project will
emphasize the importance of ensuring an equitable energy transition that does
not unfairly impact marginalized groups. CEET's activities will focus on three
distinct computing sub-disciplines that are important for enabling an equitable
energy transition, including i) designing energy-efficient, reliable, and low-
cost sensors, i.e., sensing, ii) designing energy- and carbon-efficient cloud
platforms and applications, i.e., computing, and iii) analyzing collected data
to identify and exploit opportunities for improving society’s sustainability
that are equitable, i.e., analysis. CEET will emphasize the recruitment of
groups traditionally under-represented in computing. The intended impact is to
train students to work at the intersection of computing, sustainability, and
equity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CEET's scope is broad, as its methods and
approaches draw from multiple inter-related sub-disciplines of computing that
are critical to achieving an equitable energy transition. Sensing-centric
projects will focus on inferring useful information from coarse, indirect, and
unreliable sensors that enable environmental monitoring without expensive large-
scale sensor deployments. Computing-centric projects will focus on optimizing
energy- and carbon-efficiency to reduce the environmental impact of large-scale
cloud platforms and applications. Data-centric projects will develop methods for
analyzing collected sensor data to automatically identify and exploit real-world
opportunities for energy and carbon savings. In each case, projects will
consider problems through an equity lens to better understand the reasons and
consequences of inefficiency. Ultimately, CEET's goal is to provide students a
broad background in the many areas of computing research that intersect the
energy transition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.