* 2243452
* STTR Phase I:  Enabling Student Project Collaboration with Artificial Intelligence Augmented Mentorship
* TIP,TI
* 03/15/2023,11/30/2023
* Tracie Ponder, LEARN COLLABORATE INC.
* Standard Grant
* Rajesh Mehta
* 11/30/2023
* USD 274,927.00

The broader/commercial impact of this Small Business Technology Transfer Phase I
project is in improving both student learning and workforce readiness through
interdependent learning experiences. The project will create project-based
environments that promote skills such as communication, critical thinking,
problem solving, time management, creativity, and teamwork â€“ all mirroring
professional work environments. The technology will also promote development of
skills such as project management, writing, business and data analysis, design,
and presentation. Project collaboration requires that students interact
frequently throughout the project completion process, including frequent mentor
or teacher interactions. Such an interdependent environment creates a real-world
dynamic that better prepares students to enter the workforce. The platform
developed by this project is likely to create significant societal impact while
participating in the fastest growing e-learning sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposal seeks to develop a collaborative community platform using proprietary
project collaboration models integrated with Artificial Intelligence (AI)
augmented mentorship to enhance student workforce readiness. The technology will
be designed to provide the right piece of information to the students and
mentors at the right time. By analyzing and unifying all the content under a
domain-specific semantic representation, the system will be able to aggregate
and organize all the content and identify the piece for intervention that is
contextually most useful. To make project collaboration and mentorship easier
between students and mentors in a trustworthy manner, modeling will be done
utilizing minimal supervision. This modelling will include combining contextual
embeddings from language models with graph-based neural networks to capture
interactions across multiple facets. The technology will build upon
explainability of deep neural networks to provide an appropriate level of
transparency into the decision making, both for the users to learn to trust the
platform, as well as for the platform developers to build systems that aid in
reliable, trustworthy, and fair mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.