* 2243417
* An Inclusive and Effective Approach to Recruiting and Preparing Mathematics, Science, and Computer Science Teachers for Urban, High-Need Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Ricardo Rodriguez, Texas Wesleyan University
* Continuing Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 05/31/2028
* USD 527,170.00

This project aims to address the national need for diverse, highly qualified
STEM teachers in high-need urban settings. Towards this end the project expects
to prepare 20 Texas certified math, science or computer science teachers while
strengthening a regional educational collaborative for future efforts designed
at preparing and supporting STEM educators. Through this educational
collaborative, this project will create an ecosystem of STEM education awareness
and enriched STEM opportunities for preK-12 students. This collaborative project
intentionally connects existing STEM-focused preK-12 programs into a seamless
pathway for recruitment, preparation, induction, and retention of diverse STEM
teachers for high-need urban public schools. Ultimately, the project will
address systemic inequities in access to STEM opportunities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project Texas Wesleyan University (TXWES), a
small-enrollment urban university in Fort Worth, TX, is partnering with Tarrant
County College District (TCCD), an open-access community college district, the
Fort Worth Independent School District, a high-need urban local education
agency, the Leadership Academy Network, a community-based organization, and the
University of Texas at Arlington, a large-enrollment public research university.
Two principal goals guide the execution of the project. First is to recruit and
prepare 20 mathematics, science, or computer science teachers who obtain a STEM
bachelor's degree while securing a standard Texas Teacher certification through
Texas Wesleyan Universityâ€™s Educator Preparation Program. Second is to
strengthen and expand partnerships with Fort Worth preK-12 and post-secondary
institutions, with an intentional focus on the recruitment, preparation,
induction, and retention of STEM teachers, so as to increase the number of
highly qualified STEM educators and STEM master teachers in the area. To
accomplish these goals, the project will intentionally connect existing STEM-
focused preK-12 programs into a seamless pathway for the recruitment,
preparation, and retention of STEM teachers for high-need urban public schools.
The project will advance knowledge specific to STEM education, STEM teacher
certification, induction, and retention in high-need, urban schools. This
project provides strategic levers and support throughout the entire teacher
development pathway, beginning with elementary students and their families,
through the STEM teacher certification process, and culminating with induction
support to foster long-term retention of STEM teachers in high-need schools to
positively impact the Fort Worth STEM education ecosystem. This project will add
to the education research on effective STEM teacher development through a
systems approach. Ultimately, the project will build a positive feedback loop to
continually build, reinforce, and expand STEM awareness and opportunities for
all members of the Fort Worth community. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends
project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program
(Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and
professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts. It also supports research on the persistence, retention, and
effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.