* 2243957
* REU Site: Coastal Marine Science Research Opportunities for Undergraduates at the Virginia Institute of Marine Science (VIMS)
* GEO,OCE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Rochelle Seitz, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 04/30/2026
* USD 144,788.00

The College of William and Maryâ€™s Virginia Institute of Marine Sciences (VIMS)
will host a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site program at the
VIMS campus in Gloucester Pt., VA. The program will bring undergraduates to the
VIMS campus each summer for three years. The Summer Intern Program at VIMS
introduces undergraduate students to the complex environmental issues facing
coastal ocean and estuarine systems globally. The major objectives of the intern
program are to: (1) provide meaningful research and training opportunities for
undergraduates in coastal marine science, and (2) increase the participation of
under-represented groups in the ocean sciences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mentors
are selected from the VIMS faculty and visiting scientists. The program provides
internships in the areas of marine ecology, biological and chemical
oceanography, biogeochemistry, geological and physical oceanography, and marine
policy. Student participants are recruited from throughout the United States and
include individuals from under-represented groups and from non-research colleges
and universities. The research activities of enrolled interns often result in
peer-reviewed publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.