* 2243413
* Inspiring Science and Mathematics Teachers to Reach Underserved Classrooms by Implementing Innovative, Data-supported Concepts
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Kathleen Kristian, IONA UNIVERSITY
* Continuing Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 03/31/2028
* USD 489,172.00

This project aims to serve the national need for preparing high-quality
mathematics and science teachers. Nationally, mathematics and science teaching
positions are hard to staff particularly in high-need schools. Through the
education pathway envisioned by this project, participants will begin at a two-
year or a four-year college, transfer to a math or science education/teacher
licensure program at a four-year college, co-enroll in a master’s degree
program, gain teacher licensure, and return to high-need schools as math or
science teachers. The project will enhance math and science education coursework
and experiences for undergraduates and graduate students by integrating mentored
student teaching experiences; developing innovative course curricula using
design thinking; creating modules showing design thinking in action that
scholars and education professionals may access to enhance their science and
math curriculum; and facilitating professional development opportunities to
develop participants’ professional identities as teachers prepared to succeed in
high-need schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will support 15
undergraduate students along a five-year education pathway through a STEM degree
(chemistry, biology, mathematics) and a Master of Science in Teaching (MST) as
part of their preparation for a New York State adolescent-education teaching
certification for grades 7–12. The goal is to prepare the scholarship recipients
to teach in high-need local educational agency classrooms near Iona University,
such as Ossining Union Free School District and Mount Vernon City School
District. This project builds from a successful Noyce Capacity Building project,
through which Iona and Westchester Community College (WCC) built a 2+2+1
articulation agreement for students to earn an associate degree at WCC in
addition to a STEM degree and an MST at Iona. This project will make use of a
place-based interdisciplinary module designed to expose students in entry-level
chemistry courses to the idea of using urban ecology as an interdisciplinary
subject with connections to math, chemistry, and biology. The project will also
employ design thinking within the urban ecology modules. Design thinking is an
innovative concept regularly used by Fortune 500 companies as a creative
problem-solving process to contemplate and discover innovative solutions to
problems of all kinds. The proposed project is designed to accomplish the
following objectives. (1) Recruit a minimum of 15 Iona STEM majors or WCC
transfer students who will have the coursework needed for NYS teaching
certification through participation in the Noyce Scholars program. (2) Retain at
least 93% of original Scholars through strategies that include experiential
learning opportunities, academic enrichment, and mentoring. (3) Prepare program
participants to teach in high-need LEAs. (4) Graduate and place 100% of Noyce
Scholars in high-need LEAs. (5) Track and support the persistence of Noyce
Scholar alumni during their high-need LEA teaching service and beyond by
providing mentorship and induction support activities. The Iona Noyce program
will contribute knowledge to the field of teacher preparation by exploring the
use of interdisciplinary STEM modules as a tool for Scholars to experience
place-based STEM teaching first as students and then later as teachers.
Additionally, Scholars will engage in experiences that include summer research,
fieldwork, and a Design Thinking and Innovation workshop introducing the main
principles of design thinking and the use of design thinking for developing
curricula and motivating educational change. This combination of curriculum,
activities, and support is built on best practices and is intended to develop
Scholars’ identities as teachers, giving them a sense of their abilities as
professionals, researchers, innovators, and mentors who can tackle challenges in
the classroom. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported
through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program
supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become
effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become
STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on
the effectiveness and retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.