* 2243432
* OPUS:  Synthesizing three decades of tadpole plasticity experiments with two decades of wetland surveys
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Rick Relyea, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Leslie J. Rissler
* 04/30/2025
* USD 278,827.00

Many plants and animals experience variable environmental conditions over space
and time and they can respond by changing their shape in ways that make them
better suited to their current environment. Decades of experiments have provided
tremendous insights into how plants and animal change shape, but we know much
less about “shape-shifting” species in nature. Understanding how plants and
animals evolve the ability to change their traits in different environments is
of interest not only to foundational research in biology, but also to real-world
applications, including changes in tolerance to pesticides, freshwater
salinization, invasive species, wildlife diseases, human health, and climate
change. Thus, the insights from this research will provide societal benefits by
furthering our understanding of how changes in morphology can evolve. The work
will train 3 undergraduate students, involve summer high school and middle
school teachers, and K-12 and public outreach efforts (including with
underserved schools). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will synthesize long-
term data on natural environments to better understand how environmental
variation impacts the future evolution of species traits. Using discoveries from
over three decades of experiments on multiple species of tadpoles, which alter
their morphology in different predator and competitor environments, I plan to
synthesize that work with nearly two decades of data on environmental variation
from long-term surveys of 40 ponds and wetlands in Michigan. The proposal has
four major objectives: 1) examine whether the morphological changes observed in
our experiments also occur in nature; 2) determine if variation in competition
and predation in natural wetlands differs for each tadpole species and is
associated with known morphological changes of each species; 3) investigate how
different populations experience different amounts of natural variation in
competition and predation over time, and 4) predict responses to natural
selection in natural ponds by predators and competitors over time to see if it
aligns with observations in prior experiments. Integrating these detailed and
long-term datasets allows a synthesis that will address important and novel
research questions, thereby adding value and new insights for current and future
investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.