* 2243932
* Conference: 2023 Chloroplast Biotechnology GRC &amp; GRS: Harnessing the SynBio Revolution for Metabolic Engineering and Enhanced Photosynthesis
* BIO,IOS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Klaas van Wijk, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 12/31/2023
* USD 15,000.00

This NSF award will provide financial support to US-based graduate students,
postdocs or non-tenured faculty to attend the Gordon Research Conference on
Plastid Biotechnology to be held in March 2023, in Ventura, CA, USA. Plastids
are essential organelles in algae and plants, and they carry out photosynthesis
to produce sugars and starch from captured sunlight and CO2. Plastids also
produce a diverse array of molecules that are essential in our food and for our
health, including several (pro)vitamins, amino acids, antioxidants, fatty acids
and lipids This conference will serve to discuss ongoing research to improve
plastids in plants and algae to enhance their production of products that are
beneficial for our society. These include vaccines, novel pharmaceutical
products, nutritional supplements, as well as biofuels. Junior and senior
researchers will discuss and interact to generate new ideas and start novel
collaborations to accelerate scientific discoveries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
NSF award will support the Gordon Research Conference on Plastid Biotechnology
to be held in March 2023, in Ventura, CA, USA. The conference will present novel
research in engineering plastids to either improve existing functions (e.g.,
photosynthesis) or provide them with new one. Recent progress in this research,
particularly through the transfer of molecular solutions from algae and
cyanobacteria, has been impressive. In parallel, the engineering of novel
functions into chloroplasts to make use of their metabolic and protein synthesis
capabilities is also at an exciting juncture. The genetic transformation of
plastids is now routine in many plants and algae, so the focus is moving to
synthetic biology solutions based on expression of multiple genes under
sophisticated control circuits. Indeed, the relatively small and well-understood
plastid genome is now a prime target for ambitious projects in several countries
aimed at design and synthesis of novel genomes with enhanced traits. The basic
science underpinning these advances (e.g., genome structure and replication,
control of gene expression, proteostasis, plastid metabolism, metabolite
transport) will be covered where relevant to these biotechnological
applications. The technologies discussed will cover the entire range from subtle
tweaks in plastid metabolism to complete redesign of the plastid genome, and
will include all aspects of modifying organellar genomes, proteomes or
metabolomes needed for applications in agriculture, industrial biotechnology or
the pharmaceutical sector. Target products to be covered include, for example,
biopharmaceuticals (vaccines and therapeutic proteins), industrial enzymes,
green chemicals and next-generation biofuels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.