* 2243351
* Preparing Successful STEM Teachers to Serve Students in High-Need Schools through Pathways, Pipelines, and Partnerships
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Anton Wallner, Webster University
* Continuing Grant
* John Haddock
* 02/29/2028
* USD 775,767.00

This project aims to serve the national need for high-quality STEM teachers
prepared to equip middle and high school students in high-need school districts
to be the next generation of STEM professionals. Over its five-year duration,
the project will provide scholarships to twenty-two (22) aspiring STEM teachers
majoring in biology, chemistry, computer science, or mathematics with a double
major in education. This project at Webster University (WU) includes
partnerships with the Ritenour School District, Ritenour High School, and St.
Louis Community College (STLCC). To support student professional and educational
experiences to lead to well-prepared STEM educators, the project also includes
community partnerships with the Academy of Science St. Louis, the Urban League
of St. Louis, and the Donald Danforth Plant Science Center. A fundamental
impetus of the project is to strengthen the pathways and pipelines for the
combination of STEM and STEM teacher preparation programs through specialized
curricula and specially designed project activities. This will enable high-need
schools in the St. Louis area and beyond to provide their students a strong and
inclusive STEM education, which, in turn, will help prepare many of these
students for success in a future STEM education and the STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Webster University in St. Louis
will be guided by four main goals. First is to recruit more students beyond
current numbers to pursue both a STEM degree and teaching certification through
purposeful pathways. The project will follow a "grow your own" approach by
recruiting prospective teachers and, later, placing them as certified teachers
in high-need schools in their home community. Second, project initiatives will
strengthen the pathways and pipelines to STEM teaching through specialized
curricula, culturally relevant pedagogical methodologies that promote diversity,
equity, and inclusion, enhanced advising, collaborative faculty-student research
projects in STEM, field experiences in high-need schools, and STEM outreach
programs with community partners. A third goal is to enact collaborative
partnerships with academic and community organizations that provide relevant
professional and educational experiences leading to better-prepared STEM
educators. A fourth goal is to promote success for STEM teachers working in
high-need schools through supportive mentorship and intentional induction
opportunities to strengthen students’ mastery of STEM concepts and skills and
improve teacher retention. Qualitative and quantitative project evaluation will
provide formative and summative feedback and assessment. Project data collected
regarding how demand is met for high-quality STEM teachers in St. Louis will be
compared to results in the literature to add to the knowledge base on filling
gaps in teacher shortages, especially in urban areas. This project will also add
to the "grow your own" literature on meeting teacher capacity needs through the
three Ps (pathways, pipelines, and partnerships). The project will distinguish
itself in that the three Ps leverage not only a high-need school district, but
also local community colleges and community partners engaged in STEM activities.
Through publications and presentations at several different venues,
investigators will proactively disseminate project findings and outcomes to
other institutions regionally and nationwide. This Track 1 Scholarships and
Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors
and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced,
exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school
district. It also supports research on the effectiveness and retention of K-12
STEM teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.