* 2243457
* Preparing, Supporting, and Diversifying STEM Teachers for High-Needs Schools in  Californiaâ€™s Central Valley by Promoting Social and Environmental Justice Pedagogies
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Bjorg Johannsdottir, California State University-Stanislaus
* Continuing Grant
* John Haddock
* 03/31/2028
* USD 746,993.00

This project aims to serve the national need for preparing and retaining high-
quality STEM teachers who are prepared to teach in high-need school districts.
Research indicates that when teachers and students have similar demographics,
students' test scores, attendance, and suspension rates are positively affected.
Marginalized social groups consistently bear differential impacts, and all
fields of science and mathematics are called upon for commitments to improve
STEM knowledge and to create solutions for equitable advancement of K-12
students with STEM literacies. To foster these improvements, a focus of the
project will be to provide teacher preparation for undergraduate STEM majors or
STEM degree holders to become educators with strong content knowledge and
pedagogical expertise that target social and environmental justice initiatives.
Teacher preparation and induction will emphasize empowerment, transformative
leadership, equitable and inclusive educational practices, and research-informed
instruction through planned curricular and induction-period activities, as well
as participation in a professional learning community. This will enable high-
need schools in California's Central Valley and other areas nationwide to
provide their students a strong and inclusive science and mathematics education.
This, in turn, will help prepare many of these same students for the STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at California State University-
Stanislaus (CSU-Stanislaus), an Hispanic serving institution (HSI), includes
partnerships with Turlock Unified School District (USD), Stockton USD, and
Modesto City Schools. The project will be guided by several goals. First, over
five years, the project will recruit and prepare a diverse set of twenty-five
(25) high-quality students, who are undergraduate majors or who have a degree,
in biology, chemistry, computer science, engineering, geoscience, mathematics,
or physics, to become K-12 STEM teachers in high-needs schools. A special focus
will be on recruiting students of color and other minorities who are
traditionally underrepresented in the STEM arena. The Scholars, who would be
supported for up to three years if a current undergraduate student, and for one
credentialing year if already holding a STEM degree, would represent an increase
of twenty-five STEM teachers beyond current numbers. Second, project activities
and CSU-Stanislaus curricula will provide these prospective STEM teachers with
high-level STEM content knowledge and culturally sustaining pedagogies as well
as leadership, socio-emotional learning, and active learning skills and
expertise to prepare them for their future classrooms in high-needs schools.
This process will also feature preparation with respect to national narratives,
frameworks, and standards concerning teaching and student learning. A third goal
is to decrease teacher burnout and attrition rates by creating an induction
process that includes a professional learning community and networking
opportunities aimed at connecting practicing STEM teachers with one another. A
fourth goal is to create, implement, study, sustain, and disseminate a model
that (1) involves research-based best practices to prepare and retain
prospective STEM teachers, especially from traditionally marginalized groups,
and (2) emphasizes pedagogies that attend to diversity, equity, and inclusion.
Comprehensive mixed-methods project evaluation will provide formative and
summative assessment and feedback. Through publications, conferences
presentations, and workshops, investigators will proactively disseminate project
findings and outcomes to other CSU campuses and nationwide. This Track 1:
Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
needs school districts. It also supports research on the effectiveness and
retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.