* 2243230
* A Tale of No Tail: Sperm Flagella Loss in Mormyrids
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Bruce Carlson, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathryn Dickson
* 03/31/2026
* USD 926,260.00

This project investigates genetic and evolutionary factors behind the loss of
conserved traits in weakly electric fishes, specifically mormyrids. Mormyrids
are a group of over 200 species known for unique traits, including the ability
to generate electric signals and the complete absence of flagella in their
sperm. The research team recently discovered a partial deletion mutation in a
gene that is essential for sperm flagella formation in mormyrids. The project
uses gene editing in zebrafish to test whether this single mutation results in
the loss of flagella in fishes, and investigates a newly discovered unique
morphological trait of mormyrid eggs that may facilitate fertilization when
flagella are absent. In addition, several hypotheses about the evolutionary
causes of flagella loss in mormyrid sperm will be tested, providing a link
between genetic mutations and the evolutionary forces that operate on them. By
revealing effects of the mutation on other functional systems dependent upon
cilia and flagella, the research may also provide novel insight into human
ciliary disease. The project promotes teaching and training by integrating
research outcomes into an undergraduate course and through training of a post-
doctoral fellow, two graduate students, and several undergraduate student
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the project is to understand
the genetic basis of the loss of flagella in sperm in weakly electric mormyrid
fishes, a group of over 200 species known for their numerous derived and novel
traits, including the evolution of electrogenesis, electroreception, and extreme
encephalization. Interestingly, mormyrids are also the only known vertebrate
group to completely lack flagella on their sperm. The research focuses on a
highly conserved cilia- and flagella-related protein which plays a crucial role
in the formation of sperm flagella and ciliary motility; the gene coding for
this protein was recently discovered to have a partial deletion within
mormyrids. By using CRISPR/Cas9 gene editing to create mutant zebrafish, the
investigators will determine whether this deletion leads to flagellar loss, and
what pleiotropic consequences of this mutation result for other ciliated cell
types. Additionally, the project will examine sperm-egg interaction in
mormyrids, test for evidence of sperm competition, and assess the hypothesis
that sperm flagellar loss is driven by selection for energetically efficient
testes. The study of mormyrids will provide important insights into the
evolution of a unique vertebrate mating system and may also have implications
for novel therapeutic interventions for primary ciliary dyskinesia in humans. In
addition to educational and training impacts, the project also supports
continuation of the EFISH Genomics Portal, a resource for the scientific
community studying electric fishes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was co-
funded by the BIO-IOS Physiological Mechanisms and Biomechanics Program and the
Animal Developmental Mechanisms Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.