* 2243330
* CHS: Medium: Collaborative Research: Regional Experiments for the Future of Work in America
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2021,11/30/2024
* Jeffrey Bardzell, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 11/30/2024
* USD 555,419.00

This research will provide rich insights into a new line of regional experiments
with computer-based economic development in the American Midwest, rooted in
collaborations between government, industry, and universities to drive their
traditions of manufacturing excellence into the next generation. The research
will inform the development of sociotechnical interventions supporting bottom-up
innovation procedures and emergent outcomes. Such implications will be informed
by cutting edge research on data collection and analysis techniques. The
project's emphasis on marginalized or excluded stakeholders will offer insights
on how to ensure such systems maximize stakeholder agency at all stages of the
process. Research outcomes include the identification of transferable practices,
policies, and frameworks. These will contribute actionable tactics on how to
pursue innovation agendas in contemporary economic contexts characterized by the
mobility of information, capital, and talent; emerging forms of work; and
contemporary sociotechnical infrastructures. This research will also contribute
methods to help researchers better understand stakeholder needs at the regional
scale, with a particular focus on populations that have traditionally been
underserved.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project will include in-depth
ethnographic research and stakeholder-driven engagements with the following two
groups: (1) those who are at the forefront of conceiving, designing and
implementing techno-urban experiments of fab cities, Internet of Things cities,
and smart zones; (2) underserved and excluded populations, most immediately
affected by these technological advances. By conducting sociotechnical
interventions with community stakeholders, the research advances their
commitments to broaden participation. Specifically, this research will build
self-efficacy through the clarification of an urban area's own regional
advantage. The project will do so through (1) skill building, including building
skills with new technologies such as digital fabrication; (2) developing
community's capacities to act in a collective way, supporting democracy and
self-determination; (3) regional knowledge production and dissemination,
including successful community models, actions, and communication tactics; and
(4) including diverse actors in spite of their different histories, legacies,
aspirations, and concerns, that is, fostering a sense of community in using
information technology to build a better future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.