* 2243973
* REU Site: Equitable Data Science in Adolescent Development
* SBE,SMA
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Mark Fiecas, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2026
* USD 132,788.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences
(SBE). Equitable data science investigates how biases in the data, the analysis
of the data, and the interpretation of results can reinforce long-standing
inequalities in our society and also create new inequities and disparities.
Thus, it is critical to train the next generation of data scientists to develop
methods and analyze data responsibly. This interdisciplinary project will
provide undergraduate students with training in equitable data science to build
their research skills in data science, statistical modeling and machine
learning, and scientific communication. Through this training the students will
learn how data sources, analysis methods, and the interpretation of results can
reflect, reinforce, and mitigate systemic inequalities. The students will be
trained to prioritize equity when approaching data-centered projects. These
projects will lead to publicly-available software and reports that bring
awareness to societal inequities and inform discussions on how to address them.
Finally, the students will disseminate their work via a community event, which
will inspire future research and connect the community with equity-related
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing skills in equitable data science are
invaluable towards enhancing scientific rigor while balancing fairness and
equity in scientific research. During the 10-week program, students will build
research skills in equitable data science and answer equity-oriented research
questions about adolescent development using data from the Adolescent Brain
Cognitive Development (ABCD) Study. Topics on diversity, equity, and inclusion
(DEI) and their role in data science form the foundations of this program,
emphasized early through DEI modules and discussions. Students will learn the
causes and consequences of social inequality and how these inequalities manifest
themselves in scientific research, from the data itself to the interpretation of
results. The program continues with extensive technical training in R for
programming, statistical modeling, and data visualization. Weekly workshops will
provide technical training on topics ranging from statistics and machine
learning to large-scale programming. Seminars and professional development
events will be held every other week so that students will hear from researchers
about their work on social and health inequities, prepare students for graduate
school or the job market, and provide students with networking opportunities.
Hackathons will also be held every other week so that students can gain
experiences in equitable data science beyond the data from the ABCD Study. The
10-week program culminates in a public-facing event, giving the students the
opportunity to present their work to the community and engage with the community
in dialogue around DEI.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.