* 2243707
* I-Corps:  Noninvasive Monitoring of Implantable Devices via Methacrylate-Modified Nanoparticles (NanoMA)
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2024
* Ryan Roeder, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a nanomaterial platform to enable noninvasive monitoring of
implantable medical devices, especially tissue engineered medical products.
Researchers, companies developing new products, and contract research
organizations, currently have no established means to noninvasively monitor the
function of implantable devices during in vivo preclinical testing. Current best
practices for evaluating safety and efficacy in preclinical testing are
invasive, requiring the excision of implants for destructive testing ex vivo
making preclinical testing is an extremely costly and time-consuming barrier to
innovation. The proposed nanomaterial platform will offer an alternative product
that overcomes this barrier to significantly decrease the regulatory burden
(cost, time, and animals) facing potential customers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is based on the development of methacrylate-modified
nanoparticles (nanoMA) as a nanomaterial platform for noninvasive monitoring of
implantable medical devices. The proposed technology functions as imaging
contrast agents to overcome the inability to noninvasively image common scaffold
biomaterials such as hydrogels. NanoMA are able to be linked to hydrogels in one
step, with no disruption to hydrogel function, while enabling tunable imaging
contrast for noninvasive, longitudinal monitoring of surgical placement,
biodegradation, and drug release. These nanoparticles are designed for seamless
integration with existing scaffold biomaterials, either as an additive or
prepackaged with commercialized biopolymers or bioinks for
bioprinting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.