* 2243923
* REU Site: Climate and Sustainability Research in Nanotechnology and Electrochemical Devices for Community College Students
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2026
* Carolyn Nichol, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 03/31/2026
* USD 404,872.00

The three-year renewal REU Site project, "Climate and Sustainability Research in
Nanotechnology and Electrochemical Devices for Community College Students", at
Rice University will provide ten community college students in the Greater
Houston area with summer research internships each year pertaining to the topics
of climate and sustainability. The program aims to engage students, particularly
underrepresented minorities (URM), in the STEM fields by recruiting them from
community colleges. Through laboratory research experiences and interactions
with faculty, post-docs, and student mentors at Rice University, REU
participants will gain exposure to STEM research, applications, and careers.
Taking part in undergraduate research experiences facilitates the transition for
students from two-year to four-year colleges, and creates a pathway to graduate
school and research careers. Students in this ten-week program will engage in
projects that involve real-world applications pertaining to sustainability,
energy, and water purification. Furthermore, the program will offer substantial
mentorship and training to the students with the support of the participating
Rice faculty, staff, and students and through its strong infrastructure designed
to enhance diversity and student success. One of the primary goals of the
program is to broaden and diversify the STEM workforce by providing
transformative research experiences to students who would not have otherwise
considered STEM research or careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three-year renewal
REU Site project, "Climate and Sustainability Research in Nanotechnology and
Electrochemical Devices for Community College Students" at Rice University will
introduce ten Houston-area community college students each year to climate and
sustainability research, applications, education, and careers through 10-week
internships and follow-up support. This REU will broaden the participation of
URM students in STEM by providing research opportunities to a diverse pool of
community college students who might not otherwise have access to state-of-the-
art research facilities, prominent scientists, and proactive mentorship.
Houston's community colleges represent a large, diverse group of students, many
of whom are first-generation college students. This REU will be a bridge between
2- and 4-year colleges and serve as a pipeline for those entering graduate
school. Furthermore, through this REU, participants will build and maintain
mentoring relationships with the Rice faculty, staff, postdocs, and grad
students while fostering inter-institutional partnerships between Rice
University and community colleges in the Houston area. Rice University has
established itself as a leader in the field of nanotechnology through extensive
research facilities, interdisciplinary collaboration, and significant
breakthroughs. This REU will offer students lab experiences in cutting-edge
research. Using nanotechnology and electrochemical devices, students will
address climate change and environmental sustainability through three
interdisciplinary themes: 1) Processes to reduce greenhouse gases, 2) Energy
storage and management, and 3) Water purification. REU participant research and
program findings will be published in peer-reviewed journals and presented at
regional and national conferences. Moreover, project outcomes will be
disseminated to Rice University, community college faculty, students, and the
Houston region through an annual poster colloquium and the REU
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.