* 2243914
* GOALI: Data-driven design of recycling tolerant aluminum alloys incorporating future material flows
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Eric Homer, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 07/31/2025
* USD 342,917.00

Metals production contributes to 8% of greenhouse gas emissions worldwide.
Improving materials efficiency must play a role in decarbonizing metals
production because such strategies are available now and achievable along a
shorter time horizon than novel production methods. One strategy to improve
material consumption is through improved materials recovery using recycling.
Recycling is particularly beneficial for aluminum, where energy benefits from
use of recycled materials are much improved relative to primary consumption.
Significantly improved recycling, both in terms of quantity and quality, can
play a role in achieving decarbonization targets over the necessary greenhouse
gas reduction timeline. To this end, metals production industries have set goals
to increase the use of recycled content. In the face of an evolving scrap stream
and shifts in product demand, these targets will not be achievable without
coupling alloy design with considerations of future end-of-life scrap streams.
However, alloy design has traditionally focused on improving performance without
much regard for environmental impact or the ability to recycle the materials.
This project will design new alloys by including recyclability in addition to
performance metrics into the design process accounting for how scrap streams are
expected to evolve in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project
is to create a design pipeline that can be used alongside traditional alloy
design to create recycling-friendly alloys. Recycling-friendly alloys are
defined as alloys that can incorporate a lot of scrap in their production (sink)
but that can also be used in the production of a lot of other alloys (source).
This research will address this trade-off between sink and source by (i)
creating a materials distribution model to inform recycling and future scrap
streams, (ii) developing a Bayesian optimization algorithm to effectively
explore the alloy space, and (iii) identifying the design space using
constraints on alloys compositions and properties. The material distribution
model will be a combination of material flow analysis and blending model that
will inform the future material streams (compositions, quantities, prices of
scrap streams and future demand) and how those can be used to produce new
alloys. This model will then be maximized over the alloy space using the
efficient optimization method. Finally, the optimization to find the best alloy
will be subject to constraints on compositions, thermodynamic quantities, and
properties. Overall, this work focuses on alloy design that optimizes scrap use
in projected material flows by integrating a materials distribution model,
efficient optimization, and constrained design space. Since these elements have
never been integrated together, not only is the approach unique, but the
integration involves advances in each of these areas. Thus, the proposed work
represents a step forward in sustainable alloy design and integrates and
innovates on previously developed approaches in this
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.