* 2243824
* REU Site: Botany and Conservation Biology Research at the Missouri Botanical Garden
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Wendy Applequist, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2026
* USD 324,987.00

This REU Site award to the Missouri Botanical Garden (MBG), located in St.
Louis, MO, will support the training of 10 students each year for 10 weeks
during the summers of 2023-2025. It is anticipated that a total of 30 students,
primarily from schools with limited research opportunities or from an under-
represented group, will be trained in the program. MBG is one of the most active
botanical research institutions in the US, with special strengths in plant
conservation and taxonomy, offering unusual opportunities for students to engage
in research of practical importance. Students will learn how research is
conducted and many will co-author articles in scientific journals. Mentors will
benefit by developing mentorship skills through formal training and hands-on
opportunities to mentor students. Students’ experiences and lasting benefits of
the program will be assessed through the online SALG URSSA tool and long-term
follow-up to determine their career paths. Students will be required to register
their participation on the NSF’s ETAP system.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site
will focus on botany and conservation biology. Mentors from throughout MBG’s
Science and Conservation division will participate, offering projects in plant
ecology, restoration ecology, taxonomy and systematics, conservation biology and
genetics, ethnobotany, and pollination biology. At present, students apply by
emailing an application form and other materials; in future, the ETAP system
will be used to streamline the process. Candidates will be selected by a
committee including the PI and co-PI, with input from mentors. Students will
work on individual research projects, attend weekly seminars, and participate in
group educational sessions, concluding by presenting their results in a
symposium. Students will be trained in ethics and responsible conduct of
research, research methods, scientific writing, preparing oral and poster
presentations, applying to and succeeding in graduate school, and career
development. Some students will co-author journal articles; recent publications
describe new species and explore the effects of restoration practices, the
population genetics of endangered species, and coevolution of morphological
traits in legumes. More information about the program is available by visiting
http://www.mobot.org/reu , or by contacting the PI (Dr. Wendy Applequist) or co-
PI (Dr. Mónica Carlsen) at reu@mobot.org.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.