* 2243775
* Collaborative Research: A Physics-Informed Flood Early Warning System for Agricultural Watersheds with Explainable Deep Learning and Process-Based Modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Chaoqun Lu, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 06/30/2026
* USD 499,986.00

Global floods and extreme rainfall events have surged by more than 50% this
decade and are now occurring at a rate four times higher than in 1980. However,
the capability of physical models in predicting flood events remains limited
across spatial scales, especially in intensively managed agricultural systems
like the Midwestern U.S. The apparent disparity between observed seasonal
patterns of extreme precipitation and high streamflow events presents a
challenge when using precipitation alone to predict flood occurrence and
severity. This project addresses a fundamental question in hydrologic science:
how do watershed characteristics and in-land management practices regulate the
precipitation-runoff relationship across agriculture-dominated watersheds? The
modeling framework in this project will integrate the complex impacts of
watershed characteristics, human land use, and management practices into
hydrological prediction. An early warning system will be developed for
projecting flood occurrence at a granular level in a managed system and will be
shared for further evaluation of the flood forecasting performance and
uncertainty assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goal of the
research is to develop a data-driven, physics-informed early warning system to
predict flood occurrence and support communities in agriculture-dominated
watersheds across the Midwestern United States. This project will develop a
graph-based transformer deep learning approach integrated with process-based
hydro-ecological modeling to improve flood prediction accuracy and keep the
interpretable structure. The results of the project will be tested, shared, and
deployed as a real-time prediction tool on a web-based platform that integrates
mapping capabilities, advanced visualizations, and mobile access. The early
warning system will be accessible to multiple users, especially underrepresented
communities, concerning the direct impacts of flooding on life and property and
the indirect effects on food security, economy, and livelihood of the
communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by Hydrologic
Sciences, the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR),
and the Directorate for Geosciences to support AI/ML advancement in the
geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.