* 2243591
* Exploring Nonclassical States for Quantum Metrology via Quantum Resource Theory
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2022,06/30/2025
* Wenchao Ge, University of Rhode Island
* Standard Grant
* Robert Forrey
* 06/30/2025
* USD 181,751.00

Quantum metrology is the study of making high-resolution and highly sensitive
measurements of physical parameters using quantum theory. Development in this
field will not only improve our understanding of the fundamental underpinnings
of nature, but also advance national security and technology. Nonclassical
states of light are essential resources for achieving enhanced sensitivity in
quantum metrology. Quantitative understanding of these states as a resource for
quantum-enhanced tasks is crucial for practical sensing applications. However,
such a perspective on nonclassical states for quantum metrology is not fully
developed. This project will take the new perspective to investigate methods of
quantifying nonclassical states in the framework of a resource theory for
quantum-enhanced metrology. The results of this project could provide new
schemes for performing quantum metrology using nonclassical states and motivate
new experiments, which will build the foundations for future quantum
technologies. Broader impacts of this project include training graduate students
in theoretical quantum physics, providing research opportunities for advanced
undergraduates, and building a diverse workforce in quantum information
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is at the intersection of three
research frontiers: quantum metrology, nonclassical states, and quantum resource
theories. Quantum resource theories provide a powerful framework for studying
quantum phenomena from a new foundational perspective. Based on the resource
theory of nonclassicality, the PI’s group will investigate quantum channels of
modeling optical loss of a nonclassical state and the metrological power of a
nonclassical state in an optical lossy environment for exploring robust states
for quantum metrology. The PI’s group will also study resource-theory tasks in
manipulating these nonclassical states for metrology. These tasks will help to
understand quantitatively what operations can enhance the resource of a state
and what operations can reduce the nonclassicality. The PI’s group will
investigate the distribution of nonclassicality of a state in a linear network
using the resource theory. The outcomes of the designated research can provide
new schemes of experiments in quantum metrology and develop a deeper
understanding of nonclassicality as a resource for quantum information
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.