* 2243686
* REU Site: Stanford SURGE- Sustainability Undergraduate Research in Geoscience and Engineering
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Jonathan Payne, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 05/31/2026
* USD 390,000.00

This renewal REU site, entitled “Stanford SURGE- Sustainability Undergraduate
Research in Geoscience and Engineering” program, will match 10 undergraduate
students with faculty in the Stanford Doerr School of Sustainability that are in
their area of interest. The undergraduate students participating in the SURGE
program will receive an eight-week-long mentored summer research experience in
the areas of Civil &amp; Environmental Engineering, Earth &amp; Planetary
Sciences, Earth System Science, Energy Science &amp; Engineering, Geophysics,
Oceans, and the broader field of Sustainability, including Environmental
Justice. Participating students must be enrolled in an US university/college,
including, but not limited to, community colleges, four-year universities, and
minority-serving institutions. Students from who do not have prior research
experience, students who come from undergraduate institutions with limited
research opportunities or from minority-serving institutions and students from
historically excluded backgrounds in the geosciences and engineering will be
encouraged to apply. During this award, the SURGE program will provide research
opportunities to 30 students with the aim of helping to create a diverse
pipeline into the broader field of sustainability post-graduate programs and
careers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SURGE Scholars will be matched with faculty
members based on research interest, application essays, letters of
recommendation, and interviews. In addition to gaining scientific training in a
Stanford Doerr School of Sustainability research group, students will also
participate in graduate-school preparation and professional-development
activities such as a statistical analysis prep course that meets twice per week
and workshops on applying to graduate school, planning career trajectories, and
giving oral presentations. Participants will also participate in a coding
bootcamp at the beginning of the summer. Weekly faculty research seminars will
familiarize students with a broad range of research topics in the Earth
sciences, while educational field trips will provide opportunities for students
to learn in the field and build a sense of community. A research symposium
concludes the program, where students present their project findings through
oral presentations and posters in front of faculty, mentors, and other Stanford
Earth colleagues who help review the presentations. SURGE scholars will live on
the Stanford campus and have access to dining halls and other Stanford
amenities, sharing the residential experience with fellow scholars and thus
enhancing the cohort research experience. Program success will be measured
through student and faculty surveys. SURGE scholars will be tracked after the
program to determine their career paths and to provide an alumni
network.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.