* 2243183
* TSETS:  Tribal Steppingstones in Educational Transformative STEM: A TCU-Led Secondary and Middle School Teachers Mathematics Networking Strategy
* EDU,EES
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* shasha han, Navajo Technical University
* Continuing Grant
* Regina Sievert
* 04/30/2028
* USD 300,000.00

A goal of the Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) is to support
TCUP-eligible institutions in strengthening and applying their science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) instructional and research
capacities to better serve the Nation's Indigenous citizens. Supporting these
goals is the program’s TCUP for Secondary and Elementary Teachers in STEM
(TSETS) funding focus which offers funding for TCUP-eligible institutions to
apply their resident STEM capacity in providing professional development
projects for inservice pre-college STEM educators in their communities.
Specifically, TSETS projects are designed to strengthen K-12 teacher proficiency
in STEM disciplinary or STEM education content and/or research. The TSETS Tribal
Steppingstones in Educational Transformative STEM: A TCU Led Secondary and
Middle School Teachers Mathematics Networking Strategy project, led by faculty
members at Navajo Technical University, will directly address this goal through
the delivery of three-year professional development experiences focused on
improving the mathematics content knowledge of local educators employed in
middle and high schools on the Navajo Reservation. Working with educators
serving Navajo precollege students, the project is designed to strengthen
mathematics instruction overall with the ultimate outcome of improving students’
mathematics outcomes. The project incorporates flexible elements designed to
meet the professional development needs of twenty local educators and employs a
comprehensive set of strategies to ensure long term systemic improvements in
schools’ mathematics curriculum and instruction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This STEM
teacher professional development project is designed to support educators in
improving their mathematical instruction with options to renew and/or gain new
mathematics teacher credentials. A range of mathematics courses that are
required for New Mexico teacher licensing will be offered over the project’s
five-year duration, providing a variety of entry points for educators tailored
to their individual competencies and needs. Additional critical strategies for
the project’s success include the extensive use of peer mentors who will
contribute to the professional development activities design and delivery,
regularly mentor individual teachers in group and one-one-one forums, and foster
a strong professional learning community that includes precollege educators, NTU
faculty members, and peer mentors. Activities will also address pedagogical
content knowledge, aiming to improve teachers’ knowledge of and proficiency with
using effective instructional methods. An additional anticipated outcome is the
development of more robust precollege STEM curriculum pathways to better prepare
students for success in college STEM degrees and workforce positions. The
project evaluation will enable leadership to synthesize the effective elements
of the project design which will be disseminated to the mathematics education
community, thereby advancing understanding of effective mathematics teacher
preparation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.