* 2243364
* Coupling, Energetics and Dynamics of Atmospheric Regions (CEDAR) Workshop, 2023-2024
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Hanne Mauriello, University Corporation For Atmospheric Res
* Standard Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 03/31/2025
* USD 639,504.00

This award will support an annual CEDAR (Coupling, Energetics and Dynamics of
Atmospheric Regions) workshop for 2023 and 2024. The workshop promotes the
progress of geospace science by fostering collaborations among experts in
ground-, space-based and modeling at different career stages. The annual
workshop is the premier meeting for students to network within the CEDAR
community. The workshop ensures the health of the state of the profession by
supporting undergraduate and graduate students to attend the workshop each year,
and thus, to gain exposure and participate in research. Since 1990, more than 75
students per year have been sponsored by NSF to attend the workshop. A DEI task
force is in place to ensure diversity, equity and inclusion in all aspects of
the workshop. The educational benefits of this annual workshop are considerable
and are a source of pride. Further educational training is available through
recordings of the lectures, tutorials, and sessions available online on the
CEDAR Science YouTube channel. The new CEDAR website represents the CEDAR
community to stakeholders and serves the CEDAR community by providing links to
all recordings of tutorials, prize lectures, and distinguished lectures. The
CEDAR website includes reports, individual workshop presentations, and poster
PDFs, as well as information about CEDAR science, the CEDAR community at large,
opportunities specifically for students, and the CEDAR Diversity, Equity, and
Inclusions efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CEDAR workshop achieves its goal of
promoting geoscience, ensuring the health of the state of the profession, and
fostering diversity, equity, and inclusion through its unique approaches. The
CEDAR workshop is under the guidance of the CEDAR Science Steering Committee
(CSSC). The CSSC periodically checks on the community science progress and
direction and provides timely input to the workshop organizer. The workshop
includes a student day, community-organized plenary sessions as well as grand
challenge sessions, poster sessions with a student poster competition, plenary
sessions with science highlights, agency updates, tutorials, a distinguished
lecture, and a prize lecture. The plenary session speakers are identified and
recruited through the CSSC agenda planning process that evaluates the ideal
candidates based on their representing the breadth of CEDAR science and are
selected based on the qualities of merit, educational career objectives,
potential contribution to the overall conference experience as well as to their
commitment to a diverse, equitable and inclusive workshop environment. These
plenary session presentations are recorded and available on the CEDAR website
for public access. The CEDAR website, email list server, and the CEDAR slack
channel provide communication platforms for the community. The poster session is
a prime venue for the students to share, discuss and receive feedback on their
research with CEDAR participants. The student poster competition is organized by
the CSSC. The Student Day activities are spearheaded and organized by student
reps with inputs from the students. The CEDAR workshop fosters diversity,
equity, and inclusion by awarding dependent care grants with a focus on student
and early career scientists, by providing student travel support, by including
students as co-conveners in individual workshops, by learning and fostering
discussion via a DEI-centered talk in the plenary session, and by providing a
discussion platform at the individual DEI workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.