* 2243510
* Building a Community of Mathematics and Science Teachers through the Application of Social Cognitive Career Theory
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2028
* Laurette Foster, Prairie View A & M University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 06/30/2028
* USD 637,498.00

This project aims to serve the national need for preparing highly effective
secondary mathematics and science teachers who identify as members of racial and
ethnic populations that are underrepresented in STEM disciplines relative to
their numbers in the general population. Research shows that racially and
ethnically diverse students do better academically, socially, and emotionally
with teachers who are similarly diverse. This project aims to address the
shortage of such teachers. The project will offer a bridge-to-teaching program
during the recruitment phase, learning communities during the preparation phase,
and a community of practice during the induction/support phase.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Led by a team of investigators at Prairie View A&amp;M
University (PVU) this project features partnerships with the Houston Independent
School District (ISD), Royal ISD, Sheldon ISD, and Spring ISD. The five-year
project goal is to prepare 24 racially and ethnically diverse students to be
mathematics and science teachers. These undergraduate students will earn their
teacher certification through the PVU Teach Program while completing an
undergraduate degree in their STEM discipline. Project activities are motivated
by social cognitive career theory and will focus on building a community of
racially and ethnically diverse mathematics and science teachers as Noyce
Scholars. Three objectives will guide the execution of the project. First is to
recruit students from early college high schools and from within the PVU
mathematics and science departments to participate in a bridge-to-teaching
program. Second is prepare these prospective teachers through the UTeach model
in learning communities. Third, and finally, is to support the newly certified
teachers during their first year of teaching through a community of practice.
The project results will potentially advance knowledge and understanding of
research- and evidence-based STEM teacher recruitment, preparation, and
retention strategies focused on building community in terms of students’ self-
efficacy, STEM identity, and interest in STEM teaching. The project also has the
potential to positively impact society by increasing the number of highly
effective racially and ethnically diverse secondary mathematics and science
teachers who possess the cultural competence, pedagogical knowledge, and
disposition to be successful in high-need school districts. Project evaluation
will focus on describing and assessing the overall quality of implementation and
outcomes from a case study perspective. The dissemination plan using traditional
and non-traditional outlets will communicate and amplify the project’s
intellectual merit and broader impacts. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends
project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program
(Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and
professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary
K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It
also supports research on the effectiveness and retention of K-12 STEM teachers
in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.