* 2243203
* Collaborative Research: Understanding Emission Sources and Sinks of Nitrous Acid in North American Forests
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Jeffrey Geddes, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 03/31/2026
* USD 55,555.00

This project focuses on land-atmosphere interactions and the mechanisms by which
nitrous acid (HONO) and other nitrogen oxides emitted from soils influence the
oxidizing capacity of the atmosphere. The experimental plans include the use of
growth chambers under controlled conditions combined with field data to study
the uptake of HONO onto leaves from a range of tree species that dominate major
forested regions across North America. Since HONO is not well represented in
chemical transport models, improvements in understanding HONO sources and sinks
are expected to have important implications for improving air quality models and
for determining the lifetime of some greenhouse gases, such as methane, in the
atmosphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This effort combines expertise in atmospheric
chemistry, microbial ecology, and modeling with unique analytical capabilities
for measuring HONO soil emissions. The central hypothesis of this proposal is
that variations in below-canopy hydrogen oxide radical (HOx) cycling and ozone
levels in forested regions are driven by the variability of soil emissions of
HONO (SHONO) and nitrogen oxide (NO) (SNO), that depend on season, edaphic
properties, aboveground vegetation surfaces, and belowground nitrogen cycling
that is mediated by microbe-plant interactions. Preliminary data show that high
SNO has a significant impact on below canopy HOx in a forested environment, that
NOy (the sum of reactive nitrogen oxides) fluxes are linked to forest
composition, and that spatial variability in NOy fluxes can be mapped across the
continental U.S. using forest inventory plots. The objectives of the research
are to: (1) Establish geospatial trends in SHONO across U.S. forests; (2) Carry
out field campaigns to measure SHONO in mixed deciduous forests; and (3)
Quantify uptake of HONO by leaf and soil surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will support a full-time postdoctoral researcher and a graduate student
who will receive training in state-of-the science analytical and modeling
methods. Undergraduate students will be directly involved in the research as
part of Indiana Universityâ€™s Groups Summer Research Experience Program, which
gives entering first-year students research experience and skills to excel in
STEM majors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.