* 2243992
* REU Sites: Dryland ecology and biodiversity in the northern Chihuahuan Desert
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2026
* Scott Collins, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2026
* USD 333,831.00

This REU Site award to the University of New Mexico (UNM) in Albuquerque, New
Mexico (NM), will support the research and training of 10 undergraduate students
for 10 weeks for three, consecutive summers (2023-2025). High-quality research
and training activities will be conducted at the UNM Sevilleta Field Station
near La Joya, NM. The research will take place in the context of a long-term
ecological research (LTER) program in the Sevilleta National Wildlife Refuge
(SNWR) that focuses on the impacts of climate variability on biodiversity and
ecological change. Students will receive training in research ethics, interact
with environmental artists, and practice communicating science to the public. It
is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with limited
research opportunities and/or from an underrepresented group, will be trained in
the program with the goal of providing a steppingstone to graduate school or
positions with federal agencies and non-governmental conservation organizations.
Assessment of the program will be done through the online SALG URSSA tool.
Students will be required to register in the NSF ETAP system (etap.nsf.gov) and
tracked after the program to determine their career
paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This funding continues three years of support for an
REU Site Program at the UNM Sevilleta Field Station (at SNWR). This NSF-funded
LTER site supports long-term studies of global change and regional taxa. UNM (an
Hispanic Serving Institution) will recruit participants from underrepresented
groups and primarily undergraduate institutions. Applications will be evaluated
by the cover letter, transcripts, GPA, recommendation letters, and interviews.
Participants will experience aridland ecosystems and real-world conservation in
the Northern Chihuahuan Desert. They will also receive training in public
speaking and R, attend weekly seminars, gain first-hand conservation and
management knowledge, participate in workshops on professional development, and
receive mentorship on presenting and publishing their results. Assessment will
be done with the online SALG URSSA tool. Participants will fill crucial national
workforce needs that include environmental science careers while increasing
underrepresented minorities in this field. More information is available by
visiting https://sevilletareu.wordpress.com/ or by contacting the PI (Dr. Scott
Collins at scollins@unm.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Alesia Hallmark at
AlesiaHallmark@unm.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.