* 2243971
* Collaborative Research: Did the Neogene aridification drive adaptive ecological radiation in an ancient plant lineage?
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Adam Roddy, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 03/31/2026
* USD 426,278.00

Living organisms that evolved hundreds of millions of years ago are often
considered relics or "living fossils" because they seem unchanged from their
extinct, fossilized progenitors. Of all ancient taxa regarded as living relics,
cycads are particularly notable because recent evidence suggests extant cycads
may not be relics at all, but instead evolved during the Neogene period (~20My
ago). This time period was characterized by declining temperatures, atmospheric
CO2 concentrations, and the expansion of arid regions. This research asks
whether Neogene climate change drove the diversification of cycads as they
evolved their anatomy and physiology in response to the new conditions. This
integrative approach that spans from cells to whole plants will provide a novel
perspective on cycad evolution and test whether this ancient lineage experienced
concurrent and parallel evolution on multiple continents hundreds of millions of
years after the origin of cycads. The proposed work is especially critical
because cycads are among the most endangered plant groups on Earth, with ~70% of
species threatened with extinction, primarily due to habitat destruction and
poaching. Perhaps no other lineage of plants disappearing at such an alarming
rate can provide as unique an opportunity to examine one of the earliest
experiments of seed plant evolution, and our results will directly inform
conservation practices. This project will provide research experiences for
graduate students and undergraduates at University of Wisconsin-Madison and
Florida International University, one of the nation's largest Hispanic Serving
Institutions, as well as research-driven field courses for undergraduates.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will uncover the ecological and evolutionary
processes that have generated the extant diversity of one of the oldest and most
unusual groups of seed plants, the cycads. To determine whether Neogene
diversification of cycads was enabled by adaptive trait evolution, the project
will: (A) characterize the diversity of cycad anatomical traits (e.g. anatomical
traits of stomata, bundle sheath extensions, transfusion tissue, and xylem) and
test their impacts on gas exchange and hydraulic responses to abiotic conditions
(e.g. light, CO2, VPD, drought), (B) test whether these anatomical and
physiological traits are linked to speciesâ€™ distributions in climate space, and
(C) determine whether the timing and order of trait evolution corresponded to
Neogene climate change. By leveraging the unusual anatomical trait combinations
exhibited by cycads, this research may have far reaching impacts in plant
physiology, ecology, and evolution by: (A) revealing the significance of
anatomical traits with poorly known function(s) that are also found in other
plant groups (e.g., bundle sheath extensions, transfusion tissue), (B)
characterizing the function of trait combinations that are exceptionally rare
among extant plants but commonly found in extinct taxa (e.g., tracheids and
homogeneous pits) thus allowing new insight into the function of extinct
lineages and better contextualizing the sequence of physiological trait
evolution in vascular plants, and (C) testing long-standing hypotheses about the
repeatability and predictability of evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.