* 2243353
* Community Centered Pathways for Equity and Justice in STEM Teaching
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2027
* Valerie Otero, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 06/30/2027
* USD 483,137.00

This project aims to serve the national need to recruit, develop, and retain
highly qualified STEM teachers from local communities who are able teach their
subjects with special attention to employing a lens of equity and justice.
Research suggests that students experience academic, participation, and identity
benefits when exposed to STEM teachers with similar community backgrounds and/or
racial identities. In Colorado, there is a shortage of STEM teachers who
identify as Black, Indigenous, and/or persons of color (BIPOC) or who grew up in
communities served by high-need school districts. To help address these
shortages, this project will focus on recruiting local and BIPOC students and
supporting them to obtain a STEM degree from the University of Colorado Boulder,
as well as to gain State of Colorado teaching licensure. The project will also
partner with “grow your own” teacher programs and high-need districts to
establish pathways into STEM teaching for local high school students. Finally,
the project will support teacher retention and preparation by introducing
prospective teachers into a professional learning community of practicing STEM
teachers committed to teaching STEM for equity and
justice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes partnerships with the Denver
Public Schools, Adams 12 Five Star Schools, Pathways2Teaching, and Teacher
Cadets Colorado. The project intends to produce 21 new secondary teachers
licensed in mathematics or science. Three project goals guide the execution of
the project. First is to use Noyce scholarships and collaborative partnerships
to recruit and support 21 STEM majors over four years from diverse groups
entering and completing the CU Teach licensure program. Second is to
institutionalize a model of a professional learning community for preparing
teachers, that will support them as they move into their first few years of
teaching, and as they move into increasing positions of leadership. Third, and
finally, is to promote new learning and collective sense-making around STEM-
specific, equity- and justice-seeking instructional practices. The project’s
community-centered recruitment pathway and continued support that includes a
professional learning community targeting pre-collegiate, prospective, early
career, and veteran STEM teachers has the potential of becoming a sustainable
mechanism to support the continued development of diverse STEM educators
committed to teaching STEM for equity and justice in their communities. The
necessity to adapt equity- and justice-seeking instructional practices to fit
the realities of secondary STEM teaching is a primary focus of this work, and it
is predicted that leveraging the strengths inherent in a diverse community of
experiences, backgrounds, and knowledge will be essential for overcoming
recruitment, development, and retention challenges. The project will evaluate
the successes and challenges of the community-centered pathway in meeting
project goals and disseminate results in district professional development
workshops, district leadership meetings, STEM education conferences, and
research journals. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported
through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program
supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become
effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become
STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on
the effectiveness and retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.