* 2243516
* Preparing Pre-service Science Teachers to Integrate Engineering Design, Language, and Literacy in Science Teaching
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Walter Harman, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 05/31/2028
* USD 821,742.00

This project aims to address the national need for highly qualified science
teachers prepared to teach in high-need schools. The project is offering 40
scholarships to science and engineering graduates who will become certified
science teachers in high-need schools in Virginia. The educational experience of
Noyce scholars includes preparing them as Teacher-Leaders in integrating
engineering design, language, and literacy in science instruction. Noyce
scholars are being supported through mentoring and induction into the teaching
profession. Expected outcomes are increased number of certified science teachers
for high-need schools, increased knowledge and skills for engineering design,
language, and literacy integration in science teaching among scholars, improved
student learning, and enhanced partnership between the University of Virginia
and partner school districts in science teacher preparation. The language and
literacy-integrated science aspect of the project is to address the need for
teachers to support English Learners in experiencing success in science. A
science methods course will be redesigned guided by the Teaching English
Learners Language and Literacy-Integrated Science (TELLIS)
framework.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at the University of Virginia
includes partnerships with Hampton City, Henrico, Greene, and Fluvanna school
districts. The goal is to recruit and prepare 40 science teachers over 5 years.
The objectives are to provide 40 scholarships to science and engineering
graduates who will become certified science teachers, enhance the educational
experience and increase retention of the scholars in the project and teaching
profession, induct scholars into the teaching profession, and enhance
partnership between University of Virginia and partner school districts. In
addition to teacher education requirements, scholars are receiving instruction
in integrating engineering design, language, and literacy in science teaching.
The intellectual merit of the project lies in generating knowledge on (a)
recruitment, preparation, and retention of scholars in the teaching profession,
and (b) developing scholars’ pedagogical knowledge for engineering design,
language, and literacy-integrated science instruction, and analyzing its impact
on student learning. Broader impacts are increased number of certified science
teachers in high-need schools and improved student science learning. The
evaluation is studying these main questions: To what extent is the project
addressing its goal and objectives? To what extent is scholars’ pedagogical
knowledge for engineering design, language, and literacy-integrated science
teaching enhancing student learning in science? Data is being collected through
pre- and post-tests, surveys, interviews, artifacts, and lesson observations. It
is expected that project outcomes will be disseminated through presentations at
research and teachers’ conferences, and publications in peer-reviewed journals.
The project outcomes are intended to lead to programmatic changes in science
teacher education. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported
through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program
supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become
effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become
STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on
the effectiveness and retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.