* 2243190
* Zooglider assessment of zooplankton frontal gradients across the BIOSWOT-Med region
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2025
* Mark Ohman, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Cynthia Suchman
* 02/28/2025
* USD 263,401.00

Ocean fronts are regions of sharp horizontal discontinuities that can alter
phytoplankton growth rates and community composition, zooplankton distributions
and grazing activity, and predator foraging success. This study is using
Zooglider, an autonomous ocean sampler equipped with a range of sensors and
capitalizing on a unique opportunity to investigate frontal gradients and
plankton communities in the western Mediterranean Sea. It is timed to coincide
with a rapid crossover phase of a new NASA satellite mission. The combination of
satellite and field-collected data will provide high resolution of the bio-
physical consequences of oceanic frontal processes. The project incorporates
training for graduate and undergraduate students as well as public outreach.
Results are broadly communicated by partnering with a major public aquarium that
serves 450,000 visitors per year, including by exhibiting novel porcelain
‘Zooware’ meant to convey the sensory experience of exploring the ocean’s
planktonic fauna.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on advancing
understanding of frontal processes in the western Mediterranean Sea, at a
‘crossover’ site where NASA’s new Surface Water Ocean Topography (SWOT)
satellite is making high-frequency sea surface height measurements using a high-
resolution sensor. Measurements from the SWOT satellite are resolving small
changes in sea-surface height, making it possible to follow the development and
temporal progression of ocean frontal systems. The investigator is assessing the
consequences of these frontal systems by testing the hypotheses that 1)
zooplankton, marine snow particles, and predators are altered in these ocean
frontal regions with a size-dependent or trait-dependent response; 2) particle-
grazing zooplankton are more closely associated with layers of marine snow than
with layers of living phytoplankton; 3) vertical thin layers of zooplankton are
more likely to form in frontal than non-frontal regions; and 4) higher predators
such as zooplanktivorous fish and marine mammals are more detectable in frontal
regions The project makes use of an autonomous ocean instrument, the Zooglider.
It includes a shadowgraph imaging Zoocam for resolving zooplankton and marine
snow; a dual frequency Zonar to resolve mesozooplankton and larger sources of
acoustic backscatter; and a sensitive hydrophone for recording ambient sounds,
especially from marine mammals and fishes. These autonomous measurements are
coordinated with complementary measurements from a ship-based sampling program,
other autonomous vehicles, and satellite remote
sensing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.