* 2243401
* Building STEM Educators for Excellence in Nevada (B-SEEN at UNLV)
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Mei Yang, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 07/31/2028
* USD 765,988.00

This project aims to serve the national need of preparing and retaining
culturally competent, high-quality science and mathematics teachers. As
underrepresentation of people of color persists in STEM fields nationally, there
is an urgent need to prepare teachers who are able to support students of color
to be successful in, and develop identities in, STEM. Project activities,
including recruiting STEM students, developing cultural competence, and
developing a shared community of practice among pre-service and in-service STEM
teachers are designed to support the persistence of STEM teachers in classrooms
in high-need school districts. In addition to the integration of cultural
competence in the teacher preparation program of STEM majors, a summer institute
engaging both pre-service and in-service STEM teachers aims to grow the
knowledge, skills, and perspective needed to utilize culturally relevant
pedagogy, which includes academic excellence and sociopolitical consciousness,
in addition to culturally responsive teaching. Collectively project activities
are designed to support the development of an identity as a culturally competent
STEM teacher. In addition, outcomes of this project include guidance for STEM
teacher educators on how best to develop and support STEM teachers equipped with
strategies and approaches to provide learners with experiences in success in
mathematics and science, and who will persist as teachers in high-need school
districts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at the University of Nevada Las
Vegas includes partnerships with the Clark County School District and local
businesses. Over the five-year project, 24 undergraduate students in STEM fields
will receive scholarships to complete bachelor’s degrees in a STEM discipline
and be prepared as new science and mathematics teachers through a dual major or
minor in education, leading to teaching certification. Local businesses will
provide support for program activities such as workshops as well as financial
support as Scholars begin their teaching careers. This project will contribute
to research on how STEM teachers develop culturally competent identities, with
practical results broadly applicable to STEM teacher educators nationally. This
Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the effectiveness and
retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.