* 2243993
* REU Site: Enabling Technologies and New REU Approaches to Engineer Complex Tissues
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Anthony Atala, Wake Forest University School of Medicine
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 09/30/2026
* USD 387,441.00

This three-year renewal REU Site, Enabling Technologies and New REU Approaches
to Engineer Complex Tissues, will engage diverse cohorts of 10 undergraduate
students each summer in highly collaborative, team-based 10-week
multidisciplinary research projects in regenerative medicine at the Wake Forest
Institute for Regenerative Medicine (WFIRM). A challenge facing the regenerative
medicine field and the broader STEM disciplines is developing the next
generation of skilled bioengineers. Regenerative medicine is a multidisciplinary
field involving engineering and other STEM disciplines. Students will focus on
learning about enabling technologies and biomanufacturing approaches in
regenerative medicine and the emerging field of biofabrication. The REU
experience is supplemented with additional program activities and education on
the research process, hands-on instrumentation, workshops on bioethics,
responsible conduct of research, effective oral and written communication,
professional development, networking, and career opportunities topics. WFIRM has
been at the forefront in RM research for nearly two decades and is an
internationally recognized center of excellence in research and
training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This renewal REU Site, Enabling Technologies and
New REU Approaches to Engineer Complex Tissues, will engage diverse cohorts of
10 undergraduate students each summer for three years in highly collaborative,
team-based 10-week multidisciplinary research projects in regenerative medicine
(RM) at the Wake Forest Institute for Regenerative Medicine (WFIRM). Students
will learn about enabling technologies and biomanufacturing approaches and the
emerging field of biofabrication. This REU, emphasizing RM enabling technologies
and biomanufacturing, is focused on two convergent research areas: 1) enabling
technologies biomanufacturing and biofabrication (3D bioprinting, bioreactors,
encapsulation and bioengineering of multi-cellular tissue constructs
(organoids/body-on-a-chip) as modeling platforms and 2) stem cells/gene editing
as applied to engineering one or more tissue/organ application. The REU
experience is supplemented with additional program elements and education on the
research process, hands-on instrumentation, workshops on bioethics, responsible
conduct of research, effective oral and written communication, professional
development, networking, and career opportunities topics. Also included is an
introductory course to familiarize students with the essentials of the
regenerative medicine field and seminars on “hot” topics in the field. All
students will present their research findings throughout the summer and at a
final research day symposium. WFIRM has been at the forefront in RM research for
nearly two decades and is an internationally recognized center of excellence in
research and training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.