* 2243204
* AI-Assisted Algorithms for Automatic AC Power Flow Model Creation based on DC Dispatch
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Yilu Liu, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 05/31/2026
* USD 350,000.00

This NSF project aims to develop user-friendly algorithms that automatically
create realistic snapshots of real U.S. electric grids for many futuristic
operating scenarios with variable proportions of conventional and renewable
energy generators. This project will bring transformative change to the process
of risk identification and mitigation of electric grids by significantly
reducing model development time and increasing the operating conditions that can
be considered. The intellectual merits of the project include: 1) deployment of
a multi-stage approach that combines physics-based principles and artificial
intelligence-based methods to convert dispatch scenarios of grid generators to
full power system cases, 2) development of a data-driven problem discovery
algorithm to assist human intervention. The broader impacts of the project
include: a) facilitation of high-renewable energy power grids towards the
achievement of national clean energy goals, b) involvement of undergraduate and
graduate students from underrepresented groups, c) provision of opportunities,
including lab tours and presentations, for K-12 students to learn about the
potential use of artificial intelligence in real power
grids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Higher penetration of renewable energy resources has
led to increased variations in daily generation mix, thus, the AC power flow
(ACPF) solution of a DC power flow (DCPF) dispatch case is no longer a good
initialization to obtain the ACPF solution of the next operating condition.
Currently, there are neither reliable algorithms nor vendor products to
automatically convert DCPF dispatch cases to converged ACPF cases, thus,
conversion requires manual analysis and tuning. This project aims to solve this
problem using several innovations: 1) a physics-guided machine learning
initializer (PMLI) to replace flat start initialization in Newton Raphson
solution method for ACPF, 2) a transfer learning process to reuse developed PMLI
on multiple power systems, and 3) a hot-start incremental algorithm with
automatic reactive power compensation selection. This work will provide an
important step to make simulation of the power grid functions in real time a
reality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.