* 2243334
* Equipping STEM Educators to Teach in High Need Rural Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Valorie Zonnefeld, Dordt University, Incorporated
* Continuing Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 05/31/2028
* USD 720,902.00

This project aims to serve the national need to increase the number of highly
qualified STEM teachers in the United States, with a particular focus on rural
schools. A unique challenge for STEM teachers in rural districts is that they
may be the only STEM expert in the district, a position often called a "backbone
teacher." Such personnel are often expected to teach a very wide-array of high
school mathematics and science courses, while also leading STEM education
initiatives for the district. This project proposes to increase the number of
highly qualified, backbone STEM teachers serving in high need rural schools.
This project will recruit and train backbone STEM teachers who are ready to lead
both in their individual classrooms and across the rural districts in which they
serve. A key aspect of this preparation is innovated field experiences in K-12
STEM classrooms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Dordt University (DU)
includes partnerships with the West Sioux and Le Mars Community School
Districts. Project goals include the recruitment, training, and support of 27
highly qualified STEM teachers entering the field over the five years of the
project. The use of an integrated STEM learning approach through robotics and
mediated field experience will be studied and add important knowledge to the
field of STEM education, along with the effectiveness of outreach and teacher
preparation for rural, high-needs local education agencies. Outreach efforts to
be employed to aid in recruitment of future STEM teachers include: 1) K-12
student programming that provides STEM enrichment and vocational discernment
opportunities; 2) collegiate student outreach regarding opportunities available
in STEM education; 3) teacher networking opportunities including workshops,
teacher circles, and professional learning communities. Cohort experiences
designed to increase teacher preparation, quality, and retention will include:
1) the application of the mediated field experience model shown to improve
teaching efficacy; 2) professional development opportunities including STEM
education conferences; and 3) professional support during and after completion
of a STEM-education bachelorâ€™s degree through the DU Noyce Professional Learning
Community. Detailed evaluation of discernment, teacher training, and new faculty
induction at high-needs school systems will be implemented and used to make on-
going improvements. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported
through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program
supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become
effective K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports
research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers
in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.