* 2243268
* Doctoral Dissertation Research in Economics: Two Experiments on the Behavioral Equivalence of Dirty Faces Games
* SBE,SES
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2024
* Thomas Palfrey, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Eric Bahel
* 01/31/2024
* USD 23,576.00

One of the main goals of behavioral economics is to better understand the
implications of human cognitive limitations on behavior in strategic settings
related to economic, social, and political competition. This branch of
behavioral economics, behavioral game theory, focuses on how people form
expectations in strategic environments about the anticipated behavior of other
individuals. This project will experimentally investigate the “dirty faces
game”, a workhorse example of a strategic environment where individuals can
observe some actions by other players in the game that enable them to make
inferences leading to more informed decisions. This is a simple but illustrative
game that models situations where people update their beliefs and make decisions
based on others’ past behavior, such as choosing a restaurant or purchasing a
new product by reading reviews by other people. Classical theory about behavior
in games, based on assumptions of perfect rationality, makes behaviorally
implausible predictions in this game. Relaxing the assumption of perfect
rationality leads to drastically different predictions about behavior in the
dirty faces game, which makes it an ideal test bed for a new “dynamic cognitive
hierarchy theory” (DCH) that predicts that, in dirty faces games, players will
generally behave differently under two different conventional experimental
protocols (direct response vs. strategy method), while the standard theory does
not predict any behavioral difference. This project designs two experiments to
detect the behavioral differences predicted by DCH in these games. A long-run
goal of this project is not only to test the theory, but also to provide
insights to policy designs that take account of cognitive limitations. Armed
with improved theoretical models, policy makers can design more cognitively
robust auctions, tax schemes, regulations, and other mechanisms to improve
economic performance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The dirty faces game is a strategic
environment where each individual within a group of individuals has either a
dirty or a clean face and can see all other players’ faces but not their own
faces. Over a sequence of decision periods, each individual can take an action
that provides some information about the faces they see, and the ultimate goal
of each individual is to learn their own face type from observing the others’
actions. At the beginning of the game, an honest announcement is made by an
observer about whether or not there is at least one dirty face. From the
standard game-theoretic perspective, players will eventually learn whether their
face is dirty or clean. Moreover, the extensive and strategic form
representations of this game are strategically equivalent and make the same
classical predictions. However, from the psychological perspective, the mental
processes are completely different---in the strategic form representation,
players make inferences based on hypothetical events while in the extensive form
representation, players can make statistical inferences based on observed
behavior. In a two-person dirty faces game, equilibrium theory predicts players
will know their face type within two periods---regardless of the payoffs and the
representations (extensive form vs. strategic form). Specifically, DCH predicts
both the payoff structure and game-form representation will jointly affect
behavior: (1) players will behave closer to the equilibrium in the extensive
form representation if they are sufficiently impatient and payoffs are
sufficiently low; and (2) the representation effect exists depends on the number
of decision periods (horizon). Experiment 1 uses a 2x2 design where the
representations (extensive vs. strategic form) and the payoffs (high vs. low)
are systematically varied. Experiment 2 manipulates the horizon of the game. DCH
predicts when the horizon of the game is shorter, the representation effect
detected in Experiment 1 will vanish.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.