* 2243371
* TSETS: E Kukulu Ke Kahua a Paa: Build the Foundation Until Firm
* EDU,EES
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Frankie Harriss, University of Hawaii
* Continuing Grant
* Regina Sievert
* 03/31/2028
* USD 700,000.00

The Tribal Colleges and Universities Program (TCUP) goals are to 1) increase the
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) instructional and
research capacities of specific institutions of higher education that serve the
Nation's Indigenous students, and 2) promote the advancement of intellectual
leadership within TCUP institutions to support them in addressing the STEM
priorities of their tribes, communities, or broadly of the United States.
Supporting both goals is the program’s funding strand known as TCUP for
Secondary and Elementary Teachers in STEM (TSETS) which provides funding for
TCUP institutions to work with local precollege educators in strengthening their
STEM instructional and research capacity to thereby enhance students’
preparation for advanced STEM education and entry into the STEM workforce. The
TSETS: E Kukulu Ke Kahua a Paa: Build the Foundation Until Firm project aligns
with TCUP goals through its work to build the mathematical content and
instructional knowledge of local K-12 teachers who work in schools serving
Native Hawaiian (NH) students on the island of Kauai. Engaging two cohorts of
teachers for three years each, the project will employ an array of activities
partnering University of Hawaii - Kauai Community College STEM (UH-KCC) faculty,
NH knowledge keepers and local precollege educators in a learning community that
also emphasizes the development of cultural competence to further enhance
teachers’ effectiveness in working with NH students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
TSETS project will provide three years of ongoing professional development for
two teacher cohorts, designed to improve precollege educators’ skills and
knowledge relevant to mathematics instruction. The project will use evidence-
based practices that include enrollment in mathematics course work, regular and
as-needed coaching by teacher mentors, the development of culturally responsive
STEM curriculum, and deep examination of in-situ instructional practice through
engagement in Lesson Study. The project participants will be immersed in these
activities as part of a learning community known as a Math Hui, collaborating
closely with UH-KCC STEM faculty members and cultural knowledge bearers from the
local NH community. Lessons learned from this iterative action research project
will be shared in professional forums to further advance the knowledge base on
effective STEM education, particularly relevant to supporting Native Hawaiian
students’ STEM outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.