* 2243496
* Building Leadership among Science Teachers in Rural Regions: Designing, Developing, and Implementing a Science Teacher Leadership Academy
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2029
* Karen High, Clemson University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 05/31/2029
* USD 1,313,047.00

This project aims to serve the national need to prepare high-quality science
teacher leaders in high-need, rural areas. Given the disparities in the quality
and quantity of science education in rural spaces, this project is designed to
support and develop two cohorts of grade K-8 Master Teaching Fellows (MTFs) into
science teacher leaders in rural South Carolina (SC). One cohort will be
comprised of twelve grade K-5 experienced and exemplary teachers and one cohort
of twelve grade 6-8 exemplary and experienced teachers. This five-year program
consists of several components, including a Leadership Simulation, a Summer
Institute, and Summer Conferences. Additional elements of the program that each
MTF will undertake are the completion of differentiated online modules designed
to support specific learning needs and goals, implementation of a professional
learning and leadership plan, collaboration with principals, attending and
presenting at the National Science Teacher Association (NSTA) conference, and
receiving differentiated coaching in MTF classrooms. The program is designed to
allow MTFs to focus on becoming expert science teachers the first two years
while learning about themselves as leaders and beginning to think about how
change occurs. In the last three years of the program, the focus aims on
developing MTFs as leaders, continuing to work on honing leadership knowledge
and skills. Ultimately, MTFs will be encouraged to lead in their schools and
districts by mentoring, leading professional development, and seeking other ways
to support other science teachers. In doing so, the number of science teacher
leaders in the SC upstate region will be increased and science education in
upstate SC will be impacted. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Clemson
University includes partnerships with WestEd’s Making Sense of Science and high-
need, rural school districts (Ware Shoals School District, Laurens County School
District, and Union County School District), in the upstate region of SC.
Project goals include the implementation of differentiated professional
development and coaching over the course of five years for two cohorts of
teachers to produce teacher leaders who can effect change within their rural
schools and school systems. This work is grounded in situated learning and the
science teacher leader framework and seeks to explore the following questions.
1) How does change happen in a rural school system via teacher leaders? 2) In
what ways does rurality support or hinder teacher leadership? and 3) What are
key leverage points in rural spaces that support rigorous science education? A
mixed-method investigation of these questions is intended to result in findings
that are expected to contribute to the understanding of professional learning
and the under-examined field of teacher leadership in the STEM research
literature. Project results will be widely disseminated through national and
regional channels to improve K-12 science education. The project will
collaborate with the South Carolina Department of Education to share
asynchronous modules that can be replicated by districts and state subject area
coaches as part of their regular professional learning and development for
teachers. This study addresses a significant issue in education - the current
absence of teacher leaders in STEM disciplines, particularly in rural
communities - with the goal of increasing the number of science teacher leaders
in the SC upstate region. This Track 3: Master Teacher Fellowships project is
supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The
Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to
become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to
become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports
research on the effectiveness and retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.