* 2243513
* Preparing Humanizing and Culturally Relevant STEM Teachers through STEM Teacher Education Grounded in Justice, Community, and Leadership
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Vidya Chandrasekaran, Saint Mary's College of California
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Soto
* 05/31/2028
* USD 669,468.00

The project aims to serve the national need for highly effective STEM teachers
in diverse classrooms and in high-need districts. This is a critical problem
given the decline in STEM certificates nationally over the last decade, STEM
teacher turnover, and that women and People of Color are under-represented in
STEM teaching. To address this need, this project will prepare prospective STEM
teachers to be grounded in rigorous STEM disciplinary practices alongside
humanizing, culturally relevant, and justice-oriented teaching pedagogies.
Features of the project for prospective STEM teachers include: 1) Financial
support for highly motivated STEM majors to become STEM teachers, 2) Enhanced
learning to teach STEM, field experiences, and communities of practice alongside
practicing teachers; 3) Justice-oriented teacher professional career trajectory
support; and 4) Beloved STEM educator community – within Saint Mary’s, with
local teachers, and with national and regional STEM and educational justice
professional networks. The project team expects that STEM teachers from diverse
backgrounds will not only enter the profession but persist as equity-oriented
transformative urban school change agents.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at
Saint Mary’s includes a partnership with Mt. Diablo Unified School District, a
high-need local educational agency. Project goals include fostering scholars’
growth along five knowledge bases: STEM content knowledge, knowledge of self:
STEM teacher positionality, knowledge in solidarity with youth and communities,
humanizing pedagogical knowledge, and knowledge of educational (in)justice and
teachers as change agents. This project will provide financial support over five
years (2023-2028) for 17 highly motivated students to complete a 4+1 consisting
of a BA/BS in a STEM discipline (biology, biochemistry, chemistry, earth and
environmental science, mathematics, or physics); a minor in Justice, Community,
and Leadership; a secondary teaching credential; and Master’s in the Art of
Teaching. This project will contribute to the field by generating new knowledge
on the convergence of STEM disciplinary, secondary pedagogy, and justice studies
as foundations for STEM teacher preparation. Insights gained about STEM
teachers’ trajectories through case study data and participant surveys could
potentially lead to the identification of evidence-based strategies to improve
STEM teacher preparation and retention in high-need schools. This project seeks
to impact a) Saint Mary’s STEM teacher candidates by preparing them to enter
STEM teaching grounded in STEM disciplinary, secondary pedagogy, and justice
studies; b) STEM teachers and youth in Mt. Diablo by bringing highly qualified
STEM teachers into the district and offering professional communities of
practice; and, c) STEM teacher education through the education and retention of
STEM teacher change agents. This project advances a scalable model of
humanizing, culturally relevant STEM teacher education. The project findings
will be disseminated through peer-reviewed presentations and publications. This
Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the effectiveness and
retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.