* 2243601
* Funding for Core Activities of the Board on Life Sciences
* BIO,DBI
* 11/15/2022,10/31/2027
* Kavita Berger, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Steven Ellis
* 10/31/2027
* USD 197,040.00

An award is made for support of core activities conducted by the Board on Life
Sciences (BLS) of the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine
(National Academies). The BLS works to address technical, policy, and societal
issues associated with basic, fundamental, and emerging life science and
biotechnology research and their applications. With support from this award, BLS
will: advance knowledge about scientific developments and associated policy and
societal issues to address challenges before they arise or to further advance
particular scientific areas; broaden participation of scientists from a
diversity of backgrounds; and provide scientific and science policy advice to
the U.S. government. BLS actively seeks to include scientists and reaches
audiences across a diversity of backgrounds, experiences, disciplines, and
sectors to contribute to and/or learn about the outcomes of projects. BLS
conducts projects that have significant influence and impact beyond the initial
goals of our projects, including the development of new policies governing life
sciences research and new scientific initiatives to address identified knowledge
and technological gaps. Since establishment in 1984, BLS has conducted numerous
studies, workshops, and other activities to advance life sciences and
biotechnology research toward addressing scientific and societal (e.g., health,
environment, agriculture, economy, and national security) needs. BLS products
have inspired others in the broader scientific and policy networks to act on
suggestions and consensus recommendations produced from our projects. Similarly,
efforts to foster cross-disciplinary research that drive innovation and new
research opportunities in biology and identify education and training needs to
support this innovation are addressed in BLS projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BLS
strives to provide the best possible scientific expertise to addressing
contemporary and future challenges affecting the life sciences research
enterprise and/or caused by advances in life sciences research. To achieve this
goal, BLS efforts will focus on three objectives to: a) anticipate emerging
scientific, policy, and societal issues associated with advances and
applications in the life sciences; b) develop project concepts to address
critical, emerging issues identified; and c) disseminate project outcomes to key
audiences who play roles in addressing issues. BLS core activities to achieve
these objectives include: semi-annual board meetings; concept analysis and
scoping meetings; engagement with scientists to learn about outcomes from
completed activities; and opportunity creation for scientists who are from
marginalized and/or underrepresented groups to contribute to BLS activities.
More detailed information about BLS and its work can be found at:
www.nationalacademies.org/bls/board-on-life-sciences&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.