* 2243737
* Pre-eruptive magma assembly, evolution and associated magma fluxes at arc calderas: insights from the active Cerro Blanco Volcanic Complex, Catamarca, Argentina.
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Shanaka de Silva, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 03/31/2026
* USD 240,720.00

Explosive volcanic eruptions affect society from local to global scale. Locally
and regionally, society and infrastructure may be devastated. Globally, such
eruptions can affect global climate. Historic examples include Tambora 1815 and
Pinatubo 1991. These eruptions occur at subduction zones, where Earth’s tectonic
plates converge. They also form calderas, where the ground above the magma
chamber collapses to produce a big depression. Such eruptions have occurred at a
frequency of several per century, so they are of concern to society. A key
question in the efforts to understand the potential threat from such caldera
volcanoes is “how are eruptible bodies of magma assembled and for how long do
they persist?”. To answer this question, the project will focus on the currently
active Cerro Blanco Volcanic Complex (CBVC) in Catamarca, Argentina. Here, three
major explosive eruptions in the last ~30,000 years record the episodic
development of an active caldera volcano. The project will reveal the growth,
development, and persistence of magma at the CBVC using the chemistry and age of
minerals that grew in the magma. The latest approaches to age dating and
geochemistry of individual minerals from the eruptions will be used. New ways of
analyzing and modeling these data will be developed. The project has many
broader impacts that benefit the discipline and society. The senior science team
is international and diverse. These senior scientists will mentor a junior
scientist from Argentina. An undergraduate researcher will also be deeply
involved in this project. The outcomes of this project will support the local
tourism industry and be the focus of a future field workshop for volcano
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will constrain the magmatic
processes and fluxes that have assembled and sustained a &gt;30,000-year locus
of intense rhyolitic volcanism in the Central Volcanic Zone of the Andes. Two
hypotheses relevant to subduction-related caldera volcanoes worldwide will be
tested: 1) The magmatic flux that led to the development and evolution of the
CBVC is typical of arc-related magmatic fluxes worldwide; and 2) The CBVC is the
surface expression of an episodically built composite arc pluton. The first
phase of the project will utilize coupled U-series and U-Th/He in zircon (Zircon
Double Dating or ZDD) to refine the eruptive frequency and tempo of the CBVC and
delineate the spatiotemporal development of the CBVC. This framework will then
be used to probe the magmatic evolution, development, and current state of the
magmatic complex, directly testing the two hypotheses. To do this, trace
elements and O-isotopes in zircon will also be collected and integrated with
melt chemistry, rhyolite-MELTS, and thermochemical modeling of zircon ages. The
outcomes of the study will include new efforts in thermochemical modeling of
these systems that will advance the understanding of how magma is stored pre-
eruption in the shallow crust and builds up to catastrophic eruptions of a scale
that have occurred in historic times and are therefore of immediate social
relevance. This knowledge is also fundamental to how batholiths are constructed,
the earth’s crust evolves, and how ore bodies form. The project features
international collaborations that provide access to the newest approaches to
link age dating and geochemistry of young volcanic systems. A diverse team of
senior scientists will mentor an early career researcher from Argentina and
undergraduate researchers to ensure that broader impacts of human capital
development, knowledge transfer, and research experience for undergraduates are
addressed. Outreach to local tourism efforts, and a future field workshop round
out the broader impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.