* 2243553
* Promoting STEM Education Access through Scholarships, Engineering Education Microcredentials, and a Community College Partnership
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Shannon Guerrero, Northern Arizona University
* Continuing Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 06/30/2028
* USD 531,455.00

This project aims to serve the national need for recruiting, preparing, and
supporting highly effective mathematics, science, and engineering educators in
grades 7-12. The project will continue and build on prior efforts to recruit and
support undergraduate mathematics and science majors to pursue pre-service
teacher education certification. The project will strengthen a partnership with
a community college to encourage more students to consider mathematics or
science teaching as a profession, including those from ethnically diverse
backgrounds. There is increased interest in engineering at middle and high
schools around the country. Responding to this interest, the project will
provide students with experiences in engineering education through supplemental
coursework and the opportunity to earn an engineering education microcredential.
Finally, this project provides new graduates support via a summer bridge program
designed to encourage first-year teaching readiness and promote continued growth
and collaborative networking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Northern
Arizona University (NAU) includes a partnership with Coconino Community College
(CCC), Flagstaff Urban School District, and Sinagua Middle School. Several
project goals will guide the work of the investigators for the next 5 years.
First is to provide 30 undergraduate mathematics/science majors with up to two
years of scholarships to pursue teacher certification. Second is to support a
partnership with CCC to increase recruitment of potential STEM majors from
diverse backgrounds. Third is to support up to 48 students per year (after year
1) in an engineering education microcredential program. The fourth and final
goal is to provide new graduates support in preparing for their first year of
teaching through a summer bridge program. All of these efforts will contribute
to the long-term retention and success of mathematics and science teachers to
effectively educate students from diverse backgrounds and provide expanded STEM
experiences through incorporation of engineering education in high-need
districts. Program efficacy for attracting, developing, and retaining effective
science and mathematics teachers will be measured by determining to what extent
scholars participate in STEM recruitment and teaching/learning activities, such
as the engineering education microcredential and summer bridge programs, and to
what extent the university/community college partnership broadens participation
in the mathematics/science teaching careers. This Track 1: Scholarships and
Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors
and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced,
exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school
districts. It also supports research on the effectiveness and retention of K-12
STEM teacher in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.