* 2243531
* Collaborative Research: Ideas Lab: The Role of Extracellular RNA in Intercellular and Interkingdom Communication
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2027
* Roger Innes, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 02/28/2027
* USD 805,832.00

This project is a collaboration among seven laboratories with diverse and
complementary expertise. The overarching goal of the project is to understand
the role of extracellular RNA (exRNA) in communication between cells and in
shaping the community of microbes, especially bacteria, that live on and inside
plants, insects, and humans. These collections of microbes are often referred to
as microbiomes and are critical for the health of plants and animals, including
humans. A healthy microbiome promotes a healthy immune system, but how healthy
microbiomes are maintained is poorly understood. This project will test the
hypothesis that RNA secreted by host cells plays a central role in maintaining
health both through communication among cells and by modifying the microbiome.
RNA is best known for its key role in protein production inside cells, such as
in RNA-based COVID vaccines. However, not all RNA encodes proteins, and cells
produce more non-coding RNA than coding RNA, some of which is actively pushed
into the environment by cells. This secreted RNA appears to be taken up by other
cells, including bacteria and fungi, where it could potentially impact their
growth. Understanding how exRNAs shape communication between cells and organisms
will enable manipulation of exRNA communication in both agriculture and
medicine, which will lead to development of environmentally friendly pesticides,
as well as treatments that promote formation of healthy microbiomes in both
plants and animals. This knowledge will also enable development of diagnostic
and therapeutic tools for early detection and/or treatment of
disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All cellular organisms secrete RNAs. The functions
of these extracellular RNAs (exRNAs), however, are poorly understood. Two likely
functions are intercellular and interkingdom communication. Open questions
abound in exRNA biology: how are exRNAs selected for secretion, how are they
targeted to recipient cells, and what are their roles in normal health and
organismal fitness? Arabidopsis leaf exRNA isolates are highly enriched in the
post-transcriptional modification N6-methyladenosine (m6A) (as compared to total
cellular RNA) suggesting that post-transcriptional modifications may tag
specific RNAs for export. Consistent with this, human exosomal microRNAs are
enriched with m6A (relative to cytosolic microRNAs). Interestingly, a large
number of mammalian small non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) that localize to the external
cell surface were recently found to harbor specific sialylated glycan
modifications. These observations suggest that specific RNA modifications tag
RNAs for cellular export and direct entry into appropriate recipient cells. This
project will 1) test the hypothesis that exRNAs have specific features marking
them for secretion and uptake, both within and among species, 2) determine how
exRNAs are transferred from signaler to receiver cells, and 3) assess the impact
of exRNA on microbiome health and composition through examining human gut,
insect gut, and leaf surface models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was co-
funded by the Directorate for Biological Sciences, and the Plant Genome Research
Program and the Plant Biotic Interactions Program in the Division of Integrative
Organismal Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.