* 2243552
* RUI: Magnetic properties of epsilon-Fe2O3 and alpha-FeOOH: an investigation of phase conversions and cations doping.
* GEO,EAR
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Thelma Berquo, Concordia College at Moorhead
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Panero
* 03/31/2026
* USD 178,353.00

The iron oxide minerals present in geological materials such as rocks, soils,
and sediment vary greatly, and their structure, chemical makeup, and magnetic
properties reflect the environmental conditions in which these minerals were
formed. In this research, faculty and undergraduate researchers work in
collaboration to investigate the magnetic properties of laboratory-prepared iron
oxides similar to geological materials. The undergraduate students involved in
the projects will participate in experimental work of data collection and data
analysis. The proposed study will engage undergraduate students in original
research where they will be trained on how to solve problems, and thus further
the mission of training the next generation of scientists using modern
technology and techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this Research in
Undergraduate Institution (RUI) project is to investigate the physical and
chemical parameters such as time, temperature, and the availability of ions that
influence iron oxide formation. The researchers will investigate the competitive
process of iron substitutions, Al + Ni and Al + Cr, in the lattice of goethite
and the conversion process of gamma-beta-epsilon-alpha Fe2O3 polymorphs. By
using a combination of techniques, MÃ¶ssbauer spectroscopy at room temperature,
and magnetometry from 50 K to 1000 K in an externally applied field up to 3 T,
they will investigate the magnetic properties of the iron phases, resulting in
valuable information when studying soils, sediments, and archaeological
materials. Undergraduate students will be engaged in this research work during
the summer and/or regular school year, trained to use modern instruments and
techniques to investigate magnetic materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.