* 2243979
* NRT-HDR: Interdisciplinary Studies in Entomology, Computer Science and Technology NETwork (INSECT NET)
* EDU,DGE
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2028
* Vijaykrishnan Narayanan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 06/30/2028
* USD 3,000,000.00

NRT-HDR: Interdisciplinary Studies in Entomology, Computer Science and
Technology NETwork (INSECT NET)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Insects constitute three-
quarters of the eight million animal and plant species on Earth. Insects play a
critical role in human and ecological health, including supporting fruit set by
plants through pollination, serving as food for wild animals such as birds, and
facilitating nutrient cycling. Insects are also key pests of plants and vectors
of human and animal diseases. Many insect species are showing dramatic and
alarming changes in their abundance and distributions around the world, due to a
complex suite of interacting factors. Traditional approaches for monitoring
insects are labor intensive and cannot be deployed at large scales. Cyber-
physical systems (CPS) to autonomously monitor, map and predict changes in
insect abundance and distributions across landscapes and over time will
dramatically improve our understanding of the drivers influencing biodiversity,
while supporting communities and policymakers to make decisions that conserve
beneficial species and mitigate impacts of pests. This National Science
Foundation Research Traineeship award to Penn State University establishes the
INterdisciplinary Studies in Entomology, Computer Science and Technology NETwork
(INSECT NET), empowering students to work across disciplines and collaborate
with stakeholder groups to develop solutions to the insect biodiversity crisis.
A faculty team from 8 departments, spanning 3 colleges, will co-train and co-
mentor 35 stipend-paid PhD trainees (25 NSF funded, 10 associates) and hundreds
of additional students through curricular and program
offerings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;INSECT NET is a transdisciplinary program
integrating the life sciences, computer science, engineering, and data science,
while leveraging advances in artificial intelligence. INSECT NET’s unique
solutions-driven approach - where collaborative student teams develop CPS to
address stakeholder needs through coursework, internships and research projects
- encourages creative and dynamic problem-solving, empowering students to
readily adapt to new challenges, concepts, and teams. Trainees will develop a
growth mindset, a convergence mindset, and skills in team science. Trainees will
gain competencies in (1) insect systematics (2) ecology (3) sensor design (4)
energy efficient optimizations (5) continual learning and adaptation of AI
systems (6) robotic systems (7) data integration (8) and data management,
including designing visualization tools accessible to stakeholders. Trainees
will receive formal instruction in communicating science to diverse audiences
(including the public and K-12 schools), project management, and best practices
for convergence research. Trainees will expand their professional skills and
networks through internships, entrepreneurship programs, and engagement with our
Stakeholder Advisory Board. INSECT NET’s training opportunities will be
formalized in a new Graduate Certificate in Technology and AI for Agricultural
and Ecological Science at Penn State. INSECT NET’s unique recruitment pipeline
will connect prospective students with current students and alumni, leveraging
new and existing partnerships with Minority Serving
Institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.