* 2243340
* Meeting the Need for STEM Teachers in Western Pennsylvania
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Holly Travis, Indiana University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 04/30/2028
* USD 694,169.00

This project aims to serve the national need for enrolling academically
accomplished STEM students in teacher education programs to help reduce STEM
teaching shortages, especially in rural areas. This aim will be met by providing
scholarships to train students majoring in Biology, Chemistry, Earth &amp; Space
Science, Mathematics, and Physics to teach in high-need secondary schools.
Teacher training will include skills on how to teach many different types of
students in both rural and urban schools. The project will also support and
mentor new practicing STEM teachers. The teachers produced by the project will
provide K-12 students with strong STEM foundations and increased science
understanding. Through this approach the project offers the promise of laying a
foundation for better job opportunities and economic growth in rural
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Indiana University of
Pennsylvania (IUP) includes partnerships with 12 Local Education Agencies
(LEAs): (Altoona Area School District, Armstrong School District, Leechburg Area
School District, Penns Manor Area School District, Punxsutawney Area School
District, Apollo-Ridge School District, Northern Cambria School District,
Greater Johnstown School District, Homer-Center School District, United School
District, Indiana School District, and Pittsburgh Public Schools) and two
community colleges (Penn Highlands Community College and Butler County Community
College). Project goals include: (1) recruiting 20 undergraduate STEM majors who
pursue secondary teaching certification in biology, chemistry, mathematics,
physics, or earth &amp; space science; (2) retaining 90% and graduating 100% of
retained scholars; and (3) supporting 20 new, in-service teachers by providing
both STEM teacher and IUP faculty mentorship and ongoing professional
development. Project impact will be assessed through an independent formative
and summative evaluation. Findings will inform how scholar participation in a
particular activity increases motivation to teach in a high-need LEA and
contributes to a studentâ€™s growing knowledge and skill base related to teaching
in a high-need LEA. The project will also generate new insights into effective
new teacher induction programs in both urban and rural school districts. This
model will be broadly disseminated to other public teacher education colleges
seeking to develop and expand STEM teacher preparation programs. This Track 1:
Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the effectiveness and
retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.