* 2243968
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research in Chemistry at Western Washington University
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Amanda Murphy, Western Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 03/31/2026
* USD 360,000.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site award to Western
Washington University, located in Bellingham, WA, supports the training of 8
students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2023-2025. In this program, funded
by the Division of Chemistry, participants pursue research projects in the
fields of biochemistry, synthetic chemistry, or materials chemistry. Recruitment
efforts for participants are focused on students from underrepresented
identities in STEM fields, specifically from community colleges and four-year
institutions with limited research opportunities. This program therefore
facilitates the transition to a four-year university for many of the students.
Participants also take part in weekly professional development training
seminars, engage in several excursions around Western Washington, and present a
poster at an REU symposium during the program. Since 2011, this REU site has
actively broadened participation in STEM by providing experiences for students
who otherwise may not have access to chemistry research. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Participants undertake research projects encompassing a broad range
of fields in chemistry. These include projects that develop silk-based
biomaterials, synthesize natural products for improved therapeutic uses, design
plasmonic nanoparticles or polymer-semiconductor nanocrystal composites, and
investigate new catalytic materials for sustainable fuels. Other projects
include protein biochemistry, structural biology, and computational biology
studies on intrinsically disordered proteins, bacterial sortases, and proteins
critical for blood coagulation and other signaling pathways. Several of these
projects are collaborative, and involve multiple research labs in the chemistry
department. Participants also attend weekly professional development seminars,
including how to conduct research and maintain a lab notebook, communicate
scientifically, and initiate their careers in chemistry. There are several
formal and informal activities for participants, and a strong emphasis is placed
on building community. The culmination of the summer program is a symposium that
celebrates the participantsâ€™ research and includes keynote speakers from each of
the three main research areas (biochemistry, synthetic chemistry, materials
chemistry).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.