* 2243625
* CSBR: Natural History: Facilitating Collections-Based Research on Insect Pollinators of the Sonoran Desert Region
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Wendy Moore Brusca, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Matthew Herron
* 01/31/2026
* USD 240,624.00

Bees, butterflies, moths, and flies are considered among the most efficient
insect pollinators of flowering plants. This project will protect specimens of
pollinators collected within the Sonoran Desert and Madrean Sky Island regions
that are presently at risk since they are housed either in personal collections
or at universities that do not support broader research collections of insects
with curatorial staff that would foster future care of the material. The
resulting professionally curated, comprehensive collection will reflect the
outstanding diversity of species found within this biodiversity hotspot. The
collection will also facilitate several ongoing research and training
initiatives at the University of Arizona, including our program providing
molecular identification resources for pollinators, long-term monitoring
projects of native bees in the region, and research projects linking pollinators
with their host plants by examining the eDNA of pollinators left on the flowers
they visit. The project will benefit the public and students at all levels
(K-12, community college and university undergraduates, and graduate students).
Curatorial teams, led by graduate students, will be directly involved in all
aspects of this vertically integrated project, providing them leadership
opportunities and training in museum science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Researchers
will capture label data from specimens and publish those data on the Ecdysis,
Symbiota Collections of Arthropods Network (SCAN), iDigBio, and the Global
Biodiversity Information Facility (GBIF). In addition, 1,200 native plant
specimens, which have already been digitized and georeferenced and which are
associated with 66,000 native bee specimens that pollinate them, will be mounted
on herbarium sheets, accessioned into the UA Herbarium, and added to the
Southwestern Environmental Information Network (SEINet). Extended Specimen
Network functions in Ecdysis and SEINet will allow scientists to link specimens
of pollinators with their host plant species and specific host plant specimens
when those are available, thus making a formal association between these two
large Symbiota database networks which will promote pollinator-plant research
and continued specimen digitization efforts. A well curated, comprehensive
collection of insect pollinators and digitization of associated metadata will
directly and immediately benefit several student training projects including
Course-based Undergraduate Research Experiences (CUREs) at two Hispanic-Serving
Institutions: Pima Community College (PCC) and the University of Arizona
(UA).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.