* 2243778
* RCN: INTERACT: An Incubator to Enable Scalable Education Equity Research with Terracotta
* EDU,DRL
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2025
* Amanda Diekman, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 02/28/2025
* USD 499,809.00

Improving equity in education is essential to national progress, particularly in
science, technology, engineering, and math (STEM) fields, where inequities based
on sociodemographic characteristics are pronounced. To remedy these inequities,
research is needed to understand educational practices and cues in the STEM
learning environment, and their psychological impacts on students. These
practices and cues include what teachers, staff, and administrators say and do,
their policies and instructional practices, their interactions with students,
and the norms they set for students’ interactions with one another. These
situational factors are important because they causally impact students'
learning, motivation, achievement, and persistence in STEM fields. Despite the
national importance of successful and equitable STEM education, there is still
great need for basic tools and infrastructure to support rigorous, scalable
research within STEM learning environments. However, a new generation of
research infrastructure has recently begun to emerge, enabled by the digital
transformation of education. As teachers and schools increasingly use digital
platforms for instruction, class assignments, sharing resources, student
interaction, and data collection and storage, there is an opportunity to
leverage these digital platforms to fill education research infrastructure gaps.
Terracotta is an emerging research tool that makes it possible to experimentally
manipulate many of these capabilities of the digital learning environment, while
also providing robust protections for student privacy and agency. To ensure that
Terracotta addresses the needs of high priority research studies, this Mid-scale
Research Infrastructure Incubator project will convene a diverse network of
researchers who study education, learning, and social equity, as well as
technologists and stakeholders in education, and will identify consensus
infrastructure requirements. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Incubator members will
receive training on cutting-edge findings about processes that foster equity in
education and will collaboratively envision how Terracotta can develop into a
national infrastructure that advances this research. The project will occur in
three phases: (1) Needs Assessment: Identifying high-impact research needs for
examining the influence of situational and instructional cues on STEM outcomes;
(2) Infrastructure Design: Co-creation of infrastructure solutions for filling
the range of research needs identified in Phase 1; and (3) Synthesis:
Integrating the incubator products into a consensus research infrastructure
plan. In Phases 1 and 2, incubator members will meet at multi-day in-person
convenings to identify research questions, and the corresponding infrastructure
needed, to lead to greater STEM education equity. In Phase 3, the steering
committee will synthesize incubator products into a coherent plan for national
STEM education research infrastructure. Additionally, the INTERACT incubator
also makes active strides toward diversifying the STEM education research
workforce, by constructing a community of racially and gender diverse
researchers, stakeholders, and graduate trainees who are vested in the
incubator’s products and who constitute the future of STEM education equity
research. This project is supported through a partnership with the Bill &amp;
Melinda Gates Foundation, Schmidt Futures, and the Walton Family Foundation.
Funding is also provided by NSF’s EDU Core Research
Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.