* 2243953
* REU Site: Training in Emerging Biomedical Optics and Imaging Approaches
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Kyle Quinn, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2026
* USD 414,426.00

The REU Site: Training in Emerging Biomedical Optics and Imaging Approaches
hosted by the University of Arkansas aims to engage undergraduate students in
scientific research under the mentorship of faculty in the Department of
Biomedical Engineering. Recently, in the state of Arkansas and the surrounding
region, there has been significant growth in students’ interest in the field of
biomedical engineering, but relatively limited opportunities for undergraduate
research. Research experience allows students to apply their knowledge gained
through the classroom, teaches them independent scientific research, develops
hands-on skills, and prepares them for a career in science and engineering.
Students will be recruited from colleges and universities in the region that
lack a biomedical engineering research program, as well as from minority groups
underrepresented in STEM. The program is intended to teach students independent
scientific research and guide undergraduate students—those who would otherwise
not have the mentorship opportunity—to pursue a career in science and
engineering and specifically, in the growing field of biomedical optics.
Students will gain professional perspectives through a professional development
seminar series, and engage in interdisciplinary professional development
activities with other researchers on campus. The project will prepare
undergraduate students from various backgrounds for graduate studies in
biomedical engineering or a related field as well as career as scientists and
engineers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU Site: Training in Emerging Biomedical
Optics and Imaging Approaches at the University of Arkansas will provide
scientific research opportunities for students in the region who lack such
opportunities, teach students valuable hands-on research skills within the field
of biomedical optics and imaging, and prepare students for an ethically grounded
career in science and engineering. Recently, in the state of Arkansas and the
surrounding region, there has been significant growth in the students’ interest
in the field of biomedical engineering, but relatively limited opportunities for
undergraduate research. More than half of the students will come from
underrepresented groups in STEM fields such as women, Native American, Hispanic,
and African American students. The site will provide both the financial and
scholarly platform to bring together students who lack these opportunities,
recruiting from colleges and universities of the surrounding areas that lack
biomedical research programs. In addition to rigorous coursework, undergraduate
research is an integral part of the biomedical engineering undergraduate
education. Research experience allows students to apply their knowledge gained
through the classroom, teaches them independent scientific research, develops
hands-on skills, and prepares them for a career in science and engineering.
Students will be assigned independent hypothesis-driven projects in state-of-
the-art biomedical research laboratories in fields of optical instrumentation
development or basic science applying existing, cutting-edge optical imaging or
spectroscopy methods. Students will learn to generate experimental hypotheses,
design and carry out experiments, and analyze and communicate the results of
their research. Students will gain professional perspectives through a
professional development seminar series, and engage in interdisciplinary
professional development activities with other researchers on campus. The
project will prepare undergraduate students from various backgrounds for
graduate studies in biomedical engineering or a related field as well as career
as scientists and engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.