* 2243416
* REU Site: Comparative Animal Model Approaches to Regeneration and Aging
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Jane Disney, Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2026
* USD 135,401.00

This REU Site award to the Mount Desert Island Biological Laboratory (MDIBL),
located in Bar Harbor, ME, will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks
during the summers of 2023-2025. It is anticipated that a total of 30 students,
primarily from schools with limited research opportunities or from
underrepresented groups, will be trained in the program. Students will be at all
stages of their undergraduate studies, and special consideration will be given
to applicants interested in microscopy and comparative animal model research on
regeneration and aging. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many
will present the results of their work at scientific conferences. Assessment of
the program will be done through the online SALG URSSA tool. Students will be
required to register in the NSF ETAP system (etap.nsf.gov) and tracked after the
program to determine their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU program
MDIBL will expose students to comparative animal model approaches used to
understand the biology of regeneration and aging. Labs at this REU site are
interested in how cells, tissues, organs, and limbs are repaired or replenished
after injury or during the ordinary course of development and the mechanisms
retained or reemployed to ensure an organism thrives once development is
complete. To answer these questions, researchers at MDIBL use various animal
models. These animals include zebrafish, killifish, axolotl, fruit flies
(Drosophila), and nematodes (Caenorhabditis elegans), which can be used to
compare the genetic similarities and differences in aging and regeneration
strategies across species. Students will be fully integrated into the scientific
culture of MDIBL through symposia, seminars, activities, responsible conduct of
research training, and weekly career discussions. Students More information
about the program is available in the NSF ETAP registration system and by
visiting https://mdibl.org/education/student-fellowships/reu-summer-
fellowships/, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Updike at dupdike@mdibl.org) or the
co-PI (Dr. Disney at jdisney@mdibl.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.