* 2243443
* Increasing the Representation of African American and Hispanic STEM Teachers in High-Need School Districts Through Community Partnerships
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Li-Jen Lester, Sam Houston State University
* Continuing Grant
* John Haddock
* 03/31/2028
* USD 519,415.00

This project aims to serve the national need for preparing and retaining highly
qualified secondary mathematics and science teachers who are prepared to teach
in high-need suburban and rural schools. The project will partner with seven
independent school districts in the Sam Houston State University (SHSU) general
geographic area with a primary partner being the Huntsville Independent School
District. Additional partners include other school districts in the surrounding
area and two community colleges from the Lone Star College (LSC) system, namely
LSC-Montgomery and LSC-Tomball. An underlying aim of the project is to
strengthen pathways from community colleges to a four-year STEM degree and
teaching licensure while, at the same time, increasing the number of certified
male teachers who reflect the demographics of the African American and Hispanic
students served in high-need school districts in Texas in the vicinity of SHSU.
This project will provide scholarships along with academic and co-curricular
support to thirty-nine (39) STEM students who are majoring in SHSU's College of
Science and Engineering Technology with majors in computer science, chemistry,
engineering technology, geology, mathematics, physics, or astronomy. Important
consideration will also be given to students in the LSC system who are
transferring to one of these majors at SHSU. The project will be guided by a
Culturally Responsive-Sustaining (CR-S) theoretical framework. Using the CR-S
framework, prospective teachers will learn strategies to create student-centered
learning environments, prepare students for rigorous and independent learning,
elevate marginalized voices, and empower students to work as agents of social
change in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several goals guide the execution of this
project. The first goal is to recruit and prepare thirty-nine (39) pre-service
teachers to become certified secondary STEM teachers. These Noyce Scholars will
earn a double major with the additional major in education complementing a STEM
major. In turn, the project will address critical teacher shortages in high-need
schools in the SHSU geographic area. For a second goal, over the 5-year duration
of the project, a project intent is that at least 40% percent of the Noyce
Scholars will be African American and/or Hispanic males and at least 35% will be
transfer students that emanate from community college partners. As a corollary
to this goal, the project will utilize a national "Call Me Mister" model while
partnering with SHSU's Establishing Leadership In &amp; Through Education
(ELITE) program - a Minority Male Program for Black and Hispanic Males for whom
special academic support and peer mentoring are provided. Third, the project
will provide financial, academic, and co-curricular support to assure that the
new teachers are well-prepared to teach and meet students' needs in high-need
schools in suburban and rural Texas. In the process, the project will
incorporate SHSU's extensive residency model for teacher preparation. This model
provides important opportunities for field-based learning and experiences.
Likewise, teacher preparation and induction will emphasize strong pedagogical
and STEM discipline content knowledge and will incorporate a culturally
responsive curriculum along with a diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI)
curriculum and activities. This approach will enable high-need schools in rural
and suburban Texas and other areas nationwide to provide their K-12 students
with a solid and inclusive STEM education, thereby helping to prepare many of
these students for STEM careers. A fourth goal is to develop an understanding of
the effectiveness of project components with respect to project goals as well as
to provided formative and summative feedback through education research and
mixed methods project evaluation. In concert with this, project outcomes and
lessons learned will be disseminated through several panel presentations at
local venues, regional and national conferences, and project networks. This
Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the effectiveness and
retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.