* 2243658
* Quartz grain-boundary topology as a stress and strain-rate meter and a new flow law
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2025
* Scott Johnson, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Stephen Harlan
* 02/28/2025
* USD 392,372.00

The surface of Earth is constantly subjected to stresses caused by the movement
of tectonic plates, and these stresses commonly cause events such as earthquakes
that threaten life and infrastructure. To quantify the stresses caused by plate
tectonics, geologists examine the shape, size, and other microstructural
characteristic of minerals such as quartz. From these characteristics combined
with laboratory experiments geologists have developed mathematical equations
that relate the applied stress to the rate of rock flow. These equations, known
as flow laws, are valuable but the uncertainties remain significant. Here the
researchers combine field-based data and modeling with laboratory experiments to
develop a new method for extracting stress and flow-rate information from rocks
that can be directly compared to results obtained from applying flow laws. They
quantify how the roughness of mineral grain boundaries directly records stress
and flow rate. They develop new protocols for measuring roughness using electron
beam methods. The interdisciplinary project supports a postdoctoral associate,
as well as the training of undergraduate and graduate students at the University
of Maine. The developed codes and analytical protocols are made openly available
through public portals. These outcomes can be applied beyond Earth Sciences in
Material Sciences and Engineering, notably to engineer the strength of metals,
ceramics, and advanced composite materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives
of this project are to: 1) Generate a new experimental calibration using quartz
to refine the polynomial relations among temperature, stress, flow rate and
grain-boundary roughness; 2) Obtain a complete set of quartz grain-boundary
roughness data from the Sandhill Corner shear zone in the Norumbega fault
system, Maine USA, to test and apply the new experimental calibrations; 3)
Develop and refine methods for determining grain-boundary perimeters using
optical and electron backscatter diffraction techniques, and provide optical and
backscatter diffraction calibrations for the method. Addressing the above
objectives provides an opportunity to quantify the relations between deformation
conditions and resulting rock microstructures, and to develop a new method for
estimating stresses and strain rates that can be used independently or in
concert with flow laws. The chosen approach applies models and concepts that
originate largely in the materials and engineering communities, and mostly
constitutes novel research in the geosciences. Recognition of the importance of
microstructure for macroscopic behavior and the ability to treat it
quantitatively is growing in both Earth Sciences and Materials Engineering.
Outcomes of this project will provide a framework for future efforts in both
fields, and for collaborations between them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.