* 2243044
* The Item Bank Calibration and Replenishment for Computerized Adaptive Testing in Small Scale Assessments: Method, Theory, and Application
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Shiyu Wang, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 07/31/2026
* USD 300,000.00

This research project will advance statistical estimation methods for
computerized adaptive testing (CAT) item bank calibration and replenishment in
small-scale assessments. CAT has emerged as a powerful assessment tool and has
been applied to the field of educational testing, quality of life measurement,
health related measurement, and testing in industrial settings. Different from
the traditional paper-pencil test, CAT allows for personalized assessment.
However, the application of CAT remains limited in small-scale assessment
scenarios, such as in classrooms or business daily routines. This project will
develop a series of statistical estimation methods, theories, algorithms, and
software aimed at accelerating the development of CAT and promoting its
applications in personalized educational assessment and learning. The project
will address a fundamental challenge in educational research: the lack of
efficient statistical methods to cope with limited samples sizes and missing
data, especially in low-stakes assessment settings. The outcomes are expected to
advance the fields of education and psychology and to positively impact society.
The investigators will apply the new methods to educational data sets and
develop publicly available software that will be directly applicable for
educators and applied researchers. Graduate and undergraduate students will
participate in the conduct of this research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
project will develop new statistical methods and theories to address the
challenges of Item Response Theory (IRT) model calibration with small samples,
sparse response data, and the lack of computationally efficient online
estimation procedures with theoretical guarantee. The project will develop a
dimension reduction method for a family of IRT models based on homogeneity
structure learning, which belongs to a class of statistical and machine learning
methods that aim to summarize useful information by discovering low-dimensional
structures. An online inference approach that borrows the wisdom of some recent
developments in stochastic gradient descent based online estimation and
inference also will be developed. The investigators will validate these
developed approaches through a set of simulation studies that mimic different
aspects of small-scale assessments and analyze two real data sets from a
computer-based classroom assessment and a large-scale
CAT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.