* 2243169
* Increasing and Inspiring Highly Effective Secondary STEM Teachers for High-Need, Culturally Diverse School Districts
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2028
* Spence Pilcher, Northeastern State University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 03/31/2028
* USD 720,641.00

This project aims to serve a national need by increasing the number of highly
effective secondary STEM teachers in high-need, culturally diverse schools in
rural and urban areas of northeastern Oklahoma. The State currently faces
teacher shortages, including teachers qualified for instruction in mathematics,
biology, chemistry, and physics. This project aims to attract, prepare, and
inspire prospective teachers to select diverse areas in which to teach upon
graduation and will provide 20 scholarships to high-achieving students,
significantly reducing the financial burden of becoming a STEM teacher. These
prospective teachers will receive enhanced programming through diverse
experiential learning opportunities, enhanced mentoring, summer workshops, and
after graduation, scholars will continue to receive high-quality induction
support. An innovative feature of the project is its integration of instruction
in place-based education - the immersion of students in local heritage as a
foundation for learning, to prepare STEM teachers for careers in high-need
school districts. By utilizing place-based education and other effective and
engaging STEM instruction, this project promises to improve learning outcomes
for the Scholars, better prepare the students they teach for college, and
increase those students’ interest and engagement in the STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Over the course of five years, 20 undergraduate
students will be awarded scholarships to earn a bachelor’s degree in their STEM
fields as well as Oklahoma secondary teaching certification. Towards this end
this project will rely on Northeastern State University collaborating closely
with two K-12 partners: Tahlequah Public Schools and Union Public Schools. These
partnerships provide ideal settings for the innovative preparation of
prospective STEM teachers for high-needs school districts while combating the
teacher shortage crisis. High quality, research-informed practices to enhance
prospective teachers’ learning include experiential learning, which provides
opportunities that extend beyond required internships; mentoring by highly
effective practicing teachers from high-needs school districts; workshops
focusing on best practices with a goal of preparing prospective teachers for
their role as educators; and science and mathematics demonstration workshops
facilitated by faculty and other STEM experts. This project has the potential to
increase retention of graduating STEM teachers while also preparing effective
teachers for tomorrow’s workforce. The intellectual merit of the proposed
project is embedded in the integration of instruction to support teacher
efficacy and in place-based education and its coursework as an innovative way to
prepare STEM teachers for careers in high-need school districts. Results of this
project will be used to develop evidence-based recommendations for enhancing the
training of STEM educators at other higher education institutions and to
investigate the impact of recruitment measures in recruiting scholars and the
impact of programming in retaining scholars, especially those from minority
populations. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported
through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program
supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become
effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become
STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on
the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.