* 2243653
* I-Corps:  Privacy-preserving data sharing software platform
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Trinabh Gupta, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a data sharing product for enterprises in highly regulated
verticals such as healthcare, finance, and the government. Today, data
custodians in these verticals must keep their confidential data assets in silos
due to risks of data breaches, regulatory violations, and reputational setbacks.
The proposed technology may enable these enterprises to build a centralized
database and expose this data safely for the application of artificial
intelligence and machine learning, leading to direct economic and societal
benefit. As an example, in the government sector, the proposed technology may
enable different departments of Health and Human Services, Judicial System, and
Community Services to understand risk factors for incarcerations such as
homelessness and serious mental illness, to better allocate resources, design
effective interventions, and reduce social inequities. The challenge in building
the centralized database is security and privacy, and the project will bring to
the forefront the very best of security and privacy technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of a
privacy-preserving data warehouse and analytics engine. This warehouse connects
to heterogeneous and federated data sources, while ensuring that the original
confidential data stays at source with the data custodians. The data warehouse
links records from different systems of records while removing duplicates in a
privacy-preserving manner. The secure analytics engine makes the linked data
available for queries, while providing anonymity guarantees through the state-
of-the-art technology of differential privacy. The query results obtained do not
disclose the identity of an individual whose record is present in the data.
Based on fundamental research, the data warehouse and analytics engine include
novel system architectures for federated queries, design optimizations for
performance and scalability to big data workloads, and rigorous algorithms for
anonymity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.