* 2243335
* I-Corps: Real-time anxiety detection and modulation using wearables
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Richard Sowers, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of technology that provides objective data to patients and
caregivers before and after clinical psychological consults to provide improved
adherence and to improve the informal support infrastructure for new referrals
to a clinical psychologist. Mental health disorders are prevalent in the United
States, with nearly one in four adults living with a mental illness. Mental
health disorders account for a large proportion of the disease burden in younger
populations across the world. While mental health disorders are often diagnosed
in adulthood, these diseases often stem from disorders arising as a childhood,
adolescence, or young adulthood. Social and health disparities have a widespread
impact on developmental periods and have been associated with an increase in
mental health conditions in racial minorities. Furthermore, with increased
social isolation, increased depression, anxiety, insomnia, and stress become
more prevalent, particularly in females. For young adults, in college or
professional programs, the need to balance life and work already present
significant challenges for emotional wellbeing, let alone when faced with a
pandemic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of a technology that integrates personalized, wearable devices and machine
learning/artificial intelligence frameworks to establish a personalized
evaluation and intervention targeting mental health changes in stressful
environments. Wearable sensors enable continuous measurement and evaluation of
potential behavioral markers of disease progression, physiological health, and
wellness in adults across their lifespan. Given the shortage of mental health
professionals, limited access to quality mental health services, and the stigma
associated with mental disorders, the need for improved tele-monitoring of
changes in health and wellness is paramount. Wearable sensors of physiological
or psychological function have been integrated into accessories, clothing, body
attachments, and implantable devices. However, fitness trackers and smartwatches
experience abandonment rates of ~30%, which highlights the need to develop
technologies that are user‐centered and respond to users’ functional and
emotional needs to ensure adoption and continued use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.