* 2243602
* Towards an Improved Mechanistic Understanding of Dangerous Heat Extremes Affecting US Cities in the Historical Records and Future Climate Projections
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Andrew Dessler, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 06/30/2026
* USD 591,203.00

Heat extremes are happening more often and negatively affect natural
environments, communities, and public health. This project studies these heat
extremes, particularly those causing increased mortality in urban areas of the
United States, with the goal of enhancing our understanding of these severe heat
events and their anticipated changes in the coming decades. Initially, the
project evaluates different metrics to identify climate variables that most
robustly represent heat risks. Notably, it goes beyond temperature, including
factors like humidity, solar and thermal radiation, and wind speed at the
surface. It then connects major historical heat extremes to patterns in weather
and long-term climate drivers. The results from analyzed data will be compared
to output from global climate models using advanced statistical techniques.
Lastly, the project uses high-resolution climate predictions to understand how
lethal heat events may change in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will
extend the communityâ€™s understanding of extreme heat and mortality, but the
importance of this research extends beyond scientific understanding. Communities
vulnerable to climate change, especially those with limited means to adapt, face
substantial risks from heat extremes. Despite recognizing the social
implications of these heat extremes, our ability to predict them on a seasonal
to decadal scale is insufficient. This project addresses this issue by using a
data-driven approach to associate lethal heat extremes with large-scale weather
patterns. The findings from this research will be communicated to public health
and urban planning partners to aid in their response to these threats. The
physical insights generated through these analyses can help guide interpretation
of climate model-based projection of future occurrence and severity of these
dangerous heat extremes. Additionally, this project offers valuable training for
graduate students in statistical modeling, data visualization, climate modeling,
and climate communication. Thus, it contributes to the broader scientific
community and society, not only through its results but also by training the
next generation of climate scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-
funded by the Directorate for Geosciences to support AI/ML advancement in the
geosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.