* 2243860
* Planning: Comparing Climate Change-Related Vulnerabilities in Greenland and Iceland
* GEO,OPP
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2024
* Thomas Rotnem, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Erica Hill
* 12/31/2024
* USD 199,921.00

This award supports the development of collaborative relationships and future
research questions with local communities and institutions in the North
Atlantic, where investigators will explore the impacts of environmental change
on livestock farming economies. Taking a comparative perspective, the
researchers will conduct initial site visits and interviews to evaluate how
recent climate shifts have affected local ecosystems, livelihoods, and
infrastructure in southern Iceland and southwest Greenland. Research questions
include how recent demographic and economic changes are affecting participants
and how satellite data analysis may assist local stakeholders to adapt to the
effects of climate change. The research team will use preliminary findings as
the basis for the development of a future research proposal that responds to the
priorities of participating communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses
mixed social science methods, including interviews, focus groups, and site
visits. The project will lay the foundation for a future NSF proposal while
exploring the use of satellite data to evaluate landscape and vegetation changes
with collaborators in Iceland and Greenland and addressing existing data needs
in local communities. Plans for dissemination include presentations at
professional conferences and to participating communities, a peer-reviewed
journal article, and a series of virtual classroom exchanges among students and
researchers in the U.S., Iceland, and Greenland.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.