* 2243392
* Impact of Different Learning Modalities on Science and Mathematics Teachers' Effectiveness and Retention during the COVID-19 Pandemic
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2027
* Molly Weinburgh, Texas Christian University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 03/31/2027
* USD 469,066.00

This project aims to serve the national need to understand how districtsâ€™
decisions about school openings during COVID-19 impacted students and science
and math teachers in high-need school districts. Three learning modalities
(e.g., In-person, Remote, Hybrid) related to teaching effectiveness and
retention will be investigated. District and school level data will be used to
determine teacher effectiveness and teacher retention during and immediately
after the COVID-19 school closures. In addition, math and science teacher self-
effectiveness and job satisfaction will be studied in relation to the learning
modalities.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project at Texas Christian University
includes a partnership with the Institute for Biomedical Philosophy and selected
high-need school districts from across the nine census regions of the U.S. The
overall goal of this project is to understand (a) implementation of learning
modalities utilized during the protracted national emergency of COVID-19 and (b)
the impact of these different modalities on STEM teacher effectiveness and
retention. The three research questions are: (1) What learning modalities were
used by high-need school districts beginning in fall 2020 through Spring 2022?
(2) How did utilization of different learning modalities within a COVID-19
dictated teaching environment contribute to STEM teacher effectiveness and STEM
teacher retention in high-need school districts? and (3) What support systems
and resources within a COVID-19 dictated teaching environment contribute to STEM
teacher effectiveness and STEM teacher retention in high-need school districts?
The project will utilize secondary data from large public data sets for Research
Questions 1 and 2 as well as the selection of high-need school districts. Two-
hundred respondents will provide data. There will be three case studies bounded
by the modality that will explore the commonalities within each case associated
with the third research question. Findings on best practices regarding teacher
effectiveness and retention, especially in high-need school districts, has the
potential to be used to inform policy, practice, and future design of teacher
professional development. This Track 4: Noyce Research project is supported
through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program
supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become
effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become
STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on
the effectiveness and retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.