* 2243526
* NRT-HDR: Advancing Materials Frontiers with Creativity and Data Science
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Derek Anderson, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 06/30/2028
* USD 3,000,000.00

The discovery and development of new materials is currently a decades-long
endeavor, using approaches that have remained largely unchanged for over a
century. The parameter space for materials design is vast and multidimensional
and is frequently guided by human intuition and experience. A fundamentally new
research methodology is needed to meet societal needs in semiconductor, energy,
biological, and manufacturing applications. The future of research will
incorporate an increased reliance on machine learning (ML) and artificial
intelligence (AI) in the design, analysis, and execution of experiments, thereby
changing the role of humans in the research process. While the ML and AI tools
may accelerate research, they do not inherently generate understanding or create
new applications. These uniquely human roles must be fostered and encouraged via
creativity training – a topic absent in most graduate STEM curricula. This NRT
award to University of Missouri- Columbia will prepare trainees for this future
by integrating data science and analytics (DSA), evidence-based creativity, and
cutting-edge materials training. The program will train sixty doctoral students,
including thirty-six NRT-funded trainees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Trainees in the
NRT program will complete a rigorous DSA graduate certificate offered by the
University of Missouri. As part of the NRT, a materials emphasis area will be
added to the DSA program that emphasizes materials data curation, analysis, and
evaluation. Major research areas for trainees include autonomous research
systems to map complex synthesis-structure-property relationships, archeometry
to investigate materials of the ancient world, optical metasurfaces, and
amorphous interface engineering using advanced structural reconstruction
techniques. Trainees will also learn to think creatively, to innovate, and to
expand the societal impact of materials research using an evidence-based
creativity training curriculum. The creativity training will be formally
integrated into the research plan and dissertation of each trainee. The NRT
trainees and faculty will facilitate a culture of respect and trust by promoting
new ideas, accepting failures, and encouraging risk taking. Biweekly Café Hours,
annual outings, and outreach activities will foster a welcoming and informal
environment while building a community of practice. Each trainee and mentor will
use an individual development plan to customize training activities to suit the
career path of each trainee. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship
(NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and implementation of
bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education
training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate
students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through
comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and
aligned with changing workforce and research needs.  &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.