* 2243458
* Preparing Engaged STEM Teachers through Multi-level Peer Mentoring and Early Teaching Experiences
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2028
* Kristina Collins, Texas State University - San Marcos
* Continuing Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 05/31/2028
* USD 487,772.00

This project aims to serve the national need for preparing diverse, high-quality
STEM teachers with deep content knowledge who are responsive to needs of
students. The project will provide scholarship support to STEM majors who seek
teacher certification, with recruitment focused principally on physics,
chemistry, and mathematics majors. Scholars will participate in field-based
teacher preparation collaboratively delivered by STEM and Education faculty.
Project faculty will conduct monthly full-day Saturday workshops to enhance
Scholars’ teaching-focused content knowledge and content-specific pedagogical
skills. This project will also partially support the operation of a Learning
Assistant (LA) Program. In addition to providing compelling early teaching
experiences for undergraduates, the LA Program introduces students to research
in STEM education through an LA teaching methods course, including investigation
of issues of equity and identity in STEM. Project staff will use strong
partnerships with area school districts to facilitate certified Scholars’
employment in high-needs schools and will provide two years of induction through
a Vertical Peer Mentoring Network. Project personnel will engage in a research
and evaluation agenda that will contribute to the knowledge base about STEM
teacher preparation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Texas State
University includes partnerships with the Hutto, Leander, and Lockhart
Independent School Districts. Project goals include the preparation of 20 to 30
STEM teachers over the five-year life of the project; recruiting primarily
physics, chemistry, and mathematics majors; and supporting Scholars through both
undergraduate and post-baccalaureate pathways into teaching. The LA Program
design is informed by Communities of Practice theory and its relationship to
identity formation, with a primary goal of the program being to support
students’ development of STEM identity. Vertical Peer Mentoring employs all
three elements of Vygotsky’s theory: social interaction, the concept of the
"more knowledgeable other," and the educational psychology concept of the zone
of proximal development. The research and evaluation plans bring together the
quantitative power of the Texas Education Research Center longitudinal data lake
with its national vantage on STEM teacher preparation, to answer questions about
teacher preparation quality, the impact of mentoring, and influences on teacher
career choice and teaching practices. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends
project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program
(Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and
professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary
K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It
also supports research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12
STEM teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.