* 2243027
* Conference: Joint Alabama--Florida Conference on Differential Equations, Dynamical Systems and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Selim Sukhtaiev, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 03/31/2024
* USD 26,010.00

The conference "Joint Alabama-Florida Conference on Differential Equations,
Dynamical Systems and Applications (JAF DE-DS)" organized by the departments of
Mathematics and Statistics at Auburn University, the University of Alabama at
Birmingham, Florida International University, and Florida State University will
take place in Auburn, AL, May 13-14, 2023. This conference will bring together a
diverse group of researchers in the geographic area near the states of Alabama
and Florida. The award funds will help defray travel and local expenses of the
participants with no current federal support, graduate and undergraduate
students, postdoctoral fellows, early career researchers, and scientists from
under-represented groups in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thematically, the
conference will be centered around a broad set of topics in partial differential
equations including dynamics of nonlinear waves in dispersive and dissipative
systems, long-term behavior of evolution equations, reaction-diffusion
equations, pattern formation, and applied spectral theory. The main research
directions are reaction-diffusion equations (population dynamics, chemotaxis,
and combustion models), models of fluid and gas dynamics, novel mechanisms in
stability analysis of nonlinear waves (Maslov index). More information can be
found on the conference website: &lt;br/&gt;https://www.auburn.edu/cosam/al_fl_d
ifferential_conference/index.htm&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.