* 2243184
* CAREER: Upper mantle anisotropy: the effect of pressure, temperature and hydration
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Jin Zhang, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 06/30/2024
* USD 390,629.00

Thermal convection in the Earth's mantle drives plate tectonics which generates
natural hazards, such as volcanic eruptions and earthquakes. Understanding
mantle flows has, thus, strong societal relevance. Seismology is a major tool
when investigating mantle flows. Differences in seismic velocities, called
seismic anisotropy, reflect the elastic anisotropy of mantle rocks. This
anisotropy results from the properties of their constitutive minerals and from
their deformation by convective flows. Here, the PI will experimentally measure
the elastic anisotropy of various mantle minerals at the extreme pressures and
temperatures prevailing in the Earth. From the data, rock seismic anisotropies
can be calculated and compared with field observations. The experiments will be
carried out at a national synchrotron facility, where powerful X-rays are
generated, and in the PI's laser laboratory at University of New Mexico (UNM).
The lasers and X-rays will be guided toward small mineral specimens pressurized
in-between two diamonds. Mineral elastic properties can be extracted by
quantifying the interaction between X-ray/laser beams and specimens which
induces elastic waves in the minerals. Results from this project will improve
the understanding of three critical zones in the Earth's mantle, located near
plate boundaries and within the first few hundred kilometers underneath the
surface. The project outcomes will be integrated into educational outreaches
towards high-school students in Albuquerque (NM), notably from under-represented
groups, as well as in a new introductory course at UNM. The project will also
support two early-career scientists and provide training to one graduate student
at UNM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal aims at better understanding the
seismic anisotropy observed in three critical regions of the Earth's upper
mantle: the lithosphere-asthenosphere boundary, the mid-lithosphere
discontinuity and the mantle wedge in subduction zones. The goal is to link the
anisotropy to the elastic properties of the relevant minerals. The PI will
perform experiments in the diamond-anvil cell at the high pressures and
temperatures prevailing in the mantle. Single-crystal Brillouin spectroscopy at
PI's laser spectroscopy laboratory and a national synchrotron facility, the
Advance Photon Source (IL), will allow measuring the elastic constants of
hydrogen-bearing olivine and pyroxenes and minerals from the amphibole and
serpentine groups. Specimens will be prepared by focused ion beam and a novel
scattering geometry will be implemented to ensure the success of the project.
The research outcomes will be integrated into educational and outreach
activities. The PI, an early-career female scientist, will work with teachers
from Albuquerque high schools to encourage students to pursue STEM studies. A
new introductory geoscience course will provide fun movie-discussion-exploration
style learning experiences at University of New Mexico. The objective is to
engage at an early stage more female and students from underrepresented groups
into Earth Sciences careers. The project will also support a postdoctoral
associate and provide training to one graduate student at
UNM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.