* 2243225
* The Mathematics Master Teacher Leadership Project
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2029
* Rajee Amarasinghe, California State University-Fresno Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 04/30/2029
* USD 708,060.00

This project will address the national need to prepare high-quality mathematics
teachers who are effective in helping all students succeed. To this end the
project will develop a leadership cadre of experienced and exemplary teachers to
be Master Teaching Fellows (MTF) in high-need schools. This cadre will amplify
the efforts of "GOTMath," a current Noyce project that is preparing a pool of
diverse community college students to enroll in the university’s mathematics
teacher education program. In particular, the new MTFs will serve as excellent
mentors to the "GOTMath" Student-Scholars as the latter earn their STEM
bachelor’s degree and become new teachers in the district’s high-need schools.
The Master Teaching Fellows will be engaged in a research-based Leadership
Initiative which seeks to develop the Fellows’ capacity to improve opportunities
for a diverse body of students by offering inclusive mathematics experiences.
The Leadership Initiative will help the Fellows to become future school leaders
who can mentor less experienced teachers to be more effective. The Master
Teaching Fellows will complete a Master of Science in Mathematics degree and
participate in teaching and leadership workshops offered by the project’s many
partners. They will become the next generation of math teacher-leaders vitally
needed to create schools that are sites of success for all
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together nine partners: the
Central Valley Higher Education Consortium; Fresno County Superintendent of
Schools; San Joaquin Valley Mathematics Project; the California State University
(CSU) Mathematics and Science Teacher Initiative; and five high-need school
districts (Fresno, Sanger, Reef-Sunset, Central, and Mendota), who collectively
will recruit and mentor 18 master’s-level teachers from the participating school
districts. The project rests on four proven methods for building an effective
teaching workforce: (1) multipurpose mentoring; (2) increasing the number of
teacher-leaders who are individuals who identify as members of racial and ethnic
populations that are underrepresented in STEM disciplines relative to their
numbers in the general population; (3) investing in local teachers; and (4)
implementation of the concept of "Lesson Study," in which a school-based
community of teachers collaborates to develop and share approaches to improving
classroom instruction. The project's assessment will target three questions: (1)
In what ways do activities influence the participants’ understanding of
mathematics teacher leadership? (2) How do activities contribute to the growth
of a Fellow as a teacher of mathematics, an educational researcher, and a
leader? (3) In what ways do Teacher Leaders influence their colleagues in their
schools to improve mathematics teaching? The PI Team will disseminate project
findings at conferences and in journals, and they will share the findings with
the CSU Director of Educator Preparation to disseminate to all 23 CSU campuses.
This Track 3: Master Teaching Fellowships project is supported through the
Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports
talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12
STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master
teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
effectiveness and retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.