* 2243433
* Energizing STEM Teaching Across Rural Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2028
* James White, Juniata College
* Continuing Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 04/30/2028
* USD 405,955.00

This project aims to serve the national need to prepare highly trained STEM
teachers for rural schools that often lack the resources for advanced science
and math coursework and support for associated technologies. Through specialized
knowledge and experiences, prospective teachers will learn how to address the
specific challenges and opportunities of rural schools and students by providing
innovative and creative secondary science and math courses. This will prepare
rural students to pursue STEM disciplines in college and the workplace. The need
for a strong, well trained and educated STEM workforce is a national priority,
and a high-quality, equitable high school STEM education provides the foundation
for future generations to succeed in these much-needed fields.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Juniata College includes partnerships with
five local districts who are rural and high-needs including Altoona Area School
District, Huntingdon Area School District, Mount Union School District, Juniata
Valley School District and Tyrone Area School District. In addition to the
collaboration among the Collegeâ€™s math, sciences, and education departments,
Science in Motion, a project originally funded by NSF will also assist in
training the prospective teachers. This project will provide scholarships over
five years for 24 Juniata undergraduate junior and senior STEM majors to pursue
teacher certification credentials. The prospective teachers will be trained in
culturally relevant and sustaining educational practices to ensure they provide
and champion an equitable educational opportunity for all students. The
undergraduate scholars will have the opportunity to pursue summer research in
their respective STEM fields in addition to extensive educational field
placements in rural settings. The project will be evaluated through survey
instruments, tracking of participation in activities, and interviews with the
prospective teachers, placement supervisors, and other mentors. The
dissemination of lessons learned and training in culturally relevant practices
will be shared at state and national conferences. In addition, the prospective
teachers will also share their research findings at appropriate conferences,
highlighting how actively engaging in STEM research will enhance their future
classrooms. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through
the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports
talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12
STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master
teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.