* 2243772
* REU Site: Research Experience for Undergraduates in Applied and Computational Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Eduardo Teixeira, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Continuing Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 04/30/2026
* USD 130,604.00

The Research Experience for Undergraduates in Applied and Computational
Mathematics at the University of Central Florida will provide a group of ten
undergraduate students with the opportunity to conduct research projects on
mathematical issues arising in applied and computational mathematics for ten
weeks for each of three summers. Special effort will be made to recruit talented
students from underrepresented minority groups as well as those with limited
access to research opportunities in their home institutions. Students will work
closely with faculty members on a diverse array of research projects that have
applications in medical imaging, financial engineering, and mathematical
biology. Mini-courses, developmental seminars, career and graduate school
preparation workshops, social and recreational activities, and an REU symposium
are some of the opportunities that will be offered during the program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU projects aim to address important questions in
applied partial differential equations, computational mathematics, financial
engineering, and mathematical biology. Each of these tracks will be led by a
faculty expert on the theme who will closely mentor students throughout the
project duration. The REU mentors will endeavor to foster collaborations across
the research tracks. Some of the projects include: free boundary mathematical
models, questions pertaining to smoothness of solutions, inverse scattering
problems related to medical imaging, equation-based as well as data-based models
arising from financial mathematics, and complex mathematical models on
epidemiological problems. Independent of the research track, students will be
exposed to powerful mathematical ideas and methods. Some of these projects are
expected to lead to quality peer-reviewed research articles. Ultimately, the
program intends to prepare students for careers in academia or industry that
require a rigorous mathematical foundation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.