* 2243209
* STTR Phase I:  Advancing DNA Testing with a Novel Platform for Processing Touch Biological Evidence
* TIP,TI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Martha Philpott, RAPID FORENSIC CELL TYPING, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Erik Pierstorff
* 06/30/2024
* USD 270,578.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this Small Business Technology
Transfer (STTR) Phase I project addresses two societal issues in the justice
system: an individual's constitutional right to a speedy trial, and inherent
human biases in law enforcement when gathering and processing evidence. Backlogs
in processing DNA evidence can lead to extended jail time for defendants unable
to post bail and may violate their rights, particularly for crimes they did not
commit. Rapid analysis of evidence samples can free up court dockets and save
money for institutions holding people awaiting trials due to testing backlogs.
In addition, the number of people exonerated by the re-analysis of forensic
evidence after serving years in prison rises every year, underscoring the
potential impact that testing decisions can have for individuals, families, and
society at large. This technology reduces the number of samples tested and the
potential for sample selection bias by rapidly identifying which samples may be
probative to the investigation and thus warrant DNA testing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will develop a new technology that
utilizes flow cytometry to analyze non-genetic attributes of cell populations
within forensic evidence. This technology will allow forensic laboratories to
rapidly determine the probative value of samples before DNA profiling. Machine
learning algorithms will compare morphological measurements and autofluorescence
properties of individual cells recovered from ‘touch’ epidermal cells to
identify features that vary with attributes of the person who deposited the
cells (e.g., chronological age, biological sex, and/or ancestry). This
technology will enable forensic laboratories to rapidly identify which samples
have biological material that is probative to the case and which samples have
biological material that is unrelated. This will allow labs to prioritize
samples for DNA testing more precisely and potentially provide key contextual
information for the sample. By allocating resources more efficiently, this
innovation will reduce costs, speed up results and reporting, and reduce delays
in DNA testing turn-around times. The solution will also prevent undue delays in
the legal system, improve the accuracy of case analysis, and ultimately improve
the quality and reliability of forensic analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.