* 2243586
* REU site: Integrative tree science for the Anthropocene at the Morton Arboretum
* BIO,DBI
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2026
* Charles Cannon, Morton Arboretum
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 10/31/2026
* USD 328,693.00

This REU Site award to The Morton Arboretum (Lisle, Illinois) will support the
training of eight students during ten week intensive summer programs from
2024-2026. We recruit students nationally, emphasizing students traditionally
excluded from research due to ethnic or gender identity, who attend schools
without research programs, or are first-generation college. Essentially,
students come to realize the power and benefit of trees in people’s lives. Their
research is often incorporated into programming that reaches our million plus
visitors and contributes to policy making. Students gain confidence to pursue a
scientific career and their increased tree awareness fills vital gaps in
national knowledge about tree biology. Students develop technical skills in a
specific field, hone communication and interpretation abilities, create a strong
identity and competency as a professional researcher, bond with a diverse cohort
of scientific peers, and establish enduring relationships with their CTS
collaborators. Assessment of the program will be done through the online SALG
URSSA tool. Students will be required to register in the NSF ETAP system
(etap.nsf.gov) and tracked after the program to determine their career
paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU site program based in the Center for Tree
Science (CTS) at the Morton Arboretum entitled “Integrative Tree Science for the
Anthropocene” aims to: i) provide transformative research experiences in a
multidisciplinary setting, ii) inspire a diverse and inclusive community of
students and mentors to create the scientific advances necessary so trees and
society benefit equitably and sustainably, and iii) expand student awareness of
diverse career opportunities and facilitate professional advancement in tree-
related research through exposure to the multi-faceted world of botanical
gardens. Students partner with mentors to conduct a research project, from
initial design to final symposium presentation, aimed at understanding how trees
and forests respond and adapt to emerging global environments. Students receive
professional development training covering ethics, science communication,
diversity and inclusion, and career advancement. Benefiting from the Arboretum’s
rich professional and cultural environment, students engage with youth
volunteers, exchange visits with interns at other regional training programs,
and meet diverse professionals through career awareness activities. More
information about the program is available by visiting
https://mortonarb.org/science/opportunities-in-science/research-experiences-for-
undergraduates-program/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.