* 2243558
* Recruiting and Transitioning Mathematics Majors into Teaching
* EDU,DUE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2028
* Cherie Ichinose, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 12/31/2028
* USD 769,731.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by encouraging talented
mathematics majors to become secondary school teachers. In particular, it seeks
to recruit, prepare and increase the number highly effective secondary school
mathematics teachers in high-need local school districts. Cal State University
Fullerton (CSUF) is a Hispanic-serving institution which will seek to recruit
prospective math teachers who reflect the institution's diversity and can act as
role models and mentors while providing rich mathematics instruction to all
secondary students in the CSUF service area. Freshmen and Sophomore math majors
at CSUF will be recruited as potential scholarship candidates (associates).
Potential scholarship awardees (Juniors and Seniors) will come from a pool of
current associates and other students from CSUF and local community colleges.
Students will receive targeted academic advisement and mentorship, as well as
internships in active learning classrooms, and also attend seminars focused on
equitable mathematics teaching. The project will provide scholars with induction
support in their first two years as practicing teachers, including mentorship
and participation in the Math Teachers' Circle (MTC) at CSUF. MTCs are
professional communities of K-12 mathematics teachers and mathematicians that
meet regularly to work on rich mathematics problems, allowing teachers to enrich
their knowledge and experience of math, while building meaningful partnerships
with other teachers and mathematicians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a
collaboration between CSUF and the Anaheim Union High School District (AUHSD).
Activities include, but are not limited to, classroom observations, professional
development, and student teaching at one of the AUHSD schools. This
collaboration seeks to create a continuum of teaching experiences for future
secondary school mathematics teachers, from the first year of college through
the post-baccalaureate credential year. In each of the project’s five years, the
CSUF College of Natural Sciences and Mathematics and the College of Education
will identify and recruit 4 associates and 9 scholars. At the same time, project
leaders will create an effective, sustainable model for preparing prospective
secondary school mathematics teachers who transfer from a community college to a
four-year institution, thus adding new knowledge on how to streamline this
process. The project will examine the effectiveness of mentoring on persistence
rates and success in achieving a degree and teaching credential. Results will be
disseminated via the project's website as well as through professional
organizations such as the Mathematical Association of America (MAA), the
National Council of Teachers of Mathematics (NCTM), and the Math Teacher
Education Partnership (MTE-Partnership). This Noyce Track 1: Scholarships and
Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors
and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced,
exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school
districts. It also supports research on the effectiveness and retention of K-12
STEM teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.