* 2243110
* Manufacturing of High-Efficiency Perovskite Solar Cells via Coupled Ion Source and Magnetron Discharges
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Qi Fan, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Khershed Cooper
* 06/30/2026
* USD 432,196.00

This award supports fundamental research that contributes new knowledge to
enable the manufacturing of high-efficiency perovskite solar cells, promoting
the generation and use of clean energy thus advancing national prosperity.
Perovskite solar cells are emerging photovoltaic devices and have recently
achieved power conversion efficiencies exceeding 25 percent. A critical
component of perovskite solar cells is a transparent conductive oxide thin film
of about 100 nanometer thickness, which acts as the top electrode to collect the
photocurrent while allowing light to pass through. The perovskite layer
underneath the top electrode is heat-sensitive and demands room-temperature
deposition of the transparent conductive film. However, oxide thin films grown
at room temperature by conventional magnetron sputtering – the standard
industrial technology used for manufacturing thin films – have amorphous
structures that result in poor electrical conductivity and low optical
transmittance. This challenge has become a critical barrier limiting the energy
conversion efficiencies of perovskite solar cells. This project advances the
knowledge of plasma discharges to enable ion-beam-enhanced soft sputtering,
which permits room-temperature growth of highly transparent and conductive oxide
thin films that significantly enhance solar cell efficiency and performance. The
broad use of renewable energy supports a sustainable economy and addresses
global environmental concerns. This project integrates multidisciplinary
research and training activities for graduate and undergraduate students and
prepares them for a highly skilled future workforce. Besides advanced
manufacturing, the project advances the field of plasma physics. This award also
supports NSF's ECosystem for Leading Innovation in Plasma Science and
Engineering (ECLIPSE) program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Highly transparent and
conductive oxide thin films, such as indium-tin-oxide (ITO), have
polycrystalline structures that could not be formed under off-phase-equilibrium
conditions at low temperatures in classical physical vapor deposition. This
research aims to validate the hypothesis that the interactions of an ion beam
with the surface atoms are equivalent to localized heating at the atomic scale.
Realizing effective ion-atom interactions requires overcoming the scientific
barriers to creating a high-density soft low energy ion beam that is effectively
coupled with magnetron sputtering. This research fills the knowledge gap on the
energy distributions of the ion beam and the sputtered atoms under the coupled
plasma discharges. The research team performs self-consistent particle-in-cell
Monte Carlo simulations of the beam plasma source and magnetron sputtering,
develops a model to elucidate the mutually enhanced ion-film and ion-target
interactions, establishes the relationships between the plasma parameters and
the resulting film microstructures and properties, and demonstrates high-
efficiency perovskite solar cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.