* 2243912
* REU SITE: Summer Program Advancing Techniques in the Applied Learning of Statistics (SPATIAL-Stats) at Georgetown University
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Monica Jackson, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Eriko Hironaka
* 03/31/2026
* USD 230,198.00

This REU award provides funding for the Summer Program Advancing Techniques in
the Applied Learning of Statistics (SPATIAL-Stats) at Georgetown University in
Washington, DC. This program aims to provide a mentoring structure for students
that promotes active engagement in the mathematical sciences and encourages
intercultural understanding and educational excellence. The program is geared
toward raising the level of mathematical and statistical understanding for
undergraduate students and engaging them in creative activities, thereby keeping
them in the mathematics and statistics pipeline and helping to increase the
percentage of minorities and women who obtain advanced degrees in the
mathematical sciences. In this way, the program will help provide the
foundations for the next generation of mathematical science researchers to
conduct state of the art scientific research and to effectively communicate
mathematics and statistics research to a wide audience. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Talented students from across the country will be trained by
prominent researchers on how to conduct scientific research for publication. The
program begins with an intensive three-weeks of lectures in the fields of
statistics and mathematics. The students will then spend five weeks actively
engaged in research while also participating in networking activities to meet
leading researchers across the country. By participating in SPATIAL-Stats,
students in the program will interact with other students with different
racial/ethnic backgrounds exposing them to excellence and diversity in STEM.
Students will receive advanced training in the complex fields of mathematics and
statistics to ensure their success in college and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.