* 2243983
* RUI: Relationship crafting after workplace ostracism in racial minority employees: The role of autonomic arousal, emotions, and cognitive attributions
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Yu Gao, Hofstra University
* Standard Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 04/30/2025
* USD 400,000.00

Promoting workplace inclusion and attaining employee well-being are important
for business organizations. Workplace ostracism occurs when an organizational
member is excluded or ignored by other people at work. Almost 70% of American
employees have experienced workplace ostracism. The situation is worse among
employees with a racial minority background, posing a tremendous challenge for
organizational leaders who strive to promote an inclusive workplace in an
increasingly diverse environment. This project investigates how employees
respond emotionally and physiologically to workplace ostracism and the extent to
which their racial background and cognitive attribution affect this process.
Furthermore, the researchers determine the beneficial effects of relationship
crafting, a proactive social behavior that helps ostracized employees to regain
social connections, recover wellbeing, and restore performance. Findings of this
project have important implications for policy and practice to improve diversity
and inclusion in the workplace.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using a multi-method
approach, this project conducts three studies. First, using a vignette-based
experimental study, the investigators examine the main and interaction effects
of workplace ostracism and cognitive attributions on the victims’ emotional
strains. Second, employing a battery of laboratory tasks (Cyberball Game, Gift
Card Task, and Trier Social Stress Test) and physiological measures (skin
conductance level and heart rate variability), the investigators examine the
distinct activities of sympathetic nervous system and parasympathetic nervous
system and the function of relationship crafting among ostracized individuals.
Third, using the experience sampling method to collect multi-source data in a
10-week period, the investigators examine the fluctuations of workplace
ostracism and employee responses that are otherwise missed by a between-subject
design. Data is analyzed using multilevel modeling, Monte Carlo based confidence
intervals, and multiple-group path analysis. Using a full-cycle design, the
investigators ascertain the internal and external validities of the studies and
develop a robust theory on workplace ostracism.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.