* 2243229
* Developing STEM Teachers Across Rural Schools: Using STEM Outreach Programs to Build and Strengthen Identity as STEM Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Matt Nehring, Adams State University
* Continuing Grant
* Julio Soto
* 06/30/2027
* USD 587,295.00

The project aims to serve the national need for preparing high-quality teachers
in STEM disciplines, which is particularly severe in rural southern Colorado.
Adams State University’s project will examine the effects of place-based high-
impact experiences and cost-of-attendance scholarships on developing effective
STEM teachers in high-need schools. Using the excitement of astronomy and rural
dark skies, collaborative math and science circles, STEM Saturdays, and a summer
academy for migrant students, this project aims to inspire prospective and
practicing teachers to develop new approaches in STEM teaching and learning and
generate P-20 enthusiasm for careers in K-12 STEM education. This model has the
potential to increase the number of students completing STEM degrees with
teaching licensure from a single Adams State student to eight per year.
Increased representation of underserved groups among rural teachers to improve
equity in access to STEM education and careers for students of color and those
who are low-income is a priority outcome. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project at Adams State University, a Hispanic-Serving Institution, includes
partnerships with five high-need local school districts and the San Luis Valley
Board of Cooperative Educational Services to address the need for STEM teachers
across the rural San Luis Valley. Project goals include implementing astronomy-
themed activities, hands-on workshops, mentoring, and other collaborative STEM
programming to engage prospective teachers as innovators and leaders. These
high-impact experiences and annual scholarships aim to inspire 31 undergraduate
STEM majors (e.g., in mathematics, physics, chemistry, biology, and geosciences)
and post-baccalaureates to complete degrees and teaching licensure in 4 years.
Engaging K-12 students and prospective teachers with local assets, such as ASU’s
planetarium and observatory and the dark skies of Great Sand Dunes National
Park, have the potential to attract and retain students as they develop their
passion for STEM studies and teaching. The project’s research questions focus on
the impacts of this intentional P-20 STEM ecosystem of local resources and
supportive activities, which aim to validate students’ focus on STEM and grow
their identities as effective teachers, leaders, and future mentors working in
high-need districts. This pilot effort will generate knowledge on identity
development of students in STEM education and add to the evidence on closing
gaps in the representation of ethnic and racial minorities and females in STEM
fields. Successful strategies will provide a model that other Hispanic-Serving
Institutions and school districts may replicate. An evaluator will review
institutional and survey data to monitor progress in objectives attainment and
inform improvements. ASU will disseminate findings via its website, a regional
educator newsletter, conferences, and journal publication. This Track 1:
Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the effectiveness and
retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.