* 2243796
* Workshop: Building Research Capacity in Engineering Education Through a RIEF Virtual Community of Practice
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Julie Martin, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jumoke Ladeji-Osias
* 03/31/2025
* USD 173,358.00

This project will expand capacity for engineering education research by
facilitating a virtual community for engineering faculty and students who are
learning educational research methods for the first time. In doing so, the
project will ultimately support the adoption of research-based practices in the
classroom and inform advising, programming, and policies. Sustained engagement
of engineering faculty in educational research will create synergies between
engineering education research and engineering education practice. In
particular, the project will perpetuate a series of virtual workshops, publish
downloadable information sheets, and create short videos for novice engineering
education researchers. The workshops will facilitate a collaborative community
of new educational researchers and experienced mentors that will help them
integrate into the educational research community. The knowledge and connections
the novice researchers gain will positively influence their success applying for
future engineering projects funded by the NSF. Outcomes of the project include
1) publicly available, archived resources about research in engineering
education, (2) a community of practice that supports the success of new
engineering education researchers, and (3) an understanding of how the community
created by the project influences novice researchers’ engagement in the larger
research community and how mentors help them build networks and knowledge for
such research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The virtual workshop series will provide
training, structured support, and a virtual community of practice for NSF
Research Initiation in Engineering Formation program awardees to promote their
sustained engagement in engineering education research through the development
of research-related social capital, which enhances the flow of information,
develops desirable credentials, and reinforces research identity. The team will
use social network analysis and surveys throughout the two-year project to study
how interactions (1) among Research Initiation in Engineering Formation program
mentees and mentors and (2) between mentees and established members of the
engineering education research community influence the development of research-
related social capital. The workshops will support the success of funded
Research Initiation in Engineering Formation projects, helping program
participants fully integrate into the engineering education research community
during and beyond their grant cycle. It will minimize duplication of efforts by
providing mentors with access to resources, an external support structure for
mentees to learn about common research practices, and a community of other
research mentors. The project will build participants’ professional networks by
increasing availability and accessibility of past and present program mentees
and mentors, engineering education research content experts, people in
leadership positions in the field, potential future collaborators, and others.
It will accelerate participants’ development of both strong and weak ties and
facilitate their purposive use of those embedded resources to help program
mentees accomplish their engineering education research goals during the two-
year Research Initiation in Engineering Formation grant cycle and beyond. The
project will study the impact of participation in a community of practice in
developing engineering faculty in engineering education research as well as
identify how program mentors effectively build mentee social capital. The work
will benefit any novice engineering education researchers by creating and
curating additional public resources. In addition, the project will build
research capacity for current and future Research Initiation in Engineering
Formation projects as well as other NSF programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.