* 2243739
* REU Site: Optics in the City of Light
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Herbert Winful, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 04/30/2026
* USD 502,889.00

This award supports the Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site in
Physics hosted by the University of Michigan but is primarily conducted in
laboratories in and around Paris, France. This international REU site, Optics in
the City of Light, will bring eight undergraduates to Paris each summer to
conduct research at three primary Parisian research institutions: the University
of Paris-Sacley, Ecole Polytechnique and Ecole Nationale de Techniques Avancées.
(ENSTA). The University of Paris-Saclay was recently created and has combined 14
universities including: the Institut d'Optique Graduate School, Université
Paris-Sud 11 (Orsay), and Ecole Normale Supérieure de Cachan that have been long
time participants in the program. Students will be additionally mentored by a
faculty member at the Gérard Mourou Center for Ultrafast Optical Science (GM-
CUOS) at Michigan. The students will spend one week in Ann Arbor, followed by
two months in Paris. Each student will keep weekly on-line research diaries to
aid in communication with each full group. A GM-CUOS faculty member or research
scientist will accompany the students to Paris and stay for one week to ensure
that the students get a good start. The students will be housed in a local hotel
in Ann Arbor and at the Cité Universitaire in Paris. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research that will be conducted will be cutting edge programs at the French
institutions and may even include some collaborative work with GM_CUOS and the
new high power ultrafast laser Zeus, an NSF user facility at Michigan. The
research in all projects will all involve the use of optics with a focus on
ultrafast lasers to discover very current, state-of-the art phenomena in a wide
range of fields including relativistic optics, plasma physics, materials
spectroscopy, nano-machining, patterned biological cell templating, nano-
photonics, high power fiber lasers, plasma x-ray sources, dynamics of nano-
magnetic materials, terahertz imaging, biomedical imaging with shaped pulses,
and the fatigue life studies of materials, as well as other
topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.