* 2243964
* Collaborative Research: CFS (Track III): Centers for Transformative Environmental Monitoring Programs (CTEMPs)
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2027
* John Selker, Oregon State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Lambert
* 06/30/2027
* USD 299,770.00

This award will fund the operation of the Centers for Transformative
Environmental Monitoring Programs (CTEMPs). The mission of CTEMPs is to
accelerate discovery in Earth sciences by making state-of-the-art environmental
sensing instruments and technical skills available to the NSF and broader
research communities. The CTEMPsâ€™ instruments provide cm-to-km-scale
measurements of temperature, acoustics, topography and surface reflectance. The
high spatial and temporal resolution observations facilitated by CTEMPs have led
to breakthroughs in soil moisture quantification, glacial dynamics,
groundwater/surface water interactions, snow hydrology, ocean dynamics,
topography, atmospheric mixing, limnology and geomorphology. The Center has a
history of helping researchers overcoming barriers to access to technology,
training, cost, and expert support in the Earth sciences and engineering
communities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CTEMPS is operated as a community user
facility by four institutions: University of Nevada, Reno; Oregon State
University; Desert Research Institute; and Colorado School of Mines. CTEMPs
assists research teams from all over the world in experimental design, field
implementation and data analysis in four core instrument services: fiber-optic
distributed temperature sensing (DTS), distributed acoustic sensing (DAS),
transformational field-based instrumentation via the Openly Published
Environmental Sensing (OPEnS Lab), and small Uncrewed Aircraft Systems (sUAS).
Beginning in 2023, CTEMPs will focus on the following four objectives: 1.
Continue to deliver instrumentation and expertise through its DTS, OPEnS Lab and
sUAS programs to diverse research projects in Earth, polar, oceanographic and
atmospheric sciences, 2. Expand the instrument pool to include instruments and
expert support for Distributed Acoustic Sensing (DAS) in the training and
instrument loan programs, 3. Act as a coordinator of a federated system of sUAS
sensors and platforms to reduce barriers to transformative new Earth surface
science, and 4. Provide transdisciplinary workshops that broaden inclusion of
early career scientists through hands-on training in multi-sensor observations
and experimental design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.