* 2243105
* AGEP FC-PAM: Alliance for Relevant and Inclusive Sponsorship of Engineering Researchers (ARISE) to Increase the Diversity of the Biomedical Engineering Faculty
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Celinda Kofron, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Keri Sather-Wagstaff
* 06/30/2028
* USD 586,819.00

The AGEP Faculty Career Pathways Alliance Model (FC-PAM) “Alliance for Relevant
and Inclusive Sponsorship of Engineers” (ARISE) promotes equity and inclusion in
engineering higher education. The goal of the AGEP ARISE Alliance is to apply
discipline-relevant, inclusive, and intersectional sponsorship and systemic
change in hiring practices to increase the visibility, networks, collaborations,
and professional success of Black and African American, Latine and Hispanic
American, Native American Indian, Alaska Native, Native Hawaiian, and Native
Pacific Islander biomedical engineering doctoral candidates, postdoctoral
research scholars, and early career faculty members at Brown University, Johns
Hopkins University, Columbia University, and Yale University. This AGEP FC-PAM
is building effective and professional sponsorship relationships outside the
home institutions of the AGEP ARISE Alliance’s doctoral candidates, postdoctoral
research scholars, and early career faculty members. Sponsorship is
differentiated from mentorship as it is concerned less with the transfer of
knowledge between individuals and more with the transfer of power through the
promotion of the AGEP ARISE Alliance’s doctoral candidates, postdoctoral
research scholars, and early career faculty members within professional
networks. The doctoral candidates’, postdoctoral research scholars’, and early
career faculty members’ intersecting identities around race, ethnicity, gender,
sexual orientation, disability, and caregiver status informs pairings with
sponsors, who are participating in training on the importance of
intersectionality in sponsorship. The AGEP ARISE Alliance is also adapting
faculty hiring best practices from the University of Michigan’s ADVANCE program
to both postdoctoral research scholar and early career faculty hiring policies
and practices. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Improving equity and inclusion is critical
to advancing STEM faculty members, educating America’s future STEM workforce,
fostering individual opportunity, and contributing to a thriving U.S. economy.
The NSF AGEP program, therefore, funds grants that advance and enhance the
systemic factors that support equity and inclusion and, consequently, mitigate
the systemic inequities in the academic profession and workplace. FC-PAM awards
are intended to support the development, implementation, evaluation, and
institutionalization of Alliance models that will advance AGEP populations,
within similar institutions of higher education. FC-PAM collaborators also study
how socio-cultural, economic, structural, leadership and institutional variables
affect the formation of the FC-PAM, and the strategies or interventions the
collaborators implement to advance AGEP populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intermediate outcomes of the project are increases in the visibility, networks,
opportunities, and collaborations of AGEP ARISE Alliance doctoral candidates,
postdoctoral research scholars, and early career faculty members and improved
cultural and diversity awareness among sponsors. Longer term these advances
translate into more diverse faculty in the AGEP ARISE Alliance academic
departments. Internal and external advisory boards routinely review the AGEP
ARISE Alliance’s progress, strategize on future steps, and engage with sponsors
and sponsees. An internal evaluator is leading the project’s self-study and
formative assessment of implementation, changes in hiring practices, and changes
in doctoral candidates’, postdoctoral research scholars’ and early career
faculty members’ knowledge, aspirations, values, and professional activities
resulting from Alliance activities. An external evaluator is providing summative
assessment using a theory-based framework to assess the effectiveness of the
AGEP ARISE Alliance in developing inclusive, nurturing networks of diverse
doctoral candidates, postdoctoral research scholars, and early career faculty
members in biomedical engineering; the ways those individuals have increased
their visibility, networks, collaborations, and professional success; the impact
of the project on fostering institutional climates that promote equity and
inclusion; and the advancement of AGEP populations pursuing faculty positions in
biomedical engineering. The AGEP ARISE Alliance team is developing and
disseminating sponsorship and hiring guides, and project results, that are
shared through peer-reviewed and general publications, an AGEP ARISE Alliance
website, and presentations at scientific and professional
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.