* 2243941
* REU Site: Exploring the Limits of Intelligent Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* George Montanez, Harvey Mudd College
* Standard Grant
* Vladimir Pavlovic
* 04/30/2026
* USD 393,470.00

REU Site: Exploring the Limits of Intelligent Systems
(#2243941)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As machine learning and AI systems become ever
more common, encroaching on every aspect of society, the need for understanding
the systems and their fundamental limitations becomes even more pressing. This
project promotes the progress of science and supports education and diversity by
training undergraduate students to research questions on the limits of
intelligent systems. It builds a cohort of undergraduate students who can
develop research ability, presentation skills, and further interest in research-
related computing careers. The project focuses on understanding the boundaries
in what intelligent systems can achieve both theoretically and in complex real-
world scenarios with non-expert users. By educating undergraduate students to
probe and understand the limits of these systems, the project helps build an
empowered citizenry capable of grappling with the complex ethical and social
issues these systems present. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through this award, students
will work on cutting-edge subprojects in computer vision, programming language
analysis and synthesis, human-robot interaction, and information-theoretic
understanding of machine learning systems. These research topics give students
valuable academic and industry skills that extend beyond current AI models and
frameworks towards the broader reaches of what computing may achieve in the
future. The topics for this project are designed to be modular and hierarchical
to enable successful undergraduate research milestones. Students will be housed
at Harvey Mudd College, an undergraduate-only institution, and experience the
most compelling aspects of a graduate school environment during a ten-week
summer program. Students will actively engage with the entire research process,
from literature search, to articulating problems of interest, to investigations
of specific pieces of these problems, and focusing results for presentation and
publication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.