* 2243898
* A Global Survey of Helium in the Troposphere: Advancing the Application of Helium as a Tracer of Natural Gas Usage and Stratosphere-Troposphere Exchange
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Ralph Keeling, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin (Ben) E. Brown-Steiner
* 06/30/2026
* USD 578,671.00

This project seeks to conduct a global survey of the noble gas helium building
upon a previously developed measurement technique. Helium, which is a difficult
gas to measure, can be used as an atmospheric tracer, meaning that new
measurements could help us better understand a wide range of processes including
large-scale atmospheric transport between the northern and southern hemispheres
as well as small-scale processes that emit helium such natural gas extraction.
The unique measurements of helium to be collected in this project will provide
new insight into a variety of atmospheric transport phenomena and will increase
our understanding of the sources and variability of helium and potentially other
noble gases. Early career scientists and a graduate student will be supported
throughout the course of this project, and the data collected will be shared
with the wider scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The new observations
to be made during this project will be of the ratio between the gases helium
(He) and nitrogen (N2) (He/N2) via a new mass spectrometric measurement
technique using a dual-trapping system and cryo-enrichment inlets developed
under a previous NSF-funded project. There are four research questions being
asked in this proposed work: (1) what is the interannual variability of the most
abundant helium isotope 4He?; (2) what are the He/N2 spatial gradients,
particularly between the northern and southern hemispheres?; (3) what is the
magnitude of seasonal He/N2 variations?; and (4) what can be learned by
examining high frequency He variability? This proposed work will use three
sources of measurement: historic flask samples collected from previous work that
has demonstrated an increasing trend in atmospheric He levels over the last 50
years, the ongoing collection of flask samples collected routinely by the
Scripps oxygen program, which is a network of 10 surface flask stations spread
out around the Pacific Ocean capable of resolving global-scale signals, and
quasi-continuous ambient samples taken at the Scripps Pier in La Jolla,
California.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.