* 2243403
* Preparing Teachers Regarding Ethical Reasoning in Computational Thinking
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2028
* Katheryn Asala, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Continuing Grant
* Bonnie Green
* 04/30/2028
* USD 618,003.00

This project aims to serve the national need for preparing high quality
secondary STEM teachers who can integrate ethical computational thinking into
their teaching. Computational thinking has become an integral part of almost
every STEM-related field and is increasingly necessary for secondary studentsâ€™
access to STEM courses and related opportunities in high school and beyond. In
addition, multiple scholars have shown that the lack of attention to ethics in
STEM research and development has had a negative impact on individuals, society,
and the environment. North Carolina teachers have not been adequately supported
to integrate computational thinking in their curriculum, much less with
attention to ethics. This project will provide support to 24 secondary
mathematics and science teaching candidates, each of whom will be matched with a
secondary STEM teacher in a partnering high-need school district. The teaching
candidates and their secondary mentor teachers will participate in project
activities to strengthen their own ethical computational thinking, as well as
plan to use it in future lessons. Project activities include learning basic
Python coding and engaging in four modules around computational thinking in data
science, nanoscience, geography and earth science, and engineering, with ethics
fore-fronted in each module. Teaching candidates and mentor teachers will
design, implement, reflect on, and analyze the effectiveness of their ethically
grounded computational thinking lessons. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at
the University of North Carolina (UNC) at Charlotte includes a partnership with
Charlotte-Mecklenburg Schools (CMS), the largest school district in North
Carolina serving over 150,000 students. Project goals include developing ethical
computational thinking (ECT) in three cohorts of eight mathematics and science
undergraduate teaching candidates (24 total) over four years, together with 24
practicing secondary STEM teachers in the partner district. The project aims to
do this by consistently engaging teaching candidates and their mentor teachers
in activities to develop their computational thinking with a clear focus on
ethical implications. Through the evaluation of the project, researchers will
gain insights into ways to recruit and develop secondary STEM teachers who are
prepared to infuse ethical computational thinking into their teaching, thus
better preparing their students to be more competitive when they enter the STEM
workforce. Findings will be disseminated to the research community through
publications and presentations at local and national conferences and to the
teaching community through the UNC Charlotte Center for STEM Education website
that will house all ECT lessons. This Track 1 Scholarships and Stipends project
is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The
Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to
become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to
become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports
research on the persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers
in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.