* 2243905
* Collaborative Research: Uncovering and Enhancing Pathways to Psychological Safety at Work for Racial Minority Women
* SBE,SES
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Kristen Jones, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Songqi Liu
* 06/30/2025
* USD 148,020.00

Employee psychological safety, or the belief that one can take interpersonal
risks at work without fear of retaliation, has been shown to have several health
and productivity benefits for employees and organizations. One factor that is
critical to building psychological safety is leader behavior. Most of the
research has failed to consider that psychological safety may be cultivated in
unique ways for employees who are members of socially disadvantaged groups,
particularly for those in intersecting demographic categories who often
experience unique challenges based on their intersecting social identities.
Given the workforce has become increasingly diverse, building understanding of
how leaders can best cultivate psychological safety among these groups of
employees is a critical step to fully realizing the advantages of a workforce in
which employees feel psychologically safe. As such, the project team is
collecting data to support the development of actionable, evidence-based
interventions that will help managers develop communication and leadership
skills that effectively cultivate psychological safety of employees. The
findings will support the development of leader skill trainings in
organizations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of this project is to
build a more comprehensive understanding of the specific contextual factors that
impact the psychological safety of members of some demographic categories at
work, with the broader goal of improving diverse employees’ work lives and
helping organizations to retain top diverse talent. Across three studies, the
project team is interviewing both employees and managers whom those employees
identify as having made them feel psychologically safe in the past to gain a
better understanding of the unique needs of these employees to build
psychological safety at work. Investigators are using this information to
design, implement, and evaluate the effectiveness of an intervention that trains
managers to cultivate work environments that support and enhance the
psychological safety of employees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.