* 2243398
* Creating Communities of Practice to Support NOYCE Scholars in Becoming More Adaptable Mathematics Teachers
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Craig Spencer, Kansas State University
* Continuing Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 06/30/2028
* USD 700,529.00

The project aims to serve the national need of preparing high-quality
mathematics teachers to become adaptable educators capable of thinking and
acting effectively in new or changing situations and to adjust their teaching as
needed. The project will provide opportunities for freshmen and sophomores to
work in informal math education settings both on and off campus. The project
endeavors to increase the number of undergraduate mathematics majors receiving
licensure and provide Scholars with an integrated enrichment program to identify
skills and knowledge enabling them to be more flexible in their classroom. The
projectâ€™s emphasis on recruiting and supporting students from populations
underrepresented in STEM fields to become mathematics teachers, as well as
addressing teacher adaptability in various contexts, is important when building
a mathematics teaching profession.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
at Kansas State University (KSU) includes partnerships with the Center for
Intercultural and Multilingual Advocacy, the Rural Education Center, and the
Professional Development School Network (PDSN). The PDSN is a network of K-12
districts and schools who host teacher candidates from KSU in rigorous,
carefully sequenced field experiences and collaborate as the University conducts
and disseminates research examining critical questions facing educators today.
These partnerships provide direct interaction with districts that represent
urban, suburban, and rural school contexts. Over the next 5 years, the project
will produce 18 new STEM Teachers and will form a community of practice that
will create relationship-centered experiences to support preservice teacher
preparation as well as strengthen relationships with high-need schools and math
teachers. This project has a specific focus on developing adaptability among the
Noyce Scholars that are supported and will investigate three research questions:
what knowledge, skills, understanding, tools and/or resources enable the
preservice teachers to recognize adaptability and to be more adaptable; to what
extent does adaptability change over the course of a school year; and to what
extent can adaptability be increased? This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends
project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program
(Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and
professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary
K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It
also supports research on the effectiveness and retention of K-12 STEM teachers
in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.