* 2243608
* REU Site: University of Michigan - CERN Research Experience for Undergraduates and High School Teacher Programs
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Junjie Zhu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 05/31/2026
* USD 21,303.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site at the University of
Michigan Ann Arbor provides fifteen undergraduate students each summer the
opportunity to participate in research on topics in high energy physics at the
European Organization for Nuclear Research (CERN) in Geneva, Switzerland. In
addition to participating in research with an experienced mentor, the REU
students will engage in activities such as seminars and lectures to learn to
understand the nature of international scientific collaborations and the
questions and methods of modern physics research. This project also supports
eight high school teachers to attend a two-week HST(High School Teacher) or ITW
(International Teacher Weeks) program at CERN. The teachers will use their
experience to motivate their students to better understand the physical world
and prepare them to become the future generation of scientists. Teachers also
share teaching methods with teachers from other countries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research and study at CERN will provide unparalleled
opportunities for students and teachers to learn about and work on some of the
most intellectually challenging topics in high energy physics. Students working
on cutting edge problems at CERN experience an intellectual apprenticeship and
learn to understand the nature of international scientific collaborations and
the questions and methods of modern physics research. Student projects at CERN
will include experiments involving the Large Hadron Collider, other low energy
and neutrino experiments, and CERN computing research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.