* 2243507
* Collaborative Research: Mimicking Stress-Mediated Invasive Solid Tumor Using Bioprinted Microtissue and Acoustofluidics
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Chen Shen, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 04/30/2026
* USD 189,000.00

In solid tumors, chemical and physical signals lead to cancer cells invading
nearby tissue and vascularized systems. A well-known physical signal is the
interstitial fluid pressure in the tumor region, and existing tumor models have
difficulties regulating such a volumetric pressure. It is known that tumor
regions with high interstitial pressure typically resist the delivery of the
anti-cancer drugs and therapeutics. The goal of this project is to create and
study how interstitial pressure can regulate the tumor cell response in a
biomimetic (biology mimicking) tumor model. Bioprinting technology and hydrogel
engineering will be used to construct the model. The tumor microenvironment will
be introduced using the controlled formation of cell spheroids. Physical forces
will be induced by acoustic waves, and their role in drug mass transport and the
metastatic behavior of tumor cells will be studied. Successful development of
such a model will represent a paradigm shift in the cancer community by
improving patientsâ€™ quality of life, potentially prolonging survival, and
opening up new clinical trials to test various new drug formulations. The
educational objective is to broaden the participation of underrepresented
minorities in STEM fields. This will be accomplished through various educational
activities by integrating the research into project-based educational activities
for undergraduate students and summer internships for underrepresented students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The tumor microenvironment (TME) is highly complex, with a
distinct extracellular matrix composition and leaky vasculature that regulate
the tumorigenic function of tumor cells. The investigators hypothesize that
acoustic-driven, flow-induced pressure, hydrogel bioprinting, and theoretical
simulation could be employed to replicate TME-associated pressure gradients and
hypoxic conditions for an invasion behavior in tumor cells. A novel way is
proposed for regulating biophysical pressure using the acoustic field in cell-
laden microtissue models. A tumor-spheroid-laden microfluidic device equipped
with interdigital transducers that generate surface acoustic waves will be
developed and used to test the hypothesis. Through digital light processing
bioprinting, the project aims to create a high-resolution vascular microtissue
with spatial gradients of stiffness and pore sizes. Then, a wide range of
acoustic fields (in the megahertz regime) will be made to induce pressure fields
onto the tumor spheroids and characterize the tumor cells' invasion markers.
Finally, a multi-physics theoretical and numerical approach will be developed to
help quantify the variation of acoustic radiation forces within a fluid-
saturated poroelastic environment and estimate the induced pressure
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.