* 2243099
* Collaborative Research: CAS-Climate: Linking Activities, Expenditures and Energy Use into an Integrated Systems Model to Understand and Predict Energy Futures
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Eric Williams, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 03/31/2026
* USD 265,702.00

Predicting and managing energy demand are crucial tasks for addressing climate
change and other environmental impacts of energy use. The mainstream models of
energy demand are reductionist, dividing demand into separate categories such as
residential, commercial, and transportation, and analyzing each separately. This
collaborative research will develop a holistic model of energy demand, one that
considers how consumer actions affect multiple sectors at the same time,
including residences, vehicles, commercial buildings, server/data networks, and
the production of purchased goods. The model will include consumer ownership and
use of energy- consuming technologies such as vehicles or home furnaces, and
accounts for how people use time and spend money. The new model will be
constructed for the U.S. by integrating government micro-data on consumer
behavior (American Time Use Survey, Residential Energy Consumption Survey,
National Household Travel Survey, Consumer Expenditure Survey), using modern
data analysis methods to integrate them. The integrated dataset will provide
information about energy device ownership and use, internet use, time spent in
commercial buildings, and expenditures on goods. A set of models will map these
consumer attributes to energy use and carbon emissions. For commercial
buildings, a regression model will be built that links the area of different
building types with consumers’ and employees’ use of them. An Economic Input
Output Life Cycle Assessment (EIOLCA) will estimate the energy use and emissions
from consumer expenditures. The holistic model will help understanding of the
broader effects of demand interventions. For example, how are the carbon
benefits of electric vehicles affected by induced changes in consumer purchases
and activity choices? The model will help assess the effect of behavioral
changes not typically considered in policy (e.g. encouraging telework), and thus
could broaden the scope of policy options considered. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
model advances the state of energy demand modeling on a number of fronts. First,
the model combines data on personal expenditures, time, and technology use to
provide a household-level estimate of life cycle carbon emissions, accounting
for energy use in residences, commercial buildings, servers/networks,
transportation, and manufacturing of goods. Part of the contribution is in
integrating existing models into a larger holistic framework. Missing modeling
elements will be developed, in particular linking consumers’ use of commercial
buildings to energy demand, and attributing use of information technology to
energy demand in data networks and servers. In methods, the research develops a
new approach for assessing how change in time use of a given activity (e.g.
shift from driving to biking) leads to changes in other activities as well as
the overall energy use from the primary shift in activity. The research involves
merging multiple data sources on consumers via representative populations, and
this dataset will be made publicly available. Outreach activities include a
workshop with energy efficiency modelers and policy advocates, development of an
energy demand game, and a summer camp for high school students from
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.