* 2243393
* Using a Microcredential Model to Prepare Secondary Mathematics and Science Teachers to Meet the Needs of Rural, High-need Districts
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Heather Vance-Chalcraft, East Carolina University
* Continuing Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 06/30/2028
* USD 891,044.00

This project aims to serve the national need to prepare secondary mathematics
and science teachers who are equipped for the challenges of teaching in rural,
high-need school districts. Working with local community colleges, the project
will recruit prospective teachers and provide specialized training using a
microcredential model focused on the needs of rural communities. Participants
will receive mentoring support by partnering them with previous Noyce scholars.
Through this support and training the project aims to increase both the number
and quality of secondary mathematics and science teachers available to the rural
communities in eastern North Carolina.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project at
East Carolina University (ECU) includes partnerships with Greene County Schools,
Pitt County Schools, Pitt Community College, and the East Carolina University
Rural Education Institute. The project will recruit 30 future science and
mathematics high school teachers over a four-year period. Students will earn a
double major in science/science education or mathematics/mathematics education.
They will receive scholarship support during their last two years of a Bachelor
of Science (BS) program. The overarching goal is to provide training and support
to better prepare secondary mathematics and science teachers to meet the unique
needs of rural, high-need school districts. To meet this goal, the project has
four objectives. First is to provide specialized education and support for
scholars using a microcredential model with virtual reality simulations. Second
is to build a Noyce Professional Community by leveraging the expertise of
scholars from previous ECU Noyce Grants. Third is to optimize recruitment by
building strategic relationships with rural community colleges. The fourth and
final objective is to evaluate the teaching of scholars and conduct research
that informs the preparation of high school mathematics and science teachers to
teach effectively in rural, high-need schools. In addition to preparing 30 new
mathematics and science teachers, this project will also provide an opportunity
to study how the use of microcredentials and virtual reality simulations impact
the knowledge of, competencies for, and self-efficacy of high school mathematics
and science teachers to implement culturally responsive teaching practices
during their clinical experiences and early years of teacher induction.
Additionally, the microcredentials created as a product of this project could be
implemented in other contexts, including other educator preparation or teacher
professional development programs. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends,
project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program
(Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and
professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary
K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It
also supports research on the effectiveness and retention of K-12 STEM teachers
in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.