* 2243938
* REU Site: Extremal Graph Theory and Dynamical Systems at RIT
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Laura Munoz, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 01/31/2026
* USD 323,992.00

The REU Site in Extremal Graph Theory and Dynamical Systems at the Rochester
Institute of Technology (RIT) will actively engage ten students in each of the
summers of 2023, 2024, and 2025 in research experiences in the mathematical
sciences. Research projects will be in the areas of graph theory, linear
algebra, and dynamical systems, some of which are linked to mathematical
biology. All students will work directly with RIT faculty for the entirety of
the program and will receive mentoring in mathematical research practices, as
well as in written and oral communication. Students will give presentations on
their research findings at the end of each week. The program will have a heavy
emphasis on networking with other mathematicians and will include a "Researchers
in Residence" component, where experts from outside of RIT visit the program and
collaborate with students and faculty. Results from research projects will be
disseminated through publications in refereed journals, presentations at
national and regional mathematical meetings, and at the students' home
institutions. Students will be encouraged to pursue graduate studies and
employment in the mathematical sciences. During the program, students will also
participate in an Ethics in Science Workshop. The recruitment efforts will
target students from universities, liberal arts colleges, and community
colleges. An important element of the program will be the inclusion of women,
minorities, and students from colleges without Ph.D. programs or which have
limited research opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research projects will
impact the areas of discrete and applied mathematics. Applied projects will
include modeling of cardiac arrhythmia and analysis of complex networks related
to global climate systems. Projects with a theoretical focus will include
problems from structural and extremal graph theory and linear algebra. The
faculty and participants will utilize mathematical software packages including
Mathematica, Matlab, Sage, and Nauty to help with computations and
simulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.