* 2243994
* REU Site: The Summer Systematics Institute: training the next generation of scientists for the field, the lab, and sharing their science with the world
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Lauren Esposito, California Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 04/30/2026
* USD 147,585.00

This REU Site award to the California Academy of Sciences, located in San
Francisco, California, will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks
during the summers of 2022–2024. Research will primarily be conducted at the
Academy and at local field sites in Sonoma County, California. It is anticipated
that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools with limited research
opportunities or from underrepresented groups, will be trained in the program.
Students will learn how research is conducted, and many will present the results
of their work at scientific conferences. Assessment of the program will be done
through the online SALG URSSA tool. Students will be required to register in the
NSF ETAP system (etap.nsf.gov) and tracked after the program to determine their
career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Academy’s Institute for Biodiversity
Science and Sustainability is a research hub focused on understanding the
natural world and finding solutions to sustaining it. The institution houses
world-class natural history research collections, along with the modern-day
technology and genomics tools needed to study these specimens. Participants of
the Summer Systematics Institute REU will begin the summer with fieldwork and
immersive workshops, before returning to the Academy to be paired with 1:1
mentors, our curators and research scientists, to work on original research
projects and attend seminars which provide tools in the field of systematics and
phylogenetics. The students’ summer culminates with scientific and popular
writing and giving an oral presentation to the community in our final symposium.
Students apply through an online application system and will be recruited from
universities and community colleges across the country. Applicants identify
potential mentors during the application process, and applications are
competitively reviewed by advisors who make the final selection of participants.
More information about the program is available by visiting
https://www.calacademy.org/summer-systematics-institute, or by contacting the PI
(Dr. Lauren Esposito at lesposito@calacademy.org) or the co-PI (Dr. Rebecca
Johnson at rjohnson@calacademy.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.