* 2243263
* Examining differential drought responses of forest trees with phylogenies and process-based catchment water age modeling
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Guiling Wang, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Hendratta Ali
* 08/31/2026
* USD 689,896.00

Forested ecosystems provide many benefits to human society and the natural
environment, such as alleviating floods, sequestering carbon, and supporting
habitats for biodiversity. However, the benefits that forests provide are at
risk due to the effects of climate change, including higher frequency and
greater intensity of drought in forested landscapes. The resilience of
temperate, arid, and tropical forests to drought is declining globally; and the
reasons for this decline are not clear. One difficulty is that computer models
that are used to study changes in forested ecosystems require researchers to
accurately estimate the water uptake strategies of plants. However, the
information needed for models, to accomplish this goal, are challenged because
of the lack of readily available datasets, particularly in data-poor regions of
the world. For this project, researchers will investigate methods to improve the
representation of plants in ecosystem models by using the evolutionary histories
of trees to estimate trait values. The project will then use these improved
models to test the hypothesis that changes in forest resilience are related to
changes in the elapsed time between precipitation and water uptake by plant
roots. This research will inform management practices designed to promote
drought resilience in forests, it will advance ecosystem modeling, and build
capacity in the scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will
link recent developments from tracer derived water age tracking in soils and
vegetation xylem, ecohydrological simulation of plant hydraulics, and
phylogenetic data analytics, which are three key areas that are necessary to
answer critical questions that bridge hydrology and ecosystems science. The
investigators will develop an approach to parameterize vegetation hydraulic
traits in hydrologic and ecosystem models through phylogenetic trait estimation
(PTE), supporting forest simulations in data-poor regions. The PTE will be
integrated into process-based ecohydrological and land surface models. The
researchers will then validate this modeling approach for twelve research
catchments with rich hydrologic and water isotopic datasets representing diverse
climates, geologies, and tree species compositions. The resulting process-based
models will be applied to study the combined and interrelated effects of climate
change on catchment water ages, forest primary production and transpiration,
tree hydraulic strategies, and their composite effect on drought risk and forest
resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Hydrologic
Sciences and the Division of Environmental Biology – Ecosystem Sciences Cluster
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.