* 2243919
* REU Site: Summer Intensive Research Experiences in Neuroscience (SIREN)
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Robert Duncan, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2026
* USD 133,913.00

This REU Site award to the University of Michigan, located in Ann Arbor, MI,
will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2023-2025. Activities are conducted within the Neuroscience Graduate Program at
the University of Michigan, the longest standing program of its kind in the
United States. It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from
schools with limited research opportunities or from an under-represented group,
will be trained in the program. Students will gain expertise in the conduct of
research while building an array of transferrable professional skills.
Participants will present their research in an end-of-summer symposium, and many
will present their work at additional scientific conferences. Program activities
will be assessed though short feedback surveys throughout the program, and
overall impact will be assessed at the conclusion of the summer through the
online SALG URSSA tool. The NSF ETAP system will be used to register
participants (https://www.nsfetap.gov/). Program alumni will be tracked after
the program in order to evaluate their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
hallmark of this REU Site is a focus on interdisciplinary neuroscience. Research
opportunities will span several neuroscience subdisciplines including
behavioral, cognitive, cell/molecular, developmental, sensory, and computational
neuroscience. Projects tend to focus on the basis of neurological development or
disease, and utilize a wide range of in silico, in vitro, and in vivo model
systems. Journal clubs, presentations, and discussions will intersect these
subareas to further explore interdisciplinary approaches to science. Weekly
workshops will help develop the transferable skills required for success in
long-term research careers; topics include current methods in neuroscience,
rigor and reproducibility, research skills, and career planning. In addition,
this REU Site includes weekly applied improv coursework and Breakfast &amp;
Brains presentations intended to build confidence, creativity, agility, and
empathy in public speaking. A holistic review of applicants will include
scientific interests together with essays, transcripts, and letters of
reference. More information about the program is available by visiting
https://neuroscience.med.umich.edu/summer-research-opportunities, or by
contacting the PI (Dr. R. Keith Duncan at rkduncan@umich.edu) or the co-PI (Dr.
Shelly Flagel at sflagel@umich.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.