* 2243089
* ERI: Towards Environment-Aware Wireless Communications for Next Generation Networks
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Mohammed Eltayeb, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Huaiyu Dai
* 07/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

Next-generation networks are expected to deliver ultra-low-latency and high-
speed data-rates to support new technology and applications such as healthcare
immersive technology, virtual/augmented reality, and smart city applications. To
meet the unprecedented demand for broadband access, this project will leverage
high-resolution environment sensory data to infer location-based channel
characteristics, predict link blockages beforehand, and enable robust mm-wave
communications in dynamic indoor environments. System-level design of the
proposed link configuration algorithms will be developed and analyzed. The
proposed algorithms are expected to enhance the spectrum usability and access to
indoor mm-wave wireless networks and enable emerging technology applications.
This research will be conducted at a primarily undergraduate institution and
will impact a significant number of underrepresented minority students in the
classroom and through direct research experience with the goal of broadening
their engagement and promoting their retention. The research findings will be
disseminated in scientific conferences and journal
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this project is to enable
high-speed and ultra-reliable mm-wave communications in realistic indoor
environments. To this achieve this, new transmission strategies that make use of
Lidar and mm-wave sensory data fusion will be developed. The overall project
objectives are: (1) design and develop low complexity and latency link
configuration algorithms for mm-wave systems suitable for dynamic indoor
environments based Lidar and mm-wave sensory data; (2) investigate the use of
Lidar intensity data for classification of common indoor surfaces for beyond
line-of-sight mm-wave communication; (3) leverage advanced array processing and
signal processing tools to develop transmission strategies that adapts to
environment clutter; and (4) develop early blockage warning algorithms for mm-
wave communication links based on Lidar sensing. The expected research findings
will lead to new data-driven channel models and signal processing and machine
learning approaches that mitigate mm-wave link configuration challenges in
dynamic environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.