* 2243116
* Collaborative Research: The Relationship between Agriculture and Social Change
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* BrieAnna Langlie, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2028
* USD 118,277.00

This project investigates prehistoric farming practices to understand how wealth
and inequality are generated under conditions of crisis. Intensive farming and
the control of agricultural surplus have long been understood as key factors
amplifying social inequality. In turn, during periods of ecological and social
instability, it is assumed that farmers adopt more diverse and dispersed farming
and herding strategies, resulting in limited wealth and inequality. Yet, this
traditional account makes simplistic assumptions about the relationship between
food production, the environment, and sociopolitical complexity. Can intensive
farming persist despite conditions of drought, warfare, and political
instability? Conversely, can the adoption of more diverse subsistence strategies
actually lead to widening social inequality? Archaeology is well suited to
investigate acute and long-term changes in farming, the environment, and human
relationships. This project takes on immediate urgency in the present when
traditional farmers and pastoralists in marginal environments around the world
face increasing sociopolitical and ecological challenges. Through this project,
the primary investigators train undergraduate and graduate students in
transnational archaeological field methods and in cutting-edge analytical
methods at their respective universities in the US, preparing the next
generation for careers in science and cultural resource
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team analyzes direct proxies of
agricultural and pastoral practices and compare them to measures of social
inequality during a period of long-term drought and dramatic sociopolitical
changes. The research takes place in a prehistoric highland valley, a region
with significant deep time human occupation, vast agricultural infrastructure,
and abundant natural resources. The researchers excavate a large settlement and
associated agricultural terraces, analyze excavated materials and legacy
collections from multiple sites, and conduct specialized chemical analysis of
human, plant, animal, and soil remains to reconstruct food webs, field
management systems, and patterns of human and herd mobility. They also analyze
land use and settlement patterns using unmanned aerial vehicles, three-
dimensional computer modeling, and Geographic Information Systems. The multi-
methodological approach allows the researchers to investigate agropastoral
strategies and sociopolitical organization across communities living in close
proximity but with different ecological potentials and divergent sociopolitical
histories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.