* 2243001
* CAREER: Integrating river hydrology across scales: advancing understanding of the global river-atmosphere interface
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2022,05/31/2027
* George Allen, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 05/31/2027
* USD 191,952.00

Rivers are natural hotspots for greenhouse gas emissions and are included in
global carbon budget evaluations. However, the amount of greenhouse gas emitted
by rivers is highly uncertain largely due to a fundamental gap in the current
understanding of hydraulic scaling between small streams and large rivers. This
project will develop a predictive understanding of how geomorphic and hydrologic
processes combine to drive river-atmosphere interface dynamics across spatial
and temporal scales. It will test underlying assumptions involved in estimating
the global surface area of Earthâ€™s rivers and streams and it will be used to
more accurately estimate the global rates of greenhouse gas emissions from
inland waters. The integrated research and teaching program will promote
hydrologic and environmental literacy and awareness through public outreach and
education, and it will help recruit and retain underrepresented minority
students with the goal of increasing participation and diversity in STEM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will quantify the full size-distribution of
river surface area within a continental-scale river basin by combining
satellite, airborne, and fieldwork observations. Using these observations, this
work will assess the interactions between river surfaces and streamflow at
different time and spatial scales and develop a novel open-source model for
predicting the river-atmosphere interface dynamics based on hydrologic drivers.
The knowledge generated from this project will help fill in the conceptual gaps
in our understanding of the river-atmosphere interface and develop the next
generation of global river surface area products used in carbon budgets. This
research will also untangle the hydrologic and geomorphic drivers of changing
river morphology, advancing our understanding of how humans are impacting river
systems and aquatic ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by
the Hydrologic Sciences and Geomorphology &amp; Land-use Dynamics
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.