* 2243665
* Collaborative Research: Ideas Lab: Rational Design of Noncoding RNA for Epigenetic Signal Amplification
* BIO,MCB
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2027
* Karmella Haynes, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Stephen DiFazio
* 02/28/2027
* USD 2,110,523.00

Considerable progress has been made to illuminate the dark matter of the genome
- those segments that do not encode for protein. Some of these noncoding regions
are transcribed to produce long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) that are processed
similarly to protein-encoding messenger RNAs. Although they are often found only
at low amounts within a cell, lncRNAs have been implicated in a myriad of
biological processes including cell growth and survival, cell identity and
environmental interactions, as well as numerous human and animal diseases. The
next frontier will be to tap into the biotechnology potentially inherent to
these lncRNAs. This project will use a synthetic, ‘understanding by building’
approach to rationally design and use lncRNAs to control large swaths of
chromosomal DNA. Broad utility will be demonstrated by using this new RNA
technology in human cells and in yeast (fungi). Engineering lncRNAs to control
their activity will not only contribute to fundamental understanding of these
enigmatic RNAs, but also tap the vast potential to generate useful biomolecules
in agricultural and medical applications across species. The project includes
uniquely tailored programming to support STEM workforce development for
participants ranging from high school students to postdoctoral fellows. New
virtual and hands-on activities focused on RNA biology will be integrated with
successful STEM outreach programs to ensure strong
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to define the minimal features
that are required for large-scale silencing mediated by lncRNA, building off of
the well-characterized Xic locus and its associated lncRNA, Xist, which is
responsible for silencing one of the X chromosomes in female mammals and
marsupials. The ultimate goal is to gain fundamental understanding of the
mechanisms by which lncRNAs can exert silencing effects at a chromosomal scale
despite being expressed at a low level in the cell. To tackle this, the
investigators will first test the effects of different repeats on silencing
ability in a mammalian cell culture system. They will then attempt to silence
autosomal loci by integrating synthetic lncRNAs into other chromosomes, or via
CRISPR-based targeting. We will use these data to parameterize mathematical
models to better understand the dynamics and limitations of the silencing
process. They will also create a stand-alone silencing system in haploid yeast
cells using components of the Xist system. This will enable detailed genetic
manipulations to further test and optimize the silencing system using the power
of yeast genetics. Finally, the project will use the data to guide rational
design of synthetic silencing systems that can be readily deployed in mammalian
cells to achieve targeted and tunable silencing. Overall, the investigators
expect to push the boundaries of the current understanding of lncRNA functions
in the nucleus, with anticipated outcomes to include defining the minimal
components and lncRNA levels required for stable and specific epigenetic
regulation. By reconstituting functional components from the ground-up, they
expect to validate, challenge, and/or expand fundamental mechanics involving
RNAs. Given that tunable lncRNA modulation could be a broadly applicable
biotechnology, this work has exciting implications for
bioengineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project resulted from an
NSF-sponsored Ideas Lab. It will be co-funded by the Emerging Frontiers Program
and the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.