* 2243722
* REU Site: Inclusion and Innovation in Medical Devices
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Walfre Franco, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 05/31/2026
* USD 422,300.00

This three-year REU site, Inclusion and Innovation in Medical Devices, at the
University of Massachusetts Lowell will provide undergraduate students with a
unique opportunity to explore innovations in medical devices in a
multidisciplinary environment and to pursue advanced education, research, and
careers in STEM fields. The ten-week summer program provides REU students with
opportunities to engage in various research projects in biomedical engineering
with a focus on medical devices. Students will learn how human factors
engineering can address diversity and inclusion, preventing bias in medical
products as well as designing diversity and inclusion into universal technology.
They will participate in research studies, professional development, and social
activities, and network with industry professionals. The research program will
enhance the ability of students to undertake interdisciplinary research through
cutting-edge projects that focus on the innovative engineering of medical
devices. The program also aims to inspire students to pursue advanced education,
research, and careers in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year REU
site, Inclusion and Innovation in Medical Devices, at the University of
Massachusetts Lowell will provide undergraduate students with a unique
opportunity to explore innovations in medical devices in a multidisciplinary
environment and to pursue advanced education, research, and careers in STEM
fields. The REU site will host 8 undergraduate students for 10 weeks each summer
and offer various research projects in diverse yet cohesive themes in biomedical
engineering with a focus on medical devices. Students will participate in
research, professional development, and social activities and will have the
opportunity to network with industry professionals. The project aims to educate
and train students in equity, diversity, and inclusion through active
participation in Inclusive Innovation of Medical Devices, Bystander Training,
and Racism in Science workshops. This REU Site pursues inclusion and innovation
in medical devices through multidisciplinary approaches. Students will learn
about integrating physics, chemistry, and engineering to tackle medical
problems, and how human factors engineering can address diversity and inclusion,
preventing bias in medical products. The research program will enhance the
ability of students to undertake interdisciplinary research through cutting-edge
projects that focus on the innovative engineering of medical devices. The
program also aims to inspire students to pursue advanced education, research,
and careers in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.