* 2243808
* REU Site: Mathematical Analysis and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Yunus Zeytuncu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Dearborn
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 04/30/2026
* USD 259,200.00

This award supports the Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site in
Mathematical Analysis and Applications, an eight week summer research program at
the University of Michigan Dearborn. The program will host eight undergraduate
students per year from diverse backgrounds. The primary objective of the program
is to contribute to the research infrastructure by recruiting and training the
next generation of U.S.-based mathematicians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
undergraduate research program brings together eight undergraduate students and
five faculty members each summer to collaborate on research projects in various
branches of mathematics. Over the course of three summers, research projects
will originate from the subjects of complex analysis, real analysis, harmonic
analysis, stochastic analysis, probability theory, algebraic geometry, and
inverse problems. REU participants will experiment, conjecture, provide rigorous
solutions, and present results in different formats. In addition, participants
will learn about the graduate school application process and career
opportunities in both academia and industry. The program aims to recruit
students from diverse backgrounds, including students from underrepresented
groups, women, and first-generation college students. Finally, the program will
connect participants with an extensive network of mentors and peers, thereby
assisting them with career planning and fostering long-term engagement with the
scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.