* 2243900
* RCN: PSInet - A Global Water Potential Network
* BIO,IOS
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Jessica Guo, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Irwin Forseth
* 02/29/2028
* USD 170,477.00

The ability to prepare for life on a warming planet requires a predictive
understanding of how increasing drought and heat stress will affect terrestrial
plants and the many services they provide, including food and timber production,
carbon sequestration and storage, and the maintenance of biodiverse ecosystems.
The water potential of soils and plants – which can be imagined as the blood
pressure of the natural world – directly controls the flow of water through
ecosystems and is a key regulator of the risk of plant mortality during droughts
and heat waves. However, observations of water potential (commonly abbreviated
with the Greek letter ‘Psi’) are frequently scarce, inaccessible, and plagued by
methodological challenges that hinder the synthetic research necessary to
anticipate, and prepare for, climate change impacts in natural and managed
ecosystems. PSInet – a new network of data and people - will confront this
information gap by: [1] promoting consistent collection and interpretation of
water potential data by a global community of scientists through shared
protocols, best practices, and early career training, [2] creating an open,
global database for plant and soil water potential time series, and [3]
supporting the synthesis of the PSInet database by a diverse community of
scientists and practitioners to address previously intractable questions
concerning plant responses to drought and heat stress.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gradients in water potential are the energetic basis for
the flux of water through plants, and water potential is a determinant of how
much carbon plants remove from the atmosphere, how much water they use in the
process, and the likelihood that plants survive droughts. However, while the
study of plant water potential is theory rich, it is relatively data poor.
Observations of water potential in soils and plants are relatively sparse,
discontinuous, and unaggregated. Closing this information gap is fundamental for
addressing unresolved theoretical controversies about plant response to drought
and heat stress, and for making confident predictions about ecosystem function
in a warming world. PSInet will rise to this challenge by building a global
water potential database with multiple points of connection to related
environmental observation networks, enabling cross-site synthesis necessary for
inference at regional and global scales, and providing a much-needed platform
for testing and refining modeling schemes. We will also craft community-driven
protocols and best practices to support water potential measurement and
interpretation, with a particular emphasis on emerging approaches for continuous
water potential observations, which hold tremendous promise but are currently
hampered by methodological difficulties. Finally, the project will create a
PSInet ‘Community of Practice’ to encourage data submissions, elevate the end-
use of the database, and broaden the intellectual, demographic, and geographic
diversity of ecophysiological research. Together, PSInet will provide the data,
collaborative platforms, and training necessary to confront previously
intractable questions about plant responses to drought and heat
stress.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.