* 2243319
* Pathway to Mathematics II: An Integrated STEM Initiative Focused on Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Kelly Byrd, University of South Alabama
* Continuing Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 04/30/2028
* USD 943,979.00

This project aims to serve the national need for well-prepared and highly
effective mathematics teachers. Currently, the lack of certified mathematics
teachers contributes to lower achievement and expectations for high-risk
students, especially in rural and urban areas that have overpopulated
classrooms, individuals teaching outside their certification fields, and long-
term substitute teachers lacking STEM backgrounds. This project intends to
recruit and prepare 20 high quality mathematics teachers over a five year
period. As a continuation of the original Pathway to Mathematics project, it
will also involve and benefit teachers produced by that prior project. A focus
of the current project will be attracting racially and ethnically diverse STEM
majors from related disciplines, such as mathematics and engineering, through an
extensive recruitment campaign. A hallmark of the project will be its pre-
residency experience, allowing prospective teachers to observe and participate
with mentor teachers prior to becoming scholars. Scholars will graduate with a
masterâ€™s degree in mathematics education, completing graduate coursework in both
teaching pedagogy and mathematics content.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project of
the University of South Alabama College of Education and Professional Studies
and the Colleges of Arts and Sciences and Engineering includes a partnership
with the Mobile County Public School System. Goals include: 1) generating
knowledge of factors that attract STEM majors to careers as mathematics
teachers, and 2) engaging current STEM majors and professionals in a curriculum
designed to provide a wide spectrum of teaching experiences beneficial to all
students, especially those in local high-need school districts. The intellectual
merit of this project derives from its capacity to produce mathematics teachers
who stay in the profession while evaluating effects of an integrated STEM
approach to teaching mathematics starting in the middle grades. Towards the
project's broader impacts it is anticipated that through coursework, a Summer
STEM and Diversity Institute, seminars, immersive field trips, and workshops
focused in culturally relevant pedagogy and diversity education, and through
real life personal connections with middle and high school students, scholars
will graduate with the tools and dispositions needed to meet the academic,
social, and psychological needs of students in the population they will serve.
This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through the Robert
Noyce Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the effectiveness and
retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.