* 2243725
* Cis-regulation and conditional chromatin remodeling in development and evolution of ontogenies in horned beetles
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Armin Moczek, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Anna Allen
* 08/31/2026
* USD 750,000.00

Organisms across the tree of life adjust the way they grow in response to
diverse internal and external influences. The same traits may manifest
differently in males compared to females, or look different depending on whether
the developing organism had access to sufficient food or not. Such “conditional”
or “context-responsive” development is wide-spread, and has diversified rapidly
and greatly across traits and species. Past work identified many important
mechanisms that regulate condition-responsive development, yet, how such
differences arise in the first place, and how subsequent development interprets
these differences and adjusts itself accordingly, remains very poorly
understood. This research uses horned beetles as a study system to fill this
void. Horned beetles possess highly diverse forms of context-responsive
development that are amenable to comparative and experimental study. Through the
lens of this study system this work aims to (a) characterize the genetic
networks that allows the development of complex traits such as horns, wings, and
legs to be both initiated and completed in response to varying conditions; as
well as (b) investigate how this regulation changes from trait to trait, and
from species to species, and thereby contributes to organismal diversity. This
research is further integrated within multifaceted science outreach activities
aimed at developing resources in support of K12 Indiana Science Teaching
Standards, training K-12 teachers, and increasing the participation of
historically underrepresented demographics in science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Organismal form and function emerge through the
integration of genotype and environment via the agency of developmental
processes. The proposed work will address the developmental mechanisms by which
the horned beetle species Onthophagus integrates genotype and environment in the
genesis of organismal form and function during ontogeny, and how changes in this
integration shape organismal diversity both within and among this species. This
research will break new ground by integrating the genome-wide analysis of
chromatin accessibility and gene expression with the functional analysis of
candidate genes and pathways. Further, this work will be executed in a
comparative manner across traits that differ in the degree or nature of their
context-responsive development, and across species that have diverged in trait-
specific conditional development. The proposed work has three major objectives:
first, it will identify the role of cis-regulatory architecture in environment-
and male/female-specific development. Second, it will characterize how this role
has diversified across taxa and traits representing varying degrees of
evolutionary diversification and innovation. Finally, this research will assess
the nature of interactions – as well as evolutionary changes therein – between
several known master-regulators of condition-dependent development and their
context-responsive gene regulatory networks in producing intraspecific
morphological variation. Collectively, the proposed work aims to transform our
understanding of the developmental mechanisms that integrate genotype and
environment in the genesis of organismal form and function during ontogeny, and
how changes in this integration shape organismal diversity both within and among
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.