* 2243484
* Preparing STEM Majors as Outstanding Certified Secondary Mathematics Teachers for South Texas
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* James O'Meara, Texas A&M International University
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Ellis
* 02/29/2028
* USD 651,683.00

This project aims to serve the national need to increase the number of
outstanding STEM Majors prepared to enter the teaching profession as high-
quality mathematics teachers. School districts in South Texas face significant
challenges with attracting and retaining high-quality mathematics teachers. The
increase in resignations during the COVID-19 pandemic have added to these
challenges. Moreover, teacher resignations disproportionately impact high-need,
high turnover schools across the country. Thus, there is an immediate need to
generate new knowledge for preparing STEM majors as outstanding certified
secondary mathematics teachers to increase access to high-quality mathematics
teachers and decrease the learning loss resulting from the COVID-19 pandemic.
This project builds on a theory of change that assumes fostering belonging and
elevating college and career readiness levels among talented STEM undergraduate
majors will positively impact local efforts to increase access to high-quality
mathematics teachers. To further these aims this project will provide a
formalized induction program and career readiness course to ensure equitable
situations for all Noyce Scholars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Texas
A&amp;M International University (89.3% Hispanic) includes partnerships with
Laredo Independent School District (LISD, 99.7% Hispanic), United Independent
School District (UISD, 99.4% Hispanic), and Laredo College (LC, 97.0% Hispanic).
The project plan draws on existing literature on belonging, teacher turnover,
teacher residencies, High Impact Practices and Mixed Reality Simulations
technologies. Four goals guide the execution of this project. First is to
increase the effectiveness of the Future Educator Community for fostering
belonging among 50 high-achieving STEM Majors and graduating 37 high-quality
mathematics teacher candidates over 5 years. Second is to increase the
effectiveness of the math educator preparation curriculum to elevate levels of
college readiness among high-achieving STEM Majors and 37 high-quality
mathematics teacher candidates. Third is to increase the effectiveness of the
enrichment curriculum to elevate levels of career readiness among high-achieving
STEM Majors and high-quality mathematics teacher candidates. Fourth, and
finally, is to collect, analyze, and disseminate data to assess needs, inform
revisions, gauge effectiveness of supports, and reallocate resources to increase
their effectiveness. External evaluators will conduct stakeholder interviews and
analyze mathematics teacher candidate data to generate findings regarding
progress towards these goals. Investigators will use this data to generate new
knowledge about preparing STEM Majors as outstanding certified Secondary
Mathematics Teachers. They will use this knowledge to reduce local STEM
education disparities by: (1) building capacity among partners and partnerships
engaging in educator preparation learning communities, (2) increasing
participation rates among talented STEM students attending local high turnover
campuses, (3) elevating outcomes for 4500 Hispanic learners in local mathematics
classrooms; (4) advancing STEM education and educator development at the
secondary, post-secondary and early career levels; (5) enhancing evaluation
infrastructure and data for informing effective math educator preparation for
high-need Hispanic-serving school districts. This Track 1: Scholarships and
Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors
and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced,
exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school
districts. It also supports research on the effectiveness and retention of K-12
STEM teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.