* 2243471
* Building Capacity by Strengthening Pathways and Recruitment Strategies for Future STEM Teachers through a Community College and University Partnership
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* David Rutledge, Dona Ana Branch Community College
* Standard Grant
* Julio Soto
* 03/31/2024
* USD 124,998.00

The project aims to serve the national need of building capacity to address the
challenge of teacher shortages in high-need school districts particularly in
STEM areas. The intention of this proposal is to develop clear pathways from the
community college into the main university campus, and to develop an
understanding of student perceptions about STEM and the teaching profession to
better recruit and prepare STEM teachers. The intended collaboration between
Dona Ana Community College (DACC) and New Mexico State University (NMSU) will be
essential for building sustainable STEM educator pathways. These partners will
work together to create practices that address what STEM undergraduates need to
become effective STEM teachers. To accomplish these aims, both institutions will
develop STEM degree concentrations to support a future Noyce Track 1 proposal.
Additionally, data analysis aimed at understanding STEM student interest in
simultaneously pursuing a major in a STEM discipline and a minor in Secondary
Education at both institutions will be used to develop a recruitment plan for
Noyce Scholars. As one of six minority-as-majority states, New Mexicoâ€™s
schooling environment exhibits the complex educational, cultural, and economic
challenges occurring throughout the United States. With NMSU located within
three school districts along the US-Mexico border and producing only a small
number of mathematics or science pre-service teachers, this region echos the
national declining trend in teacher production. At the same time, there is a
state-wide need for STEM prepared employees in military, space, and
agriculturally based industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Dona Ana
Community College includes a partnership with New Mexico State University.
Project goals include the development of teacher education pathways that allow
STEM majors to minor in Education, and the development of a recruitment plan. We
will draw on research about the importance of teachers having high levels of
content and pedagogical knowledge and intend on centering our recruitment plans
on the needs of students from underrepresented minority groups given the
demographics of the students at both institutions. Additionally, we will draw on
approaches to collaboration that foster organizational boundary-spanning
activities that lead to new inter-institutional norms. We will collect data from
students through survey research about levels of interest in STEM teaching to
design a recruitment plan. This project will allow both institutions to prepare
teachers so they can successfully prepare their students for STEM learning
despite strained socio-economic supports. Successful strategies implemented and
documented from this project can be a model for replication at similar
institutions. The independent evaluation approach for this capacity-building
project, conducted by the Southwest Outreach Academic Research Evaluation and
Policy Center, will be both formative and summative. Project outcomes will be
disseminated through local, state, and national conferences. This Capacity
Building project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors
and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced,
exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school
districts. It also supports research on the effectiveness and retention of K-12
STEM teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.