* 2243631
* Numerical and experimental investigation of the impact of preferential flow and nonequilibrium thermodynamics on meltwater transport through snow
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Xiaojing Fu, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 02/28/2026
* USD 454,673.00

Water stored in terrestrial snowpack is an essential buffer in hydrological
systems. Extreme weather events induced by climate change, such as frequent heat
waves and prolonged droughts, have made it difficult for current water resource
models to accurately predict the timing and volume of snowmelt arrival in
groundwater and surface water systems. Improving the mechanistic understanding
of snowmelt transport is a key component in building a more robust prediction
platform to better manage water resources under climate variability. This
project will contribute to the education of undergraduate and graduate students
learning state-of-art modeling methods and computer simulation programs and will
provide students with the experience of developing novel laboratory experiments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will generate fundamental knowledge on how
the percolation of meltwater interacts with the porous structure of snowpack
under various environmental conditions, and how such interactions influence the
volume and timing of melt drainage into the underlying groundwater system.
Existing models of snowmelt transport are limited by simplified flow physics and
equilibrium thermodynamics, which fail to address important field observations.
This project will use a new model to systematically investigate melt transport
in heterogeneous environments under dynamic atmospheric conditions. The model
resolves important physics missing in previous models that significantly
influence the residence time of melt within snowpack during transport.
Additionally, observations of melt transport through snow under controlled
environmental conditions have only been made in 3D snow samples, rendering
quantitative comparison with numerical models challenging. This project will
design and perform controlled laboratory experiments to directly visualize real-
time dynamics of melt transport and refreezing in quasi-2D flow cells. The
combined numerical-experimental effort will provide new insights on meltwater
transport and storage within snowpack, which is necessary to improve
parameterization of snowmelt processes in large-scale hydrological
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.