* 2243249
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Study of the Politics of Place
* SBE,SMA
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* James Thomas, University of Mississippi
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 04/30/2026
* USD 413,813.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences
(SBE). This REU site project immerses students in a 10-week summer research
experience where they learn and put into practice interdisciplinary methods to
study the politics of place in the American South. The project actively recruits
undergraduate students to conduct social scientific research with the University
of Mississippi faculty. Activities for each participant include workshops with
practical, hands-on instruction in research design, data collection, and data
analysis; exposure to graduate educational opportunities and careers in science;
participating in research projects with faculty mentors; writing a research
paper; and presenting research findings for academic and non-academic audiences.
This program: (1) provides students with the social scientific training and
skills to conduct research that can make a positive impact in their own
communities; (2) prepares students with the research skills necessary for a
contemporary workforce; (3) provides focused and intensive mentoring of students
to prepare them for careers in science. The intended impact of this program is
to increase students’ social scientific literacy, equip them with the necessary
knowledge and training to conduct social scientific research using a variety of
methods, and increase the number of students pursuing graduate education and
professional careers in the social sciences.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Students will
participate in faculty-directed research projects that focus on understanding
how culture, place, and power intersect, with a special emphasis on how to
conceptualize, operationalize, and study these concepts through an
interdisciplinary, multi-methodological perspective. Examples of research
projects include (1) studying how immigrants are incorporated into the
sociopolitical and economic lives of communities that are not traditional
migration destinations; (2) examining how the cultural, political, and religious
context of Mississippi shapes the health and well-being of underrepresented
Mississippians; (3) examining how food culture is used in the practice of
placemaking and the evolution of regional identity; (4) exploring inequalities
in the criminal justice system with respect to sentencing prescriptions for
diverse defendants; and (5) examining how, in an era where status is
increasingly scrutinized, groups are making sense of their place within
America’s social structure. Students will be matched to research projects based
on their substantive interests as well as the specific research skills they are
most interested in developing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.