* 2243395
* Shaping Innovative New Educators in STEM through Culturally Responsive, Sustaining, and Ecologically Grounded Hands-on Experiences and Professional Development
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Tristan Gleason, Moravian University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen Bergin
* 02/29/2028
* USD 709,032.00

This project aims to serve the national need for increasing the number of
highly-qualified STEM educators, especially those serving students in high-need
schools. The project will recruit prospective STEM majors and STEM professionals
and provide scholarship support beginning in their junior year or stipend
support for post-baccalaureate teacher certification. Scholars will be immersed
in a combination of specialized coursework, field experiences, professional
development and mentoring, educational nonprofit partnerships, and summer pre-
teaching opportunities. The experiences and programmatic elements are designed
to prepare teachers for success with youth who are most in need of highly-
qualified and committed STEM educators. Scholars will develop rigorous and
equitable practices that address their studentsâ€™ academic, social, and emotional
needs by working with a team of faculty in STEM, education, and
psychology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project at Moravian University includes
partnerships with the Allentown School District, Bethlehem Area School District,
Communities in School of Eastern Pennsylvania, and Lehigh Valley Summerbridge.
Three project goals provide a framework for the principal investigators work.
First is to recruit and increase the number of highly qualified and diverse STEM
prospective teachers enrolled at Moravian University. Second is to prepare STEM
teachers with innovative hands-on experiences and high-impact practices that
provide them with the skills to become culturally responsive and highly
effective educators in high-need school districts. Third and finally is to
retain teachers by enhancing their support system of STEM educators to increase
success as innovative, highly effective, long-term professionals in high-need
schools. The program is guided by an ecologically grounded perspective on STEM
teaching and learning. By emphasizing the importance of pedagogical content
knowledge and culturally responsive teaching, this project has strong potential
to prepare future educators for successful careers as STEM educators in high-
need schools. The project aims to recruit and support a total of 28
undergraduate and post-baccalaureate scholars in biology, general science,
computer science, and mathematics. By modeling STEM excellence in high-need
schools, the project has the potential to prepare STEM teachers who will teach
and inspire students to pursue careers in STEM. Project evaluation will assess
the impact of support system on teacher success and retention. Results from the
projects will be disseminated through various STEM teacher education conferences
and journals such as the Journal of Biological Education and the Association of
Science Teacher Education annual conference. This Track 1: Scholarship and
Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors
and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced,
exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school
districts. It also supports research on the effectiveness and retention of K-12
STEM teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.