* 2243632
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Precise and Robust Binary Reverse Engineering and its Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2026
* Gang Tan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 03/31/2026
* USD 600,000.00

Analyzing untrusted computer programs to detect malicious behavior is of
paramount importance to computer security. Many programs running in computer
systems do not come with their source code and are only available in an
executable form, called binary programs . Analyzing binary programs directly is
critical to preventing malware, which continues to disrupt the functioning of
modern societies. This project presents crosscutting research, educational
opportunities, and an outreach plan to improve the accuracy, robustness, and
scalability of binary program analysis and has the potential of fundamentally
enhancing the ability of understanding and preventing
malware.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core of this project's binary-analysis
framework has two novel techniques: (1) a new pointer analysis technique based
on a memory model called the block memory model and (2) an implementation of the
core analysis as rules in a declarative language called Datalog that can be
efficiently solved. This project will have three tasks based on these
techniques. (1) In Task A the project will produce a comprehensive framework
called Blockbin, which can produce precise reverse-engineering information of an
input binary program. The framework will handle binary programs that are
produced from different source languages that are for different architectures,
and that have been obfuscated. (2) Task B will focus on demonstrating the
utility of Blockbin through a diverse set of applications from program hardening
to authorship attribution and to malware analysis. (3) Task C will focus on
improving the scalability of Blockbin by designing a highly parallel Datalog
solver with support for lattice-based static analysis. The result will be a tool
that generates high-precision reverse-engineering information for sophisticated
binaries and a demonstration of the tool's utility in a diverse set of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.