* 2243502
* Exploration of a Labs to Classrooms Teaching Fellowship Program for Career-Changing STEM Professionals
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Valorie Zonnefeld, Dordt University, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 05/31/2024
* USD 75,000.00

This project aims to serve the national need for building capacity to prepare
working professionals in science, technology, engineering, and math to
transition to and succeed in teaching positions. These career changers, often
employed in labs or other manufacturing positions, will become fully qualified
and adequately supported STEM teachers in the Nation’s schools. The project will
explore the design of an accelerated fully online Master of Arts in Teaching
(MAT) program to provide initial teaching licenses and support for induction
into the teaching profession for these career changers. As part of this Capacity
Building project, avenues of access will be designed to allow working
professionals the quality, flexibility, and collaboration needed for success in
the redesigned online master’s degree. The project will also be responsive to
the ongoing needs of busy working adults throughout the process. The expected
outcomes of this capacity building exploration will identify enrollment targets,
unique marketing strategies, and support structures needed to ensure development
of a successful model program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Dordt
University (DU) explores the partnerships needed with the university’s
constituencies around the country. Its focus will be on school districts and
school associations in the immediate region and in areas that are part of DU’s
network of 80 historically connected pockets of DU constituents around the U.S.
currently seeking STEM teachers. Project goals include soliciting input from
stakeholders, assessing needs for STEM teachers in constituent areas, and
assessing interest among STEM graduates. Another goal is to evaluate existing
graduate and undergraduate curricula regarding an adult-friendly path to initial
licensure. Once this exploration demonstrates an MAT program to be promising,
the outcome will be the design of a unique online master’s program for working
STEM professionals. The design will include marketing, hiring, and advising
plans for quickly implementing the program. The project will identify specific
targets for enrollment, licensing, and first-year success rates. The format will
alleviate common barriers to career changing such as a long teacher training
program, the need to attend classes on campus during work hours, emergency or
temporary licenses, and the lack of relevant or convenient field experiences.
The envisioned online program will include best practices such as early
practicum experiences, a standard licensing path, adult learning theory,
induction mentorships, and a multi-faceted assessment system. The broader impact
of this project rests on the assumption that it is never too late to go into
teaching and that high-need and rural schools deserve and can have high quality
STEM teachers. This, in turn, can lead to more STEM interest among students in
those schools. This exploration phase will be evaluated on the amount of
concrete data and direction provided for planning the envisioned program. This
Capacity Building project is supported by the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors
and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced,
exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-need school
districts. It also supports research on the effectiveness and retention of K-12
STEM teachers in high-need school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.