* 2243756
* Attosecond Electron Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Stephen Leone, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 02/28/2026
* USD 675,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Stephen Leone of the University
of California, Berkeley, is using sophisticated laser techniques to study some
of the shortest time processes in molecules. Short time measurements can only be
accomplished by first creating X-ray pulses on time frames of one billion
billionth of a second, namely one attosecond. This is achieved with laboratory
table-top optical methods, producing multiple time-delayed laser pulses to first
prepare, then initialize, and finally measure the time dynamics. Professor Leone
and his students will analyze the rapid switching of charge from one part of a
molecule to another and the extremely fast ensuing chemical transformations with
site-specific characterization. Benefits to society arise through the
fundamental elucidation of charge flow in molecules that is essential to the
conversion of solar energy to electrical output and from the technical training
of the future workforce in measurement science and experimental physical
chemistry. The Leone group plans to engage middle school and high school
teachers to participate in summer research and them team also plans to host high
school students on guided visits to these ultrafast spectroscopy
laboratories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Attosecond transient absorption in the X-ray
is employed for time-resolved dynamics measurements that separate the electron
dynamical timescales from those of nuclear motion. Core level spectroscopic
transitions in reporter atoms are used. These are charge- and oxidation-state
specific, bond-length-sensitive, and electronic-state-dependent, providing a
site-selective probe of few-femtosecond time dynamics. Professor Leone and his
group are studying attosecond time-resolved processes associated with charge
transfer, charge migration, ion pair states, and electronic quantum state
superpositions. Attosecond probe pulses are produced via the process of high
harmonic generation using few-femtosecond driver laser pulses, and, under this
award, three pulse experiments will be developed, to prepare, initialize, and
probe, with high state specificity. Broader scientific impacts include the
potential to develop tools that push the limits of time, particularly important
tools as the dimensions and speed of devices decrease and computing
architectures begin to become governed by quantum
principles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.