* 2243648
* Modeling Salivary Gland Fibrosis Using a Bioorthogonally Integrated Hydrogel Platform
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Joseph Fox, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 03/31/2026
* USD 562,067.00

Non-technical description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We take saliva for granted;
without it, we will not be able to digest food, maintain dental hygiene or speak
normally. This is what many survivors of head and neck cancers and patients with
Sjögren’s syndrome, a particular type of autoimmune disease, experience every
day: persistent dry mouth. Scientists know that dry mouth is often associated
with over-accumulation of interstitial fibrous proteins, a hallmark of tissue
fibrosis. However, how the fibrotic environment causes permanent damage to the
acinar cells, the saliva producing cells, is not understood. The goal of this
project is to develop a lab-grown salivary gland tissue model using artificial
matrices created employing highly efficient chemical reactions. Epithelial cells
isolated from salivary gland and stromal cells isolated from the supporting
connective tissue will be used to build the model. The model will be comprised
of spherical epithelial entities held together through cell-cell recognition and
individual stromal cells dispersed in the engineered matrix. The living tissue
will be subjected to additional chemical transformations to alter its makeup and
rigidity, which will convert the healthy stromal cells to abnormal cells with
the ability to contract the tissue and deposit excessive fibrous proteins. We
will analyze how these changes make epithelial cells cease to produce saliva.
Using the engineered tissue model, we will evaluate the potential of therapeutic
interventions to reverse fibrosis and restore the secretory function. Integrated
with the research effort is an educational plan to engage and empower pre-
service, early childhood teachers who will inspire the next generation of
scientists. A series of hands-on exhibits, teaching modules, and makers lab
activities will be created to prepare students for careers in materials science
and biomedical engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite advances in treatment strategies,
xerostomia (or dry mouth) remains a permanent and devastating disease that
broadly affects patients with head and neck malignancies or the Sjögren’s
syndrome. Although it is well accepted that the loss of secretory acini is the
root cause of xerostomia, there is accumulating evidence underlying the
importance of tissue fibrosis in contributing to and sustaining the disease.
This application capitalizes on our recent innovations in bioorthogonal
chemistry, materials synthesis, and tissue engineering to construct a
physiologically relevant tissue model with integrated epithelial and mesenchymal
cells, allowing in situ perturbation of the extracellular environment to
simulate salivary gland fibrosis due to radiation injury or an aberrant immune
system. The proposed model will be comprised of multicellular epithelial
assemblies and individual mesenchymal stem cells in a customized synthetic
matrix, whose composition and properties can be dynamically tuned to induce
fibrogenesis. Using this model, we will investigate how the normal mesenchyme
maintains tissue homeostasis, how the fibrotic microenvironment alters the
phenotype and organization of the epithelial cells, and whether therapies
targeting tissue fibrosis can lead to the restoration of the secretory function.
The proposed research activity will not only contribute to the education of the
next generation of scientists and engineers, but also empower early childhood
teachers. Concerted efforts will be dedicated to the creation of discovery-based
teaching methods, lab-based research modules and community-based design and
innovation activities. The interdisciplinary nature of the proposed research and
educational efforts will also equip graduate students with up-to-date
information, experimental skills, and creative thinking that are all
indispensable in maintaining the United States’ global
competitiveness.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.