* 2243317
* Building Capacity and Collaborations to Prepare Elementary Teachers for Cultivating Linguistically Just and Integrated STEM Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2024
* Clara Lee Brown, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 06/30/2024
* USD 74,999.00

This project aims to serve the national need for building capacity to prepare
K-5 teachers to meet the needs of English language learners within an integrated
STEM teaching and learning context. This focus is needed in teacher preparation
because states such as Tennessee have become new gateways for immigration, but
educators are underprepared to meet the needs of changing student populations.
This project also seeks to develop strategies that will increase the pool of
Black, Indigenous, and people of color (BIPOC) teacher candidates including
creating achievable pathways for community college students, who are themselves
often bilingual/multilingual, to become STEM teachers of linguistically diverse
elementary students. Increasing the representation of BIPOC, linguistically
diverse teachers in public schools has the potential to broaden students’ access
to high-quality STEM learning opportunities from an early
age.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at the University of Tennessee, Knoxville
will develop partnerships with a linguistically diverse, high-need public school
district and its nearby community college. Four project goals will guide the
work of the investigators. First is to assess the need for teachers who are
prepared to teach integrated STEM in school districts with substantial
populations of linguistically diverse students. Second is to assess the interest
in and need for pathways into elementary STEM education for linguistically
diverse or BIPOC community college students. Third is to identify a public
school district and its nearby community college to form collaborative
partnerships and transfer pathways based upon high need for and interest in
recruiting elementary STEM teachers who are prepared to teach integrated STEM in
linguistically diverse contexts. The fourth and final goal is to develop and
configure a new elementary teacher education program with community college
transfer pathways that focuses on preparing teachers for linguistically just and
integrated STEM education in K-5. This project has the potential not only to
contribute teacher education models and frameworks that integrate theories from
bi-/multilingual education and STEM education in K-5, but also help meet the
need for teachers prepared to support BIPOC or linguistically diverse students’
STEM learning. This Capacity Building project is supported through the Robert
Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented
STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM
teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers
in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the effectiveness
and retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.