* 2243261
* Opinion Dynamics on Complex Networks
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Mariana Olvera-Cravioto, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 04/30/2026
* USD 459,680.00

This award will advance understanding of how the behaviors of internal and
external agents affect the evolution of stochastic dynamic networks. As a
particular use case, the PI will examine social network models. It is well
recognized that social media platforms, while serving as a legitimate means for
individuals to exercise free speech and share diverse views, are also
susceptible to internal and external manipulation that may lead to adverse
societal outcomes. Using a rigorous mathematical analysis, the models and
analyses in this project will study the effects of confirmation bias, media
signals, and outside influence through autonomous users, on the evolution of
networks of diverse agents. The project will investigate the effects of targeted
interventions that either reinforce individuals' current beliefs or expose them
to different views. By quantifying the effects of different interventions on the
evolution of the network, this award can help institutions, policy makers and
organizations to understand the behavior and impact of social media in modern
society. In addition to the principal use case of social networks, the results
of the project are relevant to a host of dynamically evolving complex networks,
such as those describing supply chains. The project team, with expertise in
operations researcher and political science, will train graduate students with
multidisciplinary perspectives who can contribute to a rigorous examination of
important societal issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide a
robust modeling framework for studying the stationary behavior of Markov chains
on directed complex networks via the use of random graph theory and local weak
convergence, with the goal of obtaining tractable characterizations of their
typical stationary behavior. Theoretical results will describe the stationary
distribution of the opinions on the network and will support evaluation of means
and variances. Computational aspects of the project include validation of the
models on publicly available real-world social network data from various data
repositories, as well as experimentation with curated synthetic data produced by
widely-used theoretical models. The analysis will characterize the network
dynamics and identify model parameters that contribute to the emergence of
consensus or polarization. The network model studied includes as special cases
the classical DeGroot and Friedkin-Johnsen models, and the investigation will
provide mathematical proofs for models that have only been studied empirically
to date. Extensions include the study of the original DeGroot model on strongly
connected sparse random graphs and the analysis of the opinion model on
assortative networks under the semi-sparse regime.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.