* 2243120
* A Novel Soybean Flour-based Sizing and Strength Additive for Replacing the Daily Food Starch in the Papermaking Process
* ENG,CBET
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2026
* Abdus Salam, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 03/31/2026
* USD 211,941.00

Millions of tons of starches are used as a paper sizing and dry strength
additive every year despite the fact that starch is typically in high demand for
daily meals. This is important to note because global food demand is increasing
due to population growth. Similarly, millions of tons of petroleum-based paper
dry strength agents used in the paper making industry have raised environmental
concerns, motivating efforts toward developing alternatives. Soybean flour is a
cheap complex polysaccharide compared to starch, modified starches, or
petroleum-based strength agents, and may be a suitable substitute. But the main
problem associated with using soybean flour is that it poses a bacterial
digestion problem that can produce bad odors and fouling, vital issues to
consider for use in paper industries. The goal of this project is to stop the
bacterial decomposition of soybean flour by an environmentally sustainable
chemical modification in order to benefit paper sizing/strength applications in
the paper and paper packaging industries. The key research activities of this
work include: 1) synthesis of quaternary positively charged functionalized
soybean flour by a specific chemical pathway modification in which modified
soybean flour will ultimately demonstrate the antimicrobial activity to overcome
bacterial decomposition, 2) investigation of the biological decomposition of
modified soybean flour and unmodified soybean flour to determine antimicrobial
performance, and 3) characterization of the physical properties and
antimicrobial activities of the modified soybean flour and modified soybean
flour-treated sized paper. The goal is for these materials to be used as an
alternative to starch-based sizing/strength agents in the paper and paper
packaging industries. The proposed modified soybean flour has the potential to
address low-cost, high-performance, biodegradable, and food-grade requirements
for non-toxic paper products. Additionally, the project holds the potential to
lead to the replacement of non-biodegradable and polluting petroleum-based paper
dry-strength agents such as polyacrylamide used in the paper industries and thus
address environmental and health concerns. Both graduate and undergraduate
students will be members of the project team. In addition, K-12 outreach is
planned as part of the total project deliverables.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project approach is based on exploiting an innovative reaction mechanism for
introducing a quaternary cationic charge into soybean flour such that the
functionalized soybean flour will exhibit bactericidal activity and overcome
biologically-induced decomposition. Preliminary results support the hypothesis
that the introduction of this quaternary cationic charge in soybean flour plays
a key role in stopping biological digestion and inhibiting soybean flour
contamination by bacteria, mold, and fungi. This hypothesis will be further
examined by testing reaction conditions in pursuit of enhancing targeted
performance. Modified soybean flour will be analyzed by FTIR, NMR, XPS, SEM,
TGA, DSC, and XRD to confirm modification and thermal stability. Cationic
charges in cross-linked modified soybean flour will be determined by a charge
analyzer and antimicrobial activity will be evaluated by standard AATCC 100 and
FTTS- FA-002 test methods. The biological digestion of soybean flour and
quaternary cationic charged-functionalized soybean flour will be evaluated by
ASTM test methods. Preliminary lab results have shown that the quaternary
cationic charged-functionalized soybean flour significantly enhances the
antimicrobial properties of itself and with a sized paper sheet as well as
significantly contributing to the tensile strength of paper. The work will probe
not only the chemical transformations but also explore a range of reactants and
crosslinking agents, and optimize reaction conditions to make functionally
competent and application-motivated antimicrobial soybean flours to potentially
replace daily food starch. Likewise, preliminary results indicate that the
functionalized soybean flour can be used as a surface sizing agent in paper to
change absorption properties and increase the strength of sized paper,
potentially replacing starch-based sizing agents. The project will further
confirm these preliminary results. The absorption, strength, stiffness,
printability, and other properties of modified soybean flour-treated sized paper
will be evaluated and compared with starch-treated sized paper properties. The
antimicrobial properties of modified soybean flour-treated sized paper will be
evaluated to confirm the inhibition of bacterial decomposition of soybean flour.
Additionally, modified soybean flour will be blended with pulp slurry to
fabricate additive-treated paper sheets to characterize physical properties,
especially strength compared to commercial petroleum-based strength additive
(polyacrylamide)-treated papers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.