* 2243588
* SCC-PG: A multidisciplinary approach to assessing city-wide near misses between vehicles and vulnerable road users in Reno-Sparks, Nevada
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2024
* Hao Xu, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Yueyue Fan
* 03/31/2024
* USD 147,035.00

This NSF Smart and Connected Communities project will employ a novel and
multidisciplinary approach informed by community participation to detect, map,
and analyze “near-miss” events that occur when a collision between a vulnerable
road user, such as a bicyclist or pedestrian, and an automobile is narrowly
avoided. Rising injury and fatality rates in the United States for vulnerable
road users is an area of societal concern, and contribute to public hesitancy to
walk or bicycle more. These trends challenge ongoing efforts nationwide that aim
to both make roads safer for all and reduce transportation sector emissions
through a modal shift to increased walking, bicycling, and transit use. To date,
data-driven solutions to address issues related to vulnerable road user safety
often rely on official crash data, but these data cannot alone comprehensively
represent the safety experiences of vulnerable road users. The ability to more
broadly record near-miss events, and how their frequency and locations compare
to officially reported crash data, is essential to informing safety-oriented
transportation planning strategies. To address this topic, this project will
integrate approaches and technological innovations from geography, traffic
engineering, and urban planning, in partnership with community collaborators in
greater Reno and Sparks, Nevada.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent advancement in
classification techniques applied to data collected from Light Detection and
Ranging, or LiDAR, sensors provides an ability to detect near-miss events
involving vulnerable road users. This project will deploy a portable network of
such sensors at locations throughout greater Reno and Sparks. Sensor locations
will be informed by responses to a web-based survey distributed to those who
frequently walk or bicycle in the community that will prompt them to identify
specific locations of vulnerable road user safety concern. Data will be
collected at these locations for one week. Emerging near-miss detection methods
will be applied to the field-collected data, and frequency and type of near
misses will be compared against official crash data. A community focus group
will review near miss events detected by these sensors and provide feedback to
improve event identification methods. A Geodesign workshop will produce a
collaborative plan that will prioritize locations for future assessment of
vulnerable road user safety, and identify potential countermeasures. These
efforts will help guide ongoing efforts to integrate a sensor network that if
effectively scaled, could improve the ability to detect near-miss events in
real-time, which in turn can better inform planning efforts to improve road user
safety.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.