* 2243168
* Investigating how Opportunities to Learn Culturally Responsive Teaching Influence Beginning Elementary Mathematics Teachers’ Effectiveness and Retention
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Peter Youngs, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 06/30/2027
* USD 468,565.00

This project aims to serve the national need for preparing and retaining an
effective elementary school STEM teaching workforce. The project addresses the
need for elementary school teachers to be prepared to provide culturally
responsive mathematics instruction to diverse populations of students in high-
need schools. Culturally relevant approaches have been shown to support
students’ mathematics learning. However, teacher education programs vary in how
pre-service teachers are prepared to use culturally relevant instruction. Also,
little is known about how beginning teachers apply these teaching approaches in
mathematics teaching in elementary school classrooms. This project will explore
how teacher education programs differ in their approaches to preparing
elementary school teachers for culturally relevant mathematics teaching. The
project will also investigate how teachers’ use of culturally relevant
instruction influences their instructional effectiveness, student mathematics
learning, and teacher retention in the profession. This research has the
important potential to identify elements of teacher preparation that support
beginning elementary school teachers in becoming effective, inclusive
mathematics teachers who are retained in the field. Results could be broadly
relevant for teacher education programs across the nation.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project at the University of Delaware includes partnerships with
seven teacher preparation programs across the states of Delaware, Pennsylvania,
North Carolina, and Arizona. The overarching project goal is to provide
education policymakers and teacher education program leaders evidence about
effective integration of culturally relevant instructional practices in pre-
service teacher preparation programs and how preparation experiences translate
into classroom practices used to teach mathematics in high-need elementary
schools. The experienced research team aims to conduct a longitudinal, mixed-
method research design that will, over three years, investigate a sample of 200
elementary school teachers. Teachers will include those working in minority-
serving schools and prepared at minority-serving institutions. Investigations
will span teachers' experiences during their final year of teacher preparation
through their first two years of teaching. The research team will collect
evidence about participating teachers’ opportunities to learn culturally
relevant teaching and their attitudes towards culturally relevant teaching over
time. Additionally, the research will collect classroom observation evidence to
explore how teachers apply culturally relevant teaching practices in the context
of their mathematics teaching, as well as access data on elementary school
students’ mathematics learning outcomes. The research will use structural
equation modelling to explore key mediating and moderating factors to understand
how teacher education experiences influence beginning teachers’ effectiveness
and retention. Further, the research will benefit from input and evaluation by
an advisory board that includes experts in culturally relevant teaching,
mathematics teaching and learning, and quantitative research methods. Findings
will be disseminated to education policymakers and stakeholders, and program
leaders overseeing teacher preparation through policy briefs, publications in
practitioner-oriented outlets, and presentations at professional gatherings of
teachers and preparation program leaders. This Track 4: Noyce Research project
is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The
Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to
become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to
become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports
research on the effectiveness and retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.