* 2243850
* III: Small: 3D Graph Neural Networks: Completeness, Efficiency, and Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Shuiwang Ji, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Raj Acharya
* 07/31/2026
* USD 599,939.00

Many real-world systems and phenomena can be described by entities and their
relations. For example, social networks consist of people and their
relationships, and molecules consist of atoms connected by chemical bonds.
Graphs are commonly used to encode such systems and phenomena in which nodes
correspond to entities, and edges correspond to relations. Computational
analysis of graphs has been an active area of research for many years with a
plethora of fruitful results and discoveries. However, many current graph
analysis studies only consider topologies of graphs (i.e., a two-dimensional
representations of these relationships), while important geometric information
is not considered. In many scientific domains, physical systems are most
accurately described by geometric graphs, also known as 3D graphs, in which each
node is associated with a coordinate in 3D physical space. Accurate encoding of
such geometric information is critical in many scientific domains. For example,
atoms in a molecule occupy physical space, and their locations determine 3D
molecular geometry. In drug discovery, the binding properties and thus
effectiveness of drugs critically depend on their 3D shapes as molecular
interactions act similarly to lock-and-key mechanisms. This project aims at
advancing the field of geometric graph analysis by developing algorithms that
can capture 3D geometries of graphs accurately and efficiently. The project is
committed to broadening participation in computing by engaging and inspiring
K-12 and underrepresented students in artificial intelligence and molecular
analysis research and education. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the
first set of research tasks aim to develop principled 3D graph neural networks
that can use the power of 3D geometric information of small molecules to
generate informative and discriminative representations. A novel message passing
scheme will be developed to incorporate 3D geometric information in a complete
and efficient manner. Building on this development, a new 3D graph neural
networks architecture will be designed to facilitate representation learning on
large-scale molecule data and boost the performance and efficiency for a
plethora of real-world tasks. The second set of research tasks extend the
proposed complete and efficient 3D graph neural networks to representation
learning of proteins, which are complex macromolecules of fundamental
importance. Existing studies either fail to consider the hierarchical relations
present in proteins or suffer from severe efficiency issues. To overcome these
limitations, a novel hierarchical protein graph network to learn protein
representations at different levels will be developed in this project. The
proposed method faithfully integrates important hierarchical relations,
resulting in a more natural protein learning scheme. By employing the proposed
complete and efficient 3D graph neural networks for small molecules as a base
model, the new hierarchical protein graph network is expected to achieve
provable completeness and efficiency at different levels. The proposed research
will result in open-source software tools to be used by researchers and
practitioners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.