* 2243551
* Conference: A proposal requesting NSF support for the 15th International Symposium on Particle Image Velocimetry (ISPIV 2023), San Diego, CA, June 19-21, 2023
* ENG,CBET
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2024
* Xiaofeng Liu, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 11/30/2024
* USD 49,995.00

The 15th International Symposium on Particle Image Velocimetry (ISPIV 2023) will
be hosted on campus of San Diego State University (SDSU) from June 19-21, 2023.
Particle Image Velocimetry (PIV), benefited from the advancement in laser,
camera, and computer technologies in the past four decades, has gradually
evolved since its inception in 1984 into a dominant experimental method for
scientific and applied research in fluid mechanics. During the process of the
development, the ISPIV conference series have established themselves as the
premier fora dedicated to the promotion of the PIV theory and technology. The
conference series have been playing an indispensable role as an incubator and
booster for scientists and researchers in advancing the state-of-the-art of the
technologies on Particle Image Velocimetry. Like the practice in the past, the
ISPIV 2023 conference will again bring together leading scientists, researchers,
developers and users of Particle Image Velocimetry from all over the world to
examine, exchange and discuss all aspects of the latest innovative developments
and applications related to Particle Image Velocimetry, with the aim to further
advance the state-of-the-art of PIV theory, technology and practice. The
proposed conference, featuring 3 keynote lectures and over 200 contributing
papers, will provide a comprehensive overview of the current state-of-the-art of
PIV, and pave the way for a wide range of new and emerging developments such as
machine learning and data assimilation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The meeting will
provide an opportunity for students and junior researchers to be educated with
the latest developments in the research field of PIV and present their own
recent research results at the conference. The meeting will also invite
researchers and students from underrepresented groups to present their research
results and encourage their full participation and engagement in the conference
so as to boost their career growth. The meeting will disseminate research
results and promote the research areas through talks, webpages, flyers, posters,
and proceedings, thus achieving positive impact to the society. Through
encouraging participants’ full engagement and fostering their new connections
and collaborations, the symposium will bring lasting impacts on the advancement
of Particle Image Velocimetry in the aforementioned areas of applications.
Moreover, the symposium will help increase the public scientific literacy and
engagement with science and technology through the conference proceedings, news
coverage and in-depth interviews carried by both conventional and social
media.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.