* 2243059
* EAGER: Increased Service Life of Sustainable Cements via Electric Fields
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2025
* Claire White, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Gianluca Cusatis
* 02/28/2025
* USD 300,000.00

This EArly-concept Grant for Exploratory Research (EAGER) project focuses on the
modification of hardened cement internal structure via the application of
electric field. Cement is a vital ingredient for the production of concrete, an
irreplaceable construction material that is second only to water in terms of
global usage. With population growth forecast to significantly increase over the
coming decades and, with it, substantial urbanization, the worldâ€™s insatiable
need for construction materials will continue. Thus, it is imperative that
cement, which is currently responsible for 7% of anthropogenic CO2 emissions,
undergoes rapid and drastic decarbonization to mitigate its effect on climate
change. The use of more sustainable cements will significantly reduce these CO2
emissions; however, these cements also need to possess long service-lives and
high levels of durability. This project addresses these needs via fundamental
research aiming at using applied electric fields to deliberately change the
atomic arrangements in sustainable cements prior to setting. It is envisioned
that more crystalline cements will be more durable due to enhanced thermodynamic
stability, elongating service-lives and thus providing additional CO2 savings in
the concrete industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will exploit electric
fields to deliberately increase the thermodynamic stability of traditional and
sustainable cements by enhancing the nanoscale ordering (i.e., degree of
crystallinity) of their main binder gels. Given that the degree of crystallinity
of a phase directly influences its thermodynamic stability, increasing the
binder gel crystallinity will improve resistance to chemically-induced changes
such as pH-induced decalcification. This will extend the service life of the
concrete, and also has the potential to improve the physical and mechanical
properties of the concrete. In this project, an electric field will be applied
to silicate-activated flash calcined metakaolin, silicate-activated slag and
ordinary Portland cement (OPC) paste, and its impact on reaction kinetics,
mechanical properties and degree of crystallinity will be measured using a suite
of experimental techniques that includes isothermal calorimetry, X-ray pair
distribution function analysis and cryo-transmission electron microscopy (cryo-
TEM). Moreover, to further enhance formation of crystalline binder phases the
synergy between high dielectric constant dopant nanomaterials and electric
fields will be explored, where the impact of (i) dopant morphology and (ii)
dopant dielectric constant on the degree of crystallinity will be uncovered.
Application of the electric field to these systems containing the high
dielectric constant dopant nanoparticles should reduce the energy associated
with electric-field-instigated crystal nucleation, and so too those containing
anisotropic dopant nanoparticles, thereby further enhancing the formation of a
crystalline binder.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.