* 2243394
* Striking a STEM Teacher Pipeline: A Capacity Building Project
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* Sonya Stephens, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 05/31/2024
* USD 74,996.00

The project aims to serve the national need of building capacity to address
effective strategies for recruiting and retaining mathematics teachers in high-
need schools. The project aspires to strengthen, re-imagine, and develop
partnerships between university faculty and high-need school districts to
structure necessary educational pipelines specific to mathematics education. A
key strategy to be used relies on these partnerships for opportunities to
establish students’ interest in teaching secondary mathematics at high-need
schools and eventually enroll participants in a Bachelor’s/Master’s curricular
pathway to secondary mathematics teaching. Founded on standards-based
instruction and tenets of culturally responsive teaching, the
Bachelor’s/Master’s curricular pathway will focus on examinations of
instructional practices that best address the complex demands of teaching in
high-need schools. Ultimately, the pathway could make positive contributions to
high-need schools and their local communities by developing certified,
culturally responsive teachers with this unique
preparation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Florida Agricultural and
Mechanical University (FAMU) includes partnerships with three high-need school
districts: FAMU Developmental Research School K-12, Gadsden County School
District and Jefferson County Schools K-12. Project goals include: 1) conducting
a needs assessment to better understand strengths and challenges at neighboring
high-need schools by engaging secondary students, teachers, and administrators,
STEM undergraduate majors, and faculty at FAMU; 2) strengthening partnerships
between FAMU and neighboring high-need schools to co-investigate and co-design
effective models to incorporate into a Bachelor’s/Master’s curricular pathway;
3) enhancing collaborations among FAMU faculty to build the capacity of
university faculty members to offer instruction and experiences that support
preservice mathematics teachers’ learning; 4) co-designing, with FAMU faculty
and neighboring high-need school districts, instructional tasks and field
clinical experiences for incorporation in a Bachelor’s/Master’s curricular
pathway 5) enhancing institutional knowledge of methodologies for recruitment,
preparation, and retention of STEM teachers for high-need schools; and 6)
systematically identifying project successes, impacts, challenges, and outcomes
to develop a more comprehensive project to support secondary mathematics teacher
candidates. This Capacity Building project is supported through the Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the effectiveness and
retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.