* 2243589
* REU Site: Research on Prescriptive Analytics for AI-enabled Operations Engineering
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2026
* Prasad Calyam, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Vladimir Pavlovic
* 02/28/2026
* USD 405,000.00

The goal of this REU site to fill the gap in student knowledge in prescriptive
analytics, a form of analytics which suggests decision options for how to take
advantage future opportunities or mitigate future risks. Prescriptive analytics
are particularly critical for key industries such as services, manufacturing and
agriculture that experience high expenditure, supply-demand mismatch, and
operational uncertainties. This REU program will not only equip students with
the required knowledge but provide them the skillset to conduct research on
delivering intelligent/scalable prescriptive analytics solutions to real-world
problems involving data-driven planning and decision making. In addition,
through the REU projects, numerous underrepresented minorities, women and first-
generation graduates, will be trained in doing independent research, which will,
in turn, motivate them to pursue advanced degrees in STEM.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The summer program will cultivate student interest in
developing several creative and novel research works, e.g., (i) real-time
scheduling models to optimize the planning and control of unmanned ground
vehicle (UGV) - transfer robots (a.k.a. transbots), (ii) creating a Blockchain
system for healthcare process improvement, (iii) designing decomposition-based
iterative optimization algorithms for dynamically dispatching and routing
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), i.e., drones and air taxis, and (iv)
understanding genotype, environment and management (G×E×M) interaction using
deep learning. In summary, exposing students to multidisciplinary research
projects in prescriptive analytics for AI-enabled operations engineering,
inculcating a passion for science and engineering, and cultivating their
presentation skillsets for pursuing advanced STEM degrees are the main goals of
the proposed REU Site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.