* 2243407
* Characterization of Oceanic Storm Systems using Microseism
* GEO,EAR
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2024
* Miaki Ishii, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2024
* USD 225,566.00

Due to a warming climate, the typical behaviors of tropical cyclones and other
oceanic storms are likely changing. There is great concern that over the coming
decades and centuries hurricanes will become more frequent, powerful, and
devastating to society, and especially coastal populations. Key information to
predict how these storms will evolve comes from the historic storm catalog.
These records of past storm behavior have been kept for over a century and are
used to help determine the patterns in storms up until today. However, one major
drawback to these records is that prior to the satellite era, the observations
for most storms were sourced from nearby ships or land-based weather stations;
therefore, the data are good for records of storms which were close to the coast
or to major shipping lanes, but those out to sea are likely to be poorly
reported or completely missed. A potential solution comes from long-running
ground motion data recordings. While these records are typically used to study
earthquakes, the ground motion during “quiet” times (i.e., without earthquakes)
has been shown to register off-shore ocean storm activity. As such, they could
fill in the gaps in storm records for the pre-satellite era. The researchers
will establish the relationship between the ground motion signals (seismic data)
and parameters of tropical cyclones (e.g., windspeed, location). This work will
be an essential first step towards utilizing large collections of historical
seismic data to develop a seismic-based catalog of storms. Such a catalog will
complement existing historical storm data to paint a more comprehensive picture
of how hurricanes have changed, and how they might continue to evolve over the
coming century.&lt;br/&gt;Up to the present, many studies have shown that
background seismic noise, or microseisms, are excited when a hurricane is
present. This is the case even for inland seismic stations or storms that are
out to sea. However, detailed analysis of how different storm parameters, such
as strength and location, affect the structure of the microseism observations
(i.e., the strength in different frequency bands across time) has yet to be
undertaken. This project will combine several comprehensive and modern data sets
to look for relationships that can be leveraged in future work to reduce bias
introduced by land- or ship-track-based observations in historical storm
catalogs. In particular, the HURDAT2 dataset from NOAA which gives the best
storm-track and a variety of other relevant storm parameters will be compared to
spectral data from seismic stations and wave-buoys. The work will focus on
storms in the Atlantic and seismic stations and buoys across the Eastern United
States over the last two decades. Once relationships that determine how the
response of wave-buoys and seismic observations change for different
combinations of storm parameters are found, the models will be used to invert
the problem, i.e., constraining storm characteristics using the seismic data.
This project will additionally require consideration and study of site-specific
effects as well as ways to filter the effects of small local weather systems
from the data. In undertaking this work, stronger constraints will also be put
on the physical mechanisms which excite microseisms as well as the locations in
which they are excited. The end result of this work will be an ability to
extract information about oceanic storms (i.e., the presence of a storm, its
strength, and its location) from seismic data alone, as well as an overall
improved understanding of how energy is transferred from fluid to the solid
Earth, paving a way for analyses of historical storms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.