* 2243644
* A glial-endothelial model to examine collective regulation of transport across the retina
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Maribel Vazquez, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 05/31/2026
* USD 389,724.00

The retinal neurons responsible for converting light into brain signals require
a tightly-controlled biochemical environment that is regulated by the blood-
retinal barrier. Dysfunction of this barrier leads to progressive damage in the
adult retina and is a major cause of vision loss. Barrier function has been
attributed largely to the vascular endothelial cells (EC) that line the inside
of retinal blood vessels. However, MÃ¼ller glia (MG) are cells unique to the
retina that wrap around these blood vessels to impact barrier maintenance and
how it responds to stressors. The interaction between EC and MG is poorly
understood and largely understudied. This project develops a microfluidic system
wherein layers of EC and MG are cultured atop one another to create a well-
defined biomimetic (biology mimicking) environment. The barrier properties of
these cultures will be investigated under normal conditions and in presence of
biochemical agents that cause barrier leakiness and alter glucose transport,
both of which result in neural degeneration and vision loss. The proposed
studies will increase our understanding of the role of MG in the regulation of
bloodborne factors across the blood-retinal barrier. The project will also
provide opportunities for both graduate and undergraduate students to examine
disparities in neurovascular health and its societal implications for
development of glial-mediated therapies and public health
policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators hypothesize that MG interact
bilaterally with cognate EC to preserve the integrity and modulate permeability
of the inner blood retinal barrier (iBRB) in response to biochemical changes. To
test this hypothesis, the project investigates how EC collectively form a
transport barrier with MG in an in vitro system that mimics critical aspects of
the adult iBRB. The Research Plan is organized under three Aims. The First Aim
will examine how collective EC and MG responses alter cellular behaviors and
molecular transport from blood vessels into neuroretina. Experiments will
measure changes in cell growth and morphology, expression of adhesion and tight
junction proteins, and the resistivity and permeability of cell barriers. The
Second Aim will develop a layered, microfluidic system to measure transport of
bloodborne factors from EC to MG by modeling appropriate retinal proximity with
interstitial flows. Tests will examine trans- and paracellular properties using
molecules of different sizes and known reactivity, as well as probe the route(s)
of transport across each cell layer. The Third Aim will assess how environments
of advanced glycation end products (AGEs) mechanistically alter resistivity and
permeability across EC and MG. The study will focus on AGEs-mediated, reactive
oxygen species (ROS), which increase the expression of both the glucose
transporter GLUT-1 and vascular endothelial growth factor alpha (VEGF), which in
turn causes abnormal angiogenesis and irreversible retinal damage in
adults.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.