* 2243619
* REU Site: Research in Consumer Networking Technologies
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Yi Shang, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Jill Denner
* 02/28/2026
* USD 405,000.00

This funding renews a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site at
the&lt;br/&gt;University of Missouri – Columbia. Undergraduate students will
investigate a variety of interesting and&lt;br/&gt;challenging problems that
involve consumer networking applications and services that are of
significance&lt;br/&gt;to the economy and quality of life in areas such as
social computing, health care, and public safety. The&lt;br/&gt;students will
participate in the faculty mentors’ on-going funded research, investigate
technically&lt;br/&gt;challenging issues and develop viable solutions and
insights. They will participate in professional&lt;br/&gt;development activities
to prepare them for future graduate studies and a broad range of
emerging&lt;br/&gt;computing careers. The site will focus on recruiting students
from non-PhD granting institutions with&lt;br/&gt;particular emphasis on
institutions in and around the state of Missouri.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
intellectual merit of the project rests with the leadership, an experienced
research group with&lt;br/&gt;excellent expertise and experience in the research
area. The research will focus on broad topics such as:&lt;br/&gt;software-
defined networking/virtualization, visual cloud computing, immersive learning
with virtual&lt;br/&gt;reality, mobile sensing and environment recognition,
securing networked consumer applications, and&lt;br/&gt;application-aware
network performance optimization. The research activities will lead to a
better&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the multitude of efficiency, performance,
reliability, scalability, and security issues and&lt;br/&gt;tradeoffs in
consumer networking technologies and related applications. Advanced
networking&lt;br/&gt;environments and software developed in the previous REU
site programs as well as novel testbeds such as&lt;br/&gt;the Missouri
University Science DMZ (demilitarized zone) environment, NSF-
supported&lt;br/&gt;CloudLab/FABRIC and Mizzou CAVE, smart device equipment, and
sensor-based monitoring will be&lt;br/&gt;leveraged by the participating
students in hands-on experiments within their research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.