* 2243955
* REU Site: Modeling the Dynamics of Biological Systems
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2024,01/31/2027
* Melissa Srougi, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 01/31/2027
* USD 404,868.00

This REU Site award to North Carolina State University, located in Raleigh, NC,
will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2024-2026. The focus of this program is to provide research and training in
modeling the dynamics of biological systems using advanced quantitative imaging
techniques under the mentorship of leaders in the field. It is anticipated that
a total of 30 students, primarily persons from under-represented groups,
disability status including the deaf/hard-of-hearing, and/or from schools with
limited research opportunities will be trained in the program. This REU program
will empower diverse undergraduates with skills in cutting-edge quantitative
imaging techniques and data analysis to drive novel research addressing
fundamental biological questions. Students will be supported to publish their
research, and many will present the results of their work at scientific
conferences. Assessment of the program will be done through the online SALG
URSSA tool. The NSF ETAP system will be used to register participants
(https://www.nsfetap.gov/). Students will be tracked after the program in order
to determine their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;REU students will conduct
research that will broaden the understanding of how complex cellular systems
adapt to various stimuli ranging from organismal developmental biology,
neurobiological function, down to the molecular level of how individual proteins
interact with specific areas of DNA. Research will be conducted in departments
including biology, chemistry, physics, and engineering. Students will work
together to maintain a research website, collaborate with the Science House for
K-12 STEM outreach training, and present their results at scientific
conferences. Trainees will cultivate a community of practice through weekly
cohort meetings on the responsible conduct of research; diversity, equity, and
inclusion; career pathways; and scientific communication. Students will apply
through an online application form and will be recruited broadly using close-
captioned video and guided application materials. Students will be selected by
program staff in collaboration with potential research mentors. More information
about the program is available at https://biotech.ncsu.edu/research-training/ or
by contacting the PI (Dr. Stefanie Chen at slchen2@ncsu.edu) or the co-PI (Dr.
Melissa Srougi at mcsrougi@ncsu.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.