* 2243362
* REU Site: University of Washington Physics
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Gray Rybka, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 03/31/2026
* USD 178,668.00

This award supports the renewal of the Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) site at the University of Washington, Seattle. The program offers a broad
selection of student projects from almost every sub-field of physics. It makes
use of the University of Washington's strong in-house "table-top" experimental
programs; its machine-shop facilities including a first-rate student shop;
CENPA, a DOE center-of-excellence in nuclear physics and astrophysics; and
theory opportunities ranging from the Institute for Nuclear Theory to Biophysics
to use of a twenty-teraflop local cluster, as well as research into physics
education. The award supports twelve students per summer. Selection will be
competitive, considering past academic performance, letters of recommendation,
and taking into account the potential for impacting the student's
career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each student participant will be partnered with a
UW faculty adviser. Several Physics faculty members participate as advisers, as
do selected faculty from affiliated departments. Student work includes: design,
construction, and commissioning of instrumentation; data collection and
analysis; numerical modeling; the development of software for such modeling; and
theory. Not infrequently this work culminates in a journal
publication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.