* 2243423
* LTREB: Sexual selection over time: evolutionary dynamics and outcomes of intense male competition and female mate choice in a lek mating system
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Emily DuVal, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Matt Carling
* 05/31/2028
* USD 126,365.00

The purpose of this project is to understand how evolution by sexual selection
occurs. It analyzes how differences in which individuals produce offspring and
how many offspring they produce lead to population-wide changes in behavior or
morphology. In natural populations, some individuals are often more successful
than others at producing offspring. This is especially true in “lek” mating
species, where males display to many females in one location, and females visit
many males before mating. Iconic examples of such behavior occur in peacocks,
birds-of-paradise, and small tropical birds called manakins. This project builds
on long-term monitoring of behavior in the lance-tailed manakin to investigate
patterns of individual reproductive success. By following the fate of individual
manakins and linking individual behavior and other traits to genetically
measured reproductive success, researchers will measure the strength of both
natural and sexual selection in a wild population. Broader impacts of this work
include intensive independent research opportunities for undergraduate students,
internationally and on the university campus. A collaboration hosts a live
stream of manakin display activity with supporting in-depth and accurate content
about evolution and behavior. The work produces training opportunities for post-
graduates and graduate students, who will take part in data collection and
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project advances three key areas of research
in evolution and animal behavior. First, it characterizes temporal variation in
the potential for sexual selection to occur (measured as standardized
reproductive variance). To do so, the work investigates three hypothesized
sources of this variation: breeding synchrony, climactic variation, and
variation in the availability of preferred mates. Second, it draws on strengths
of the long-term dataset to incorporate changes that occur across individual
lifespans into analyses of sexual selection. This allows for the separation of
developmental from selective processes to more accurately characterize targets
of selection. Long-term data include video of displays by the same males across
their breeding tenure, and these will be analyzed to objectively measure changes
in display performance over time. Finally, this study directly quantifies
genetic changes in the population over time. These data will be used to assess
the relative contribution of multiple sources of evolutionary change, including
viability selection, gene flow, and drift as well as sexual selection. Samples
archived during this study build potential for later genomic analysis to
understand the genes underlying sexual selection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.