* 2243541
* Building Capacity to Develop STEM Teacher Leaders in Montana Rural and American Indian Schools
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2023,10/31/2023
* Fenqjen Luo, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Julio Soto
* 10/31/2023
* USD 74,725.00

This project aims to serve the national need of building capacity to develop
high-quality science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) teacher
leaders in rural and American Indian reservation communities. Like other rural
states, Montana has a shortage of high-quality STEM teacher leaders in many
geographically isolated, STEM-underrepresented, and high-needs schools and
communities, particularly on and near Montana’s seven American Indian
reservations. High-quality STEM teacher leaders can make a huge
difference—inspiring young students to learn STEM content knowledge and pursue
STEM careers, which ultimately broadens the diversity of the country’s STEM
workforce. To develop high-quality STEM teacher leaders, qualified practicing
STEM teachers must be recruited, trained, retained and provided ongoing support
to develop their teaching competencies and hone their leadership
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Montana State University will
assess the needs of STEM teachers in potential partner schools on or near four
reservations (Flathead, Blackfeet, Northern Cheyenne, and Crow) while building a
network of collaborators within and beyond the university. Together, these
partners will develop effective methods for recruiting and selecting experienced
and exemplary STEM teachers to become teacher leaders; and identify or recommend
a meaningful, culturally sustaining teacher leadership development model
appropriate for high-need rural and reservation communities. Our ultimate goal
is to build the capacity to support a cohort of dedicated, high-quality and
culturally sustaining teacher leaders who can implement and develop exemplary
practices for supporting rural and American Indian students. The findings and
suggested practices generated from this project will advance our knowledge and
enhance our expertise on creating scaffolds to develop experienced, exemplary
STEM teachers to become teacher leaders in high-need rural and minority school
districts. This Capacity Building project is supported through the Robert Noyce
Teacher Scholarship Program. The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the effectiveness and
retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.