* 2243346
* I-Corps: NextG Wireless Communications
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/2022,10/31/2023
* Habarakada Madanayake, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the expansion
of wireless communications that are expected to be a valuable resource to
wireless network operators and defense contractors. The Federal Communications
Commission (FCC) auctions valuable airwave licenses that can be used to build
faster and more powerful 5G networks. A recent FCC auction raised $22.9 billion.
With the proposed technology, wireless network operators may use their most
expensive spectrum licenses to double capacity and enable future growth of their
customer base and data rate expansions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on the development of technology to expand future wireless
networks. The rapid growth in wireless devices has caused a spectral scarcity in
sub-6 GHz “legacy” bands. Although the mm-wave spectrum is abundant and the
future of wireless relies on moving to mm-wave bands, the legacy frequencies
remain important for communications due to favorable physics for highly
scattering urban environments. Consequently, there will always be demand for the
sub-6 GHz spectral band from commercial, public safety, and military systems.
In-band full duplex (IBFD) radios can simultaneously transmit and receive (STAR)
two information-carrying signals over the same bandwidth, thus effectively
doubling the bandwidth of operation and the capacity of the wireless channel.
IBFD offers an advantage for wireless communications in legacy spectral bands.
However, IBFD suffers from self-interference (SI) (shadowing the signal of
interest (SOI) due to transmitter signal leakage to the receiver). The IBFD is
especially challenging in multiple-input and multiple-output (MIMO) radios due
to mutual coupling (MC) (shadowing the SOI due to transmission from neighboring
antenna elements). Practical and low-complex designs capable of performing STAR
in MIMO radios are crucial for the future of IBFD.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.