* 2243410
* Building Capacity to Address STEM Educator Shortages in Rural South Dakota
* EDU,DUE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Bentley Sayler, Black Hills State University
* Standard Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 03/31/2024
* USD 74,992.00

This project aims to serve the national need for preparing high quality STEM
teachers in rural low-income areas. More specifically, the project team will
help address the STEM teacher shortage in rural South Dakota by exploring
factors that inspire students to pursue STEM teaching. At the same time the
project also aims to strengthen partnerships with high-need rural and tribal
schools within the region. The project will survey and interview teachers and
administrators at rural schools and districts, as well as recent alumni, K-12
and university students, and personnel from other Noyce-funded STEM educator
preparation programs. Results will bring light upon the needs of potential
partner schools in recruiting, retaining and supporting STEM educators,
particularly early career teachers with backgrounds similar to the students they
serve. Findings will also inform the structure of secondary STEM teacher
preparation programs and will provide direction in creating a recruitment and
support plan geared toward students from rural and low-income
backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Black Hills State University
includes partnerships with the Center for the Advancement of Mathematics and
Science Education (CAMSE), the Center for American Indian Studies (CAIS), and up
to 10 regional school districts. Project activities include conducting two needs
assessments. One will center on high needs-schools and districts with a focus on
rural and tribal schools within a 150-mile radius of BHSU. The goal is to
establish formal partnerships that address the identified needs. The other needs
assessment will center on high school students, university students, and teacher
education graduates, and will focus on the needs of rural and tribal
communities. The outcomes of these assessments are intended to support the
development of a recruitment plan for a future Track 1 Noyce Teacher Scholarship
Program proposal. The project also aims to review the structure of STEM majors
at BHSU and evaluate the feasibility of restructuring the academic programs to
align with other teacher preparation programs, particularly those in rural
areas. Results may inform recruitment, retention, and early career support
strategies of STEM teacher preparation programs at other small, rural, primarily
undergraduate institutions. This Capacity Building project is supported through
the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports
talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12
STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master
teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
effectiveness and retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.