* 2243288
* Investigating Factors Influencing Engineering and Computer Science Teachers’ Professional Identity, Support Networks, Effectiveness, and Retention
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Jessica Gale, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Kimberly Tanner
* 04/30/2026
* USD 545,239.00

This project aims to serve the national need for recruiting and retaining
effective engineering and computer science (CS) teachers. As engineering and CS
have emerged as priorities in K-12 education, there is a pressing need to
increase understanding of the experiences of engineering and CS teachers and
factors that influence their retention and effectiveness. Although there is a
strong research base on the retention of mathematics and science teachers,
little research has examined factors impacting the retention and effectiveness
of engineering or CS teachers. The purpose of this research is to investigate
how engineering and CS teachers’ professional identity and support networks
impact their retention and effectiveness in high-need schools. Additionally, the
research aims to explore how school or school district-level characteristics
might be associated with teachers’ professional identity, support networks,
effectiveness, and retention. Further, the research aims to understand the
influence of teacher education programs on engineering and CS teachers’
effectiveness and retention. Ultimately, this work will contribute to our
understanding of how best to support and retain effective engineering and CS
teachers in high-need K-12 schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at the
Georgia Institute of Technology includes partnerships with the Georgia
Department of Education, Georgia College and State University, and Piedmont
University. Three project goals guide the work of the principal investigators.
First is to analyze state-level engineering and CS teacher mobility, attrition,
and effectiveness data. Second is to develop and administer a national survey
around professional identity, self-efficacy, support networks, effectiveness,
and retention. Third, and finally, is to conduct case studies to develop deep,
contextualized understandings of engineering and CS teachers’ experiences.
Employing a sequential explanatory mixed-methods design, the project will
investigate an array of research questions aligned with these three study goals.
Research questions include: What factors influence engineering and CS teachers’
persistence in high-need schools? What are the relationships among professional
identity, self-efficacy, and retention for engineering and CS teachers? And what
experiences influence the professional identities, self-efficacy, effectiveness,
retention, and persistence of engineering and CS teachers? The broader impacts
of this research will be at the national level. Identifying factors that
influence engineering and CS teachers’ effectiveness and retention, specifically
among teachers in high-need schools, has the potential to support teacher
education programs in preparing engineering and CS teachers in the future. The
project also has the potential to contribute to STEM education literature by
generating new insights about the interconnections among teacher professional
identity, personal networks, support structures, self-efficacy, teacher
effectiveness, and teacher retention. This Track 4: Noyce Research project is
supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The
Noyce program supports talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to
become effective K-12 STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to
become STEM master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports
research on the effectiveness and retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.