* 2243419
* Building Capacity to Transform Practices in STEM Education
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2024
* Konstantinos Alexakos, CUNY Medgar Evers College
* Standard Grant
* Patrice Waller
* 03/31/2024
* USD 125,000.00

The Building Capacity to Transform Practices in STEM Education project aims to
serve the national need to address the shortage of highly qualified STEM
teachers, which negatively impacts the delivery and quality of education
provided to students in large high-need school districts. This project seeks to
recruit and train biology and chemistry majors to become secondary teachers in
New York City Department of Education schools. Activities include the
development, outreach and recruitment efforts specifically focused on increasing
the pool of prospective science teachers of color. The project will establish
the inter- and intra- institutional structures for articulation, curricula, and
other recruitment and training components for a future Medgar Evers College
/Brooklyn College collaborative proposal. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This capacity
building project includes partnerships with the School of Education, the School
of Science, Health and Technology at Medgar Evers College (MEC), and the School
of Education at Brooklyn College (BC). The project will be structured as a
5-year BS/MA dual degree project across the two educational institutions and
aims to create an academic pipeline that will support the successful transition
of students from undergraduate education at MEC to graduate studies at BC. The
project also plans to develop and pilot a sustainable learning community that
will serve as a foundation for mentorship to support students from pre-service
to in-service teaching, with a focus on the social and emotional wellness. The
project will identify partners/stakeholders, and pilot professional development
activities that will emphasize inquiry-based pedagogical workshops, and promote
continuing education and retention of novice science teachers. This project is
unique in its approach because it will holistically target factors that affect
STEM teachers’ recruitment and retention and will potentially contribute to
research on increasing the pool of prospective science teachers of color. This
capacity building project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the effectiveness and
retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.