* 2243641
* I-Corps:  Artificial Intelligence (AI)-assisted sustainable cement manufacturing technology
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2023,07/31/2024
* Chengcheng Tao, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 07/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a computational technology for building sustainable cement
construction materials. Cement manufacturing is one of the largest and most
energy and carbon-intensive industries in the world. Reducing the energy costs
and the carbon footprint of cement manufacturing may offer an opportunity to
improve profitability and lower environmental impact. The proposed technology
may be used by research scientists and decision makers to improve performance,
sustainability, and economic value of the cementitious materials and
manufacturing process. The pathway for improving the sustainability of
cementitious material manufacturing and product quality is low energy input,
leading to a low carbon footprint and high economic benefits. End users include
product manufacturers, cement and concrete admixture companies, codes and
standards committees, and public decision-makers. This technology may be
important to ensuring development is planned and conducted in a manner that is
consistent with an accurate view of sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
I-Corps project is based on the development of data-driven physical and chemical
modeling for cement materials and manufacturing process. The proposed technology
integrates the advanced reaction process simulation, cementitious materials
modeling, and artificial intelligence optimization and machine learning
algorithms. The technology has the potential to effectively provide optimal
operational conditions for low-cost, low-carbon, high-performance cementitious
materials and a manufacturing industry based on user-defined criteria. In
addition, a user-friendly platform is a part of the proposed design to
facilitate the use of artificial intelligence technology in improving the
sustainability of construction materials industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.