* 2243754
* REU Site: Research Experience for Undergraduates in Biosensing - Engineering Molecular or Nanoscale Signal Transducers for High-Performance Bio-Detection
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Xiaoshan Zhu, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 08/31/2026
* USD 374,197.00

The three-year REU Site: Engineering Molecular or Nanoscale Signal Transducers
for High-Performance Bio-Detection at the University of Nevada Reno will engage
8 undergraduate students for 10 weeks per year in the frontiers of biosensing.
Biosensors are important tools in addressing fundamental challenges related to
human well-being (good health, effective agricultural production of food and
green energy, and safe natural environments). Research projects will train
participants to gain the state-of-the-art scientific/engineering concepts and
skills about biosensing through developing biosensors and applying them to human
health, agriculture, and the environment. Students will be recruited from
underrepresented minority groups, women, and students with disabilities, who
traditionally have limited access to undergraduate research facilities. This REU
site, integrating research and training, will help grow the workforce for
emerging R&amp;D opportunities for students, and prepare them as future leaders
to further advance knowledge in biosensing, solving more challenging questions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three-year REU Site: Engineering Molecular
or Nanoscale Signal Transducers for High-Performance Bio-Detection at the
University of Nevada Reno will engage 8 undergraduate students for 10 weeks per
year in the frontiers of biosensing. Research projects featuring molecular or
nanoscale entities (fluorophores, proteins, nanoparticles, nanotubes, 2D
nanomaterials, etc.) will be engineered as signal transducers of biosensors.
Such signal transducers (due to their specific optical properties or
electronics) can significantly enhance biosensor sensitivities, and also enable
biosensors for inner-cellular or in vivo detection, wearables development, etc.
Since these projects converge new technologies and ideas from widely diverse
fields of knowledge undergraduate students will engage in opportunities to learn
cutting-edge biosensing technologies integrating knowledge of multiple-
disciplines Students will be trained to design and develop biosensors
incorporated with molecular or nanoscale signal transducers and characterize the
detection performance of biosensors. They will then apply biosensors to address
open challenges in human health, agriculture, and the environment. Students are
expected to gain significant research experience in the biosensing area and grow
the workforce or future leaders for emerging R&amp;D opportunities in biosensing
fields. The participating faculty will also gain better professionalism and
proficiency in developing the next-generation workforce in STEM fields. The
outcomes of this REU site will be disseminated to the public and attract more
students to the STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded
with the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.