* 2243323
* Building a Pathway for Recruiting and Preparing STEM Teachers in Rural West Central Illinois
* EDU,DUE
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2028
* Robert Mann, Western Illinois University
* Continuing Grant
* Mindy Capaldi
* 02/29/2028
* USD 908,236.00

This project aims to address the national need for high-quality math and science
teachers who are well-prepared to teach in high-need school districts, including
rural districts. Many public schools in rural West Central Illinois are
underfunded, have small populations, and are in communities with high poverty
rates. This project will serve these partner rural districts by recruiting and
preparing STEM teachers for their secondary schools. Scholars will complete STEM
curriculum and will benefit from a high-quality teacher preparation program and
induction support. They will receive mentoring and advising from both STEM and
education faculty, tutoring for subject area exams, and small equipment grants
to help build their classroom materials. To facilitate professional development,
scholars will have access to a workshop series that focuses on how to teach
secondary STEM topics, including how to use pedagogies that enable the scholars
to teach these topics in a way that is culturally sensitive and aware. Scholars
will also complete a summer seminar that will prepare them to teach in high-need
districts and will have the option to complete an undergraduate research
experience and/or participate in other pre-service teaching
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Western Illinois University
(WIU) includes partnerships with Black Hawk College (BHC) and five local high-
need districts (Galesburg, Macomb, Bushnell-Prairie, Fulton County, and Moline-
Coal Valley). The project goals are 1) to graduate 24 scholars and place them in
local, high-need districts; 2) to grant scholarships to at least six students
from BHC; 3) to build a pathway for STEM education majors who graduate from
local high schools, start at BHC, finish their degrees at WIU, and teach in
local secondary schools; 4) to expand opportunities to introduce early STEM
majors to the theory and practice of teaching STEM; and 5) to prepare STEM
teachers who are broadly trained in both content and pedagogy and specifically
trained to be culturally sensitive and aware. The intellectual merit of the
project is to determine the efficacy and impact of all project activities,
including participation in seminars and workshops focused on preparation for
teaching in high-need districts. The project team will also measure the impact
and effectiveness of expanding the existing WIU Learning Assistant program. The
broader impacts of the proposed activities include addressing the critical need
for well-qualified STEM educators; recruitment activities to attract a diverse
candidate pool; and demonstrating the benefits of STEM teaching and the
opportunities available in STEM secondary education. Furthermore, expansion of
the Learning Assistant program will support all introductory STEM courses at
both WIU and BHC. The project includes specific plans for formative and
summative evaluation of all activities; dissemination of project results will be
made through traditional channels, such as conference presentations and journal
articles. This Track 1: Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through
the Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports
talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12
STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master
teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
effectiveness and retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.