* 2243878
* REU Site: Computational and Data Intensive Astrophysics at the University of Florida
* MPS,AST
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* Desika Narayanan, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 04/30/2024
* USD 118,475.00

This award will support the renewal of a 10-week summer REU (Research
Experiences for Undergraduates) Site program serving 8 student interns per year
at the University of Florida (UF). The REU program will leverage access to
cutting-edge supercomputing facilities that include the UFâ€™s Informatics
Institute as well as the newly established AI initiative on campus.
Participating students will be involved in research that will provide training
in a critically emerging area for careers both within and outside the academia.
The program will also provide educational opportunities outside of the
laboratory to build professional writing, oral presentations, and networking
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program is fully committed to working toward
the recruitment, admission, training, and empowerment of a diverse REU cohort.
To this end they are fostering long-term relationships with regional colleges
and universities with limited research opportunities while also recruiting
nationally. They intend to partner with other undergraduate programs on the UF
campus to broaden the reach of these opportunities to nearly 100 undergraduates
every summer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.