* 2243356
* Increasing the Value of Education for Secondary Teachers in STEM
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Melissa Rhoten, Longwood University
* Continuing Grant
* John Haddock
* 05/31/2028
* USD 769,689.00

This project aims to serve the national need for preparing and retaining highly
qualified secondary science and mathematics teachers who are prepared to teach
in high-need rural school districts. An underlying aim of the project is to
build pathways from community colleges to a four-year STEM degree and teaching
licensure. The project will provide scholarships and academic and co-curricular
support to twenty (20) talented undergraduate students who are majoring in
biology, chemistry, mathematics, or physics and are committed to a STEM teaching
career. Through mentoring and community building, the project will support
students as they complete their associate’s and bachelor’s degrees and, after
graduation, enter the teaching profession. Teacher preparation and induction
will emphasize strong content and pedagogical knowledge and will target
development of cultural competencies. This will enable high-need schools in
rural Virginia and other areas nationwide to provide their K-12 students a
strong and inclusive science and mathematics education. This, in turn, will help
prepare many of these same students for the STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project at Longwood University includes
partnerships with Patrick and Henry Community College, Virginia Western
Community College, and local educational agencies in Prince Edward, Henry, and
Franklin counties in Virginia. The project will be guided by several goals. The
first goal is to establish a cross-institutional team of faculty and staff
members committed to recruiting undergraduate STEM majors and preparing them to
become certified teachers. Second, over the five-year duration of the project,
the investigators will recruit and provide financial and enhanced programmatic
support to twenty (20) high-quality undergraduate STEM majors, of whom
approximately 75% will be community college transfers, to prepare them to teach
biology, chemistry, mathematics, or physics in high-need rural schools. Using a
grow-your-own approach of recruiting students from their local areas and later
placing them as STEM teachers in these same areas, the project will address
critical teacher shortages in rural Southside and Southwest Virginia. Project
support for teacher preparation and induction will include implementing high-
impact practices such as enhanced faculty and peer mentoring, a summer bridge
experience, cohort building, and a professional community of practice. For a
third goal, the project will foster comprehensive, mixed methods formative and
summative evaluation to: (1) provide assessment and feedback for adaptive
project management and implementation and (2) generate evidence-based new
knowledge for recruiting, supporting, preparing, and retaining community college
and other students to become successful, culturally competent STEM teachers in
high-need rural schools. In concert with this, the collaborative partnership
will strengthen Longwood University's ongoing efforts to increase the number of
students from traditionally marginalized groups in local schools who pursue
careers in STEM fields. A fourth goal is to disseminate outcomes and lessons
learned through peer-reviewed publications and state, regional, and national
conferences. In turn, this will promote an ongoing national need to recruit and
retain more STEM teachers who will serve rural communities. This Track 1:
Scholarships and Stipends project is supported through the Robert Noyce Teacher
Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports talented STEM
undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12 STEM teachers
and experienced, exemplary K-12 teachers to become STEM master teachers in high-
need school districts. It also supports research on the effectiveness and
retention of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need school
districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.