* 2243975
* REU Site: Student Training in Oceanography, Remote Sensing, and Meteorology (STORM)
* GEO,AGS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Ankur Desai, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 06/30/2026
* USD 400,676.00

To solve the most pressing problems facing the planet, tomorrowâ€™s leaders in
climate, weather, and water enterprise and research must grapple with an
enormous variety and complexity of Earth observations from space, on the ground,
and in the ocean in collaborative, diverse team settings. The Student Training
in Oceanography, Remote sensing and Meteorology (STORM) REU will support
development of these leaders by training a total of 30 students (10 each summer)
over three years in an immersive 10-week summer research program at the
University of Wisconsin-Madison. STORM students will emerge from the REU
prepared to tackle challenging problems in climate, weather, and water with a
set of research, technical, and interpersonal skills critical to success across
STEM careers. Students will work with faculty and scientists to design and
produce cutting-edge research in oceanography, remote sensing, and meteorology
while developing the foundational knowledge and skills necessary for research
independence, including computer programming, literature reviews, and oral and
poster presentations. Students will also participate in weekly professional
development and interpersonal skill-building opportunities that will provide
breadth and context to the research experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;STORM is a
collaborative effort among the co-located Department of Atmospheric and Oceanic
Sciences (AOS), the Nelson Institute Center for Climatic Research (CCR), the
Space Science and Engineering Center (SSEC), and the Cooperative Institute for
Meteorological Satellite Studies (CIMSS). STORM aims to expand the pool of
future researchers and develop a diverse STEM workforce by providing hands-on
student engagement, integrating intentional recruitment and support for
improving diversity, and addressing critical, societally-relevant research
questions. Students will receive professional development that includes
improving coding skills, exploring their science identity, discussing career
paths, skills for science communication, networking, self advocacy, and
discussing the importance of mental health. The objectives of this REU site are
exposure, enrichment, and empowerment. The site aims through exposure to provide
undergraduate students with their first, or near-first, experience in STEM
research, specifically in the atmospheric and oceanic sciences. The experience
will be enriched by promoting the development of a set of research, self-
reflection, and interpersonal skills that will serve undergraduate students in a
variety of STEM careers paths. The REU site will aim for empowerment by
instilling a sense of self-awareness, ownership and agency in each undergraduate
student so that they can more readily navigate STEM careers as they
are.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.