* 2243182
* REU Site: Pathways to Inclusive Science: Emerging Field Techniques
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Ian Billick, Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2024
* USD 127,694.00

This REU Site award to the Rocky Mountain Biological Laboratory, located in
Gothic, Colorado, will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during
the summer of 2023. The program recruits students nationally, building on
established collaborative relationships with the Los Angeles community colleges.
Students apply online, and submit essays and letters of reference. Students for
whom the program will have a large impact, including students who would be
unable to participate in summer research without financial support, are
encouraged to apply. Ten students, primarily from schools with limited research
opportunities, will be trained in the program in 2023. The goal is that at least
80% of the participants will be minority students and at least 40% of the
students will have a community college background. Students will learn how
research is conducted, many will present the results of their work at scientific
conferences. Approximately one-third of the students will publish results in
scientific journals. Assessment of the program will be done through the online
SALG URSSA tool. The NSF ETAP system will be used to register participants.
Students will be required to register in the NSF ETAP system (etap.nsf.gov) and
tracked after the program to determine their career
paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theme of the program is Pathways to Inclusive
Science: Emerging Field Techniques. We will provide training and research
opportunities for participants to integrate emerging techniques in remote
sensing and data analytics into the field sciences. Students design and
implement a field research program and present results orally and in writing at
the end of the summer. Students also participate in professional development
opportunities, including sessions on responsible conduct of research, training
in field safety and Title IX, and graduate and career opportunities. More
information about the program is available by visiting http://rmbl.org , or by
contacting the PI (Dr. Ian Billick at ibillick@rmbl.org) or the co-PI (Dr. Ian
Breckheimer at ikb@rmbl.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.