* 2243341
* CAREER: Recovering complex associations from high-dimensional genomic data
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2023
* Barbara Engelhardt, The J. David Gladstone Institutes
* Continuing Grant
* Sylvia Spengler
* 03/31/2023
* USD 138,428.00

In this proposal, the PI will analyze current genomic data using powerful modern
machine learning methods to help make personalized medicine for each patient a
reality. Imagine using genomic data and clinical traits to accurately predict
risk for preterm birth early in gestation, or a college student's risk for
future heart attacks, and tailoring preventative measures to the specific risk
mechanisms. This research addresses a core theme of machine learning methods
applied to scientific data: how to robustly and efficiently build predictive
models using complex hidden structure in high dimensional data with limited
numbers of samples, as is common in genomic and biomedical data. This proposal
addresses a number of fundamental questions: How to use correlation among
features to share strength across limited numbers of samples? How to test for
causality of an observation in a cell on disease? How to encode biological
structure in nonlinear functions? These fundamental questions in applied machine
learning and statistical genetics will be addressed through the creation of
hierarchical models and methods for computationally tractable analyses. These
projects will enable recovery of genomic signals with predictive ability
essential for personalized medicine. The PI also plans active engagement with
underrepresented minorities in computer science and making publicly available
software.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to develop computationally
tractable structured hierarchical models to find complex signals in genomic data
that are hidden to current methods that will be used to build predictive models
using existing genomic study data, and to use these predictive variants to
precisely quantify disease risk for each patient. Success of these goals impacts
personalized medicine, enabling a complete understanding of the genetic
regulators of disease and making individual-specific disease risk prediction and
treatment a reality. Although linear models have been used to analyze scientific
data for 125 years, these methods assume unlimited availability of samples and
simple linear structure, and fail to recover variants with more complex
associations. In genomic data, predictive signal is often compositional,
including linear, sparse, low-rank, or nonlinear structure. This proposed
research will drastically shift current scientific data analysis by developing
efficient methods that recover predictive genetic variants with complex effects.
This research is organized around three integrated projects. 1) High-dimensional
correlations. Current methods for correlation do not exploit multiple,
correlated traits to improve power to find relationships between two high-
dimensional sets of observations. The PI will develop computationally tractable
models and robust inference methods for structured latent variable models in the
presence of substantial observation noise. 2) Sparse, nonlinear regression for
prediction by exploiting nonaddictive effects. Standard predictive models for
genomics assume that associations are sparse and additive across predictors;
nonlinear terms are not regularized appropriately. The PI will develop a
predictive model that robustly recovers variants with additive and nonadditive
effects. 3) Causal inference to study the mechanism of genetic regulation of
disease. Current models of causal inference in genomics make unrealistic
assumptions and fail to exploit modern machine learning approaches to
nonlinearity, regularization, and approximate inference. The PI will develop a
hierarchical model for causal analysis to pinpoint the cellular mechanisms of
disease.