* 2243733
* MS PHD'S Access, Inclusion, and Mentoring (AIM) in Geosciences Program
* GEO,RISE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Ashanti Johnson, East Central University
* Standard Grant
* Brandon Jones
* 05/31/2025
* USD 164,796.00

For twelve years Minorities Striving and Pursuing Higher Degrees of Success in
Earth System Science (MS PHD’S) provided professional development, networking
opportunities and cohort support via membership within a virtual community
comprised of peers, junior- and senior-level researchers and educators. MS PHD’S
became a model program within the geoscience community. The current effort seeks
to convene subject matter experts, program mentors, staff, mentees and business
and industry partners as a planning team to orchestrate the next phase of the
program - MS PHD’S Access, Inclusion, and Mentoring (AIM) in Geosciences. The
planning team will finalize the MS PHD’S AIM in Geoscience Program’s structure
and activities to meet the needs of participants as they move into an even more
dynamic, tech-savvy, post-COVID work/learning environment. With support, the
planning team will develop the blueprint necessary to launch MS PHD’S AIM as a
robust intervention to advance NSF’s mission to promote the progress of science;
to advance national health, prosperity and welfare. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MS
PHD’S Access, Inclusion, and Mentoring (AIM) in Geosciences Program (MS PHD’S
AIM) will support NSF’s mission to promote the progress of science; to advance
national health, prosperity and welfare. Given the continued need to facilitate
the support and continued professional development for the next generation of
geoscience scholars from historically excluded groups, this effort seeks to plan
the implementation of the program with the following goals in mind: review past
program activities; develop guidance based on current literature; identify and
recruit key organizations and individuals; assist in development efforts to
achieve sustainability of the initiative; develop specific strategies to enhance
broader impacts; ideate possible connections with other STEM fields; and create
virtual tools for sustained participant engagement and information
sharing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by NSF's Geoscience
Opportunities for Leadership in Diversity (GOLDEN) and the Established Program
to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.