* 2243260
* Building a Culturally-Competent STEM Teacher Workforce in Northeast Ohio
* EDU,DUE
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Catherine Lane, Baldwin Wallace University
* Standard Grant
* Julio Soto
* 05/31/2024
* USD 124,988.00

The project aims to serve the local, regional, and national needs of recruiting,
training, and graduating more STEM educators in K-12 schools and ensuring those
students have the training necessary to succeed in diverse classrooms. To
address these needs and build the capacity necessary to implement a Noyce
program, Baldwin Wallace University will develop a new STEM-anchored education
program; establish stronger recruitment pipelines for that program with area
K–12 schools and community colleges, including the creation of a new dual
enrollment program focused on STEM education; and improve the quality of
training that students receive in culturally competent practices (CCP) to better
prepare graduates to succeed as STEM educators. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project at Baldwin Wallace University (BWU) includes partnerships with Cleveland
Metropolitan School District, Fairview Park City School District, Cuyahoga
Community College, and Lorain County Community College. The project objectives
are to (1) design and launch a new STEM education bachelor’s program that
couples a major in biology or mathematics with the courses necessary to meet the
teacher licensure requirements in the State of Ohio; (2) improve the education
and STEM faculty’s knowledge of and capacity to integrate instruction in the use
of culturally competent practices into the curriculum; (3) strengthen existing
partnerships with area high schools by establishing a recruitment pipeline into
the STEM education program; and (4) strengthen existing partnerships with area
community colleges with a focus on recruiting transfer students in the STEM
education program. These activities will improve BWU’s capacity to meet the
growing local, regional, and national need for additional, well-trained,
culturally competent STEM educators. Additionally, as part of the eventual Track
1 proposal, the project leaders will study how the integration of culturally
competent practices into the curriculum might broaden the perspectives of and
increase the resilience of young STEM educators. The program evaluation will
rely on interviews of the project team and partners to establish the fidelity to
proposed project activities and the extent to which those activities achieved
the proposed outputs. This Capacity Building project is supported through the
Robert Noyce Teacher Scholarship Program (Noyce). The Noyce program supports
talented STEM undergraduate majors and professionals to become effective K-12
STEM teachers and experienced, exemplary K-12 STEM teachers to become STEM
master teachers in high-need school districts. It also supports research on the
persistence, retention, and effectiveness of K-12 STEM teachers in high-need
school districts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.