* 2243606
* Collaborative Research: EAGER: Expedited Measurement of Englacial Temperatures by Means of Melt-Probe-Deployed Distributed Temperature Sensing
* GEO,OPP
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2024
* Dale Winebrenner, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Paul Cutler
* 11/30/2024
* USD 240,377.00

Knowledge of basal temperatures and geothermal fluxes underneath the Greenland
and Antarctic ice sheets is key to modeling ice-sheet flow, to finding locations
where climate records are preserved, and in general to better understand
subglacial conditions that influence ice-sheet evolution. Yet such information
has been difficult to acquire and there exist limited basal temperature and
geothermal flux measurements from a few, isolated locations. This project will
develop and test a new measurement capability that would couple unreinforced
single-mode optical fiber with melt probe technology. The project aims to
develop and test a capability that would greatly expand the number and
distribution of temperature and flux observations from ice sheets. An immediate
goal is to enhance the measurement capabilities of probes to be used by the
Center for Oldest Ice Exploration (COLDEX) Science and Technology
Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team will augment the capability of melt probes
that are presently being built for COLDEX to deploy optical dust-loggers to
depths up to 3000 m in Greenland and East Antarctica. The team will add to each
probe 3000 m of single-mode optical fiber to unspool as the probe descends.
Distributed Temperature Sensing at the deployment site will be realized with
minimal additional surface equipment and a single additional field team
member.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.