* 2243578
* Collaborative Research: Expanding the diversity of iron oxidation mechanisms via genetics, microscopy and 'omics in Leptothrix
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Emily J Fleming, Chico State Enterprises
* Continuing Grant
* Alberto Perez-Huerta
* 05/31/2026
* USD 113,906.00

Iron is practically ubiquitous across Earth, making it an important component in
the chemistry of life and in the chemistry of soils, sediments, and groundwater.
Iron in contact with an oxidant such as oxygen can result in iron oxidation.
When iron oxidation occurs in soils, it can lead to the sequestration of
nutrients and metals; thus, understanding the mechanisms and controls on iron
oxidation is critical. Microorganisms can catalyze iron oxidation, yet the
extent of microorganism contribution to oxidation remains relatively unknown.
This project evaluates microbial iron oxidation mechanisms (genes/proteins) to
help identify when, and how much, microbial iron oxidation is occurring in the
environment. This project specifically uses the iron-oxidizing bacterium
Leptothrix cholodnii SP-6 to explore new iron-oxidizing mechanisms. The advanced
knowledge can be applied to determine controls on iron-oxidizing bacterial
activity and how to harness it for bioremediation, water treatment, resource
recovery, and other applications. This project trains two graduate students and
numerous undergraduates. In addition to public lectures, hands-on activities,
and lab tours, a major outreach activity includes "Microbes in the Wild"
workshops for middle school girls and first-generation college-bound students,
who learn about the power of microbes to address environmental challenges.
Culturing, genetics, and 'omics research tasks are being incorporated into
college classes as multi-week experiential learning
units.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A new genetic system in the heterotrophic iron-
oxidizing bacterium Leptothrix cholodnii SP-6 provides an unprecedented
opportunity to reveal new iron oxidation mechanisms. L. cholodnii SP-6 is easily
culturable and its genome has numerous predicted metal oxidation genes including
genes for multiheme cytochromes and multicopper oxidases with homologs in other
iron oxidizers. Yet, the genome is missing well-known iron oxidase genes, making
L. cholodnii SP-6 a good model organism to investigate novel iron oxidation
mechanisms. This project is using a combination of culturing, comparative
genomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, genetics, and microscopy to determine the
iron oxidation mechanisms in Leptothrix, notably SP-6. The research aims include
(1) discover candidate iron oxidation genes in L. cholodnii SP-6 via transposon
sequencing (TnSeq), transcriptomics, and proteomics. A high throughput pipeline
for culturing and assaying iron oxidation is being developed so that as many
genes as possible can be screened. (2) Explore the environmental diversity and
frequency of Leptothrix iron oxidation genes via isolation and genomic
characterization of new Leptothrix spp. followed by comparative genomics study.
(3) Validate iron oxidation genes in L. cholodnii SP-6 via genetic methods of
knockout and complementation. (4) Determine the role of iron oxidation proteins
in biomineralization by labeling and localizing key iron oxidation proteins and
imaging cells and biominerals by confocal and electron microscopy. Together,
these approaches will establish a larger set of iron oxidation genes/proteins
while understanding how these catalyze formation of environmentally important
iron oxyhydroxide biominerals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.