* 2243228
* GOALI: Coordination of Resilience Interventions by Consumers and the Supply Utility (CRICSU)
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Antonio Conejo, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 05/31/2026
* USD 317,483.00

This NSF project aims to develop a methodology to improve in a coordinated
manner the resilience of a power distribution system to supply electricity and
the resilience of proactive consumers to supply their individual electricity
demands. The project will bring transformative change by providing a bilevel
optimization framework that, for given resilience improvement budgets, allows
achieving maximum resilience for the distribution system as a whole and the
maximum individual resilience level for each proactive consumer. This will be
achieved by significantly improving current algorithms to solve bilevel
optimization problems. Such improvements will be accomplished by leveraging
novel relaxation and decomposition techniques to derive tractable optimization
problems that accurately reflect the physical and economic laws involved. The
intellectual merits of the project include the detailed modeling of the
interrelated resilience problems of the agents to coordinate their conflicting
objectives, and the development of techniques to solve bilevel problems whose
lower-level problems are nonconvex and/or non-continuous. The broader impacts of
the project include the application of the proposed methodology to critical
infrastructures other than power systems, such as natural-gas and water systems,
the availability of efficient algorithms to solve complex bilevel problems,
which can be used in many disciplines, and the education of graduate and
undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pursuing resilience enhancement,
we plan to develop a novel hierarchical decision-making framework (an
optimization problem that includes as constraints other optimization problems)
for different electric power agents interacting through an electricity
distribution system. Such decision framework enables identifying effective
solutions that are optimal for both the leading partner, the electric utility,
and the other agents, proactive consumers and non-proactive consumers, that
react to the decisions of the leading agent. We will develop and tailor such
framework to the case of a power distribution system, representing in detail the
physical laws governing such system. Resilience improvement interventions mainly
include installing battery energy storage systems, smart switches, distributed
generators, and converting overhead distribution lines to underground lines. The
novel decision framework translates into a complex bilevel optimization problem
that we plan to characterize and solve by leveraging novel decomposition and
convex relaxation techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.