* 2243646
* SCC-PG: Leveraging Community Partners and IoT Based Sensors to Improve Localized Air Quality Monitoring in Communities
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2024
* Brian Krupp, Baldwin Wallace University
* Standard Grant
* Vishal Sharma
* 03/31/2024
* USD 146,676.00

Approximately 91% of the world population lives in environments that do not
currently meet air quality standards. In the United States (U.S.), the Clean Air
Act of 1970 has resulted in air pollution concentrations dropping below national
standards, meaning that most communities in the U.S. have cleaner air. However,
clean air is not realized across all communities, especially in communities of
color, where air quality can differ significantly. Further, regulatory air
quality sensors that are sparsely deployed may not accurately detect the quality
of air that residents breathe in their communities. With the availability of
low-cost sensors and advancement of low-cost single-board computers and
microcontrollers, this research aims to provide residents with an ability to
accurately understand their air quality through the deployment of an Internet of
Things (IoT) air quality sensor. We will meet with residents that have been
affected by both redlining and nearby pollution sources to better understand how
air quality affects their daily lives and what air quality information is most
beneficial to them. In addition, the team will closely collaborate with partner
school(s) to create K-12 curriculum for students to learn how to create their
own air quality sensor, deploy it at their school, and make the air quality
readings publicly available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research, we will
combine the availability of low-cost particulate matter sensors with the
accessibility of IoT compatible single-board computers and microcontrollers to
enable publicly available fine-grained air quality information. To provide real-
time access to the data, a prototype mobile application for both iOS and
Android, along with a web dashboard, will be developed. To address common
challenges of both power and connectivity, we will partner with PCs for People
to deploy the sensors and provide connectivity through their existing
infrastructure. An enclosure will be developed that ensures proper airflow, has
low interference with wireless communication, and is modular to allow other
sensing capabilities in the future. We will compare the findings from a test
deployment of the sensors with regulatory sensors readings and share the results
with the community and local officials. To ensure the sustainability of the
project and provide an opportunity for it to expand, we will create an open-
source Computer Science and Engineering curriculum in partnership with a local
middle school and we will pilot a tech camp at our
university.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.