* 2244925
* Surface Composition and Chemical Behavior of Supported Single-Atom Alloy (SAA) Nanoparticles under Catalytic Conditions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Francisco Zaera, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2026
* USD 594,391.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Francisco Zaera of the University of California, Riverside is studying
the chemical behavior of so-called single atom alloy (SAA) catalysts. Catalysis
is used extensively in industry to manufacture chemicals, and transition metals
are in many instances the key components of the catalysts used. To tune the
properties of metal catalysts to optimize catalytic performance, alloys of two
or more metals are sometimes used. In recent years, much interest has developed
in using a particular version of metal alloys, SAAs, as catalysts where a small
amount of one metal, e.g. platinum (Pt) in the Zaera lab, is dispersed on
nanoparticles (NPs) of a second (Cu) to add specific new functionality. In the
case of hydrocarbon hydrogenations, a family of important catalytic processes
where hydrogen atoms (H) are added to carbon-carbon or carbon-oxygen multiple
bonds, research using model systems has suggested that the Pt atoms are needed
to dissociate H2 to provide the required H atoms. However, preliminary studies
under realistic catalytic conditions have indicated that the behavior of the
single atoms may be more nuanced. This project focuses on characterizing the
nature of the surfaces of SAA catalysts under catalytic conditions to better
understand the behavior of the minority (Pt) and majority (Cu) metals and their
contributions to hydrogenation catalysis to improve catalytic performance. The
knowledge derived from this work is aimed to help tune the selectivity of
processes for the industrial production of fine chemicals. The knowledge
derivied from this work will also be useful for educational purposes, by
providing data to illustrate basic principles in kinetics, catalysis, and NP
synthesis in undergraduate and graduate classes. Collaborations with Latin
American research groups are being forged, and student participation from groups
underrepresented in research is being pursued.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In these
studies, Professor Francisco Zaera of the University of California, Riverside is
studying the surface composition and chemical behavior of supported SAA
nanoparticles (NPs) under catalytic conditions. The main objective of this
project is to characterize SAA catalysts in situ or under operando conditions
(while carrying out catalytic processes) to bridge the pressure and materials
gaps and better understand their working surface chemistry. Two hypotheses
underpin this proposal: (1) that the minority metal (Pt) may diffuse into the
bulk under reaction conditions and influence catalysis in a remote way (a direct
consequence of the pressure gap); and (2) that such environment-induced metal
diffusion may occur under different conditions in supported NPs vs. in bulk
materials (a direct manifestation of the materials gap). Three parallel
experimental approaches are being followed to test the key hypotheses. First,
kinetic measurements under catalytic conditions are being performed on model
systems by using a so-called "high-pressure cell" and complemented and
correlated with results from in situ characterization of the surface using
reflection-absorption infrared spectroscopy (RAIRS). Second, synthetic methods
are being developed to make well mixed diluted alloys and core-shell bimetallic
NPs to investigate the possible diffusion and intermixing of the metals under
reaction conditions. Third, catalysts are being characterized under catalytic
conditions in situ and under operando conditions by X-ray absorption
spectroscopy (XAS) to evaluate changes in the coordination sphere around the
minority atoms, one way to determine their presence on the surface vs. inside
the bulk, and by infrared absorption spectroscopy (IR), to extract information
about the adsorption mode of the reactants and to titrate the minority atoms
available at the surface under catalytic conditions. The proposal combines
studies with model systems, new catalyst synthesis methodology, in situ
spectroscopic studies of catalysts, and quantum mechanics calculations to answer
a critical question; namely, the effect of the pressure and materials gaps on
SAA performance, with wide-ranging implications to the field of
catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.