* 2244294
* Collaborative Research: REU site: Multi-disciplinary Research Experiences in Smart Personal Protective Equipment (SmaPP)
* ENG,EEC
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Biswajit Ray, University of Alabama in Huntsville
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 09/30/2026
* USD 178,937.00

This new three-year REU Site: Collaborative Research: REU site:
Multidisciplinary Research Experiences in Smart Personal Protective Equipment
(SmaPP) is a collaborative project between Oklahoma State University, Stillwater
(OSU) and the University of Alabama in Huntsville (UAH). Smart Personal
Protective Equipment (SmaPP) is critical for the safety of individuals in
workplaces. Advanced levels of protection and comfort equipped with remote human
vital sign monitoring systems will significantly increase the acceptance of
SmaPP. This collaborative REU site will engage 9 undergraduate students each
year in multiple facets of fundamental and hands-on research in developing
SmaPP. Participants will be recruited from diverse populations of undergraduate
students, including underrepresented groups, women, and from two- and four-year
institutions with minimal research experience and infrastructures. The REU
students will be mentored by faculty members from mechanical engineering,
electrical engineering, mechatronics, fire protection engineering, and emergency
management from OSU and UAH. The students will gain experience in technical and
theoretical aspects of the SmaPP and be exposed to graduate studies, career
paths in engineering, and safe operations in a laboratory environment, as well
as gain interpersonal skills and knowledge of research ethics. The overarching
goal of the collaborative REU site is to provide a multidisciplinary research
experience to undergraduate students and expand opportunities for research as a
career choice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new three-year REU Site: Collaborative
Research: REU site: Multidisciplinary Research Experiences in Smart Personal
Protective Equipment (SmaPP) is a collaborative project between Oklahoma State
University, Stillwater (OSU) and the University of Alabama in Huntsville (UAH).
The collaborative REU site focuses on interdisciplinary research activities for
developing SmaPP, including materials for body protection, investigating the
thermal response of materials to heat exposure, designing flexible sensing
electronics with wireless communication for remote physiological vital signs and
radiation monitoring, and studying human perceptions toward SmaPP. Nine students
each year will be trained in various computing software, such as Matlab,
LabVIEW, ANSYS, SolidWorks, and 3D printing, as well as equipment-specific
training to carry out the research successfully. The REU site's fundamental and
applied research focus will expose students to analytical and experimental
studies. The students will develop and test auxetic materials, analyze heat
transfer characteristics to improve the safety and comfort of PPE materials and
develop wearable sensing technology and monitoring algorithms with secure
communication. Along with tangible research experience in developing a product
with high societal impact, students will have the opportunity to advance their
research and interpersonal communication skills. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is jointly funded with the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.