* 2244028
* i-REU Site: The UF/France Research Exchange in Chemistry: Advancing Diversity Through International Engagement
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Valeria Kleiman, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 03/31/2026
* USD 522,000.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site award to the University
of Florida, located in Gainesville, FL, supports the training of 12 students for
11 weeks during the summers of 2023-2025. This program, funded by the Division
of Chemistry, seeks to advance diversity through international engagement.
Participants travel to France to engage in collaborative intensive research
projects at one of four partner sites: Sorbonne University (Paris), University
of Strasbourg, AgroParis Tech (Reims), and University of Toulouse – Paul
Sabatier. Participants also take part in mentoring and professional development
activities throughout the summer that focus on science communication, developing
a portfolio to highlight their laboratory skills, and applying for graduate
programs and national fellowships. Through immersion in an international
research environment, this site develops students’ self-confidence and awareness
of the global aspects of chemistry. The program targets undergraduate students
from underrepresented groups in STEM, and for whom summer research abroad will
help steer them towards graduate school and a career in STEM, thereby broadening
participation in STEM and increasing the diversity of STEM skilled workers to
match the global scientific challenges for the next 30-40 years.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This international REU program is run as a bidirectional
exchange site where domestic students are matched with host groups at each of
the partner sites and French institution-funded students are sent to the
University of Florida for summer research. Students participate in a pre-
departure orientation workshop, then each student is matched with an active
research group to conduct individually mentored research projects across all
areas of chemistry. Mentoring and professional development activities are
included in weekly virtual meetings with the addition of an online journal,
introduced to guide scientific self-awareness and to help develop a portfolio
highlighting their laboratory skills. A 3-day workshop brings all participants
together for a visit to a biorefinery in Pomacle-Bazancourt highlighting green
chemistry applications. Upon return to the US, students present their research
outcomes at an ACS National Meeting, where they meet with the PIs for a final
mentoring session on fellowship applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.