* 2244551
* REU Site: Computational Modeling Serving Portland
* CSE,OAC
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Christof Teuscher, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 04/30/2026
* USD 428,608.00

Computational modeling and thinking as a way of solving complex problems has the
potential to impact society through a student's professional career
contributions. The project teaches students the fundamental skills of
computational modeling and thinking that will help them understand and solve
applicable problems in the real world. Students participate in multi-
disciplinary, community-based, computational modeling research projects to serve
and enhance Portland and its greater region. Through their projects and through
interactions with their community partners, students are gaining an
understanding of the potential and limits of computational tools and how they
can serve diverse communities. The virtual nature of the project allows the site
to broaden participation and for students to participate from anywhere in the
US. The firsthand and applied nature of the research projects attracts and
motivates a diverse population of students to pursue a STEM career.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The intellectual focus of this virtual REU site is
computational modeling to serve and enhance Portland and its greater region.
Computational modeling and thinking are not limited to the use of information
technology; it is a way of thinking and solving problems well beyond the
traditional computing disciplines. Students participate in multi-disciplinary,
community-based research projects to gain experience in computational thinking
across different disciplines. The activities of this REU site involve a 2-week
training followed by an 8-week research project completed under a faculty
mentor's guidance and with the involvement of a community partner. The site
recruits a diverse population of students across disciplines from institutions
with limited research opportunities as well as tribal colleges and universities.
The virtual nature of the site allows the recruitment of students who are unable
to travel. The REU Site teaches students the fundamental skills of computational
modeling and thinking that help them understand and solve applied research
problems in the real world.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.