* 2244391
* REU Site: Applying Data Science on Energy-efficient Cluster Systems and Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Li Liu, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Jill Denner
* 02/28/2026
* USD 390,002.00

California State University, Northridge will establish a new Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site on data science. Data science and
parallel and distributed computing techniques have been widely used for modeling
complex compute-intensive and data-intensive problems in science and
engineering. Developing an effective energy conservation technique for
compute/data-intensive applications has become increasingly critical in business
planning and decision-making. There is a lack of holistic energy-efficient
solutions capable of reducing energy costs by comprehensively utilizing a
variety of measurement methods, energy consumption models, and energy-saving
strategies through data science and parallel and distributed computing
technologies. This project will develop energy-efficient solutions for cluster
systems and various applications by applying data science and parallel and
distributed computing technologies. It will provide students with an immersive
experience in which they will participate in trainings and research activities
to apply knowledge and skills of data science and parallel and distributed
computing on energy-efficient cluster systems and applications. Students will
gain research experience on problem-solving through analyzing existing research,
designing and conducting experiments, and applying data science technologies in
data collection, analysis, processing, and modeling.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this project include increasing
the participation of undergraduate students, especially from groups that are
underrepresented in computing, in research on data science and energy-efficient
computing; and applying data science to build energy-efficient cluster systems
and applications. This project will recruit 8 undergraduate students to work on
4 projects in the summer for 8 weeks each year for a total of 3 years. Among the
24 participant students in this REU site, more than 60% will be selected from
universities/colleges outside the REU site, and more than 60% will be from
underrepresented groups. In this project, students will develop skills in
intelligent data collection, data processing, and data visualization of
geospatial data and shade maps; gain expertise applying data science
technologies and methods to model the energy consumption of cluster systems and
automobile air conditioning systems; and investigate energy-efficient solutions
for workload management on cluster system and various applications (geo-
information visualization, automobile air conditioner system, and shading
detection and mapping). The energy-efficient solutions for cluster systems
workload management and the developed applications can serve as guidance for
analyzing energy consumption data, building predictive energy models, and
developing energy-saving workload management strategies for cluster systems and
solutions for data-intensive applications. Software tools, experimental results,
models and energy-saving solutions produced in the project will be freely
disseminated as shared resources through publications, professional
presentations, and web access.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.