* 2244460
* REU Site: Mind, Brain, Body and Behavior
* SBE,SMA
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Patricia Bauer, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 07/31/2026
* USD 404,979.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences
(SBE) and the Air Force Office of Scientific Research (ASSURE) Program.
Psychology is the science of behavior and application of the resulting knowledge
to help solve individual and societal problems. The current lack of scientists
from diverse backgrounds hinders innovation and problem-solving in the field.
The MB3 Program at Emory University will address this issue by providing
mentorship, research training, and early career support to undergraduate
students from diverse backgrounds. MB3 will focus on students who would like to
pursue interdisciplinary graduate training in psychology but lack resources at
their home institution. Specifically, this REU program will (a) identify
undergraduate students from underrepresented backgrounds across the nation who
are at institutions without psychology graduate training programs to (b) be
trained by leading experts, in completing interdisciplinary psychological
research from start to finish, and (c) help prepare them for graduate level
training and psychology related careers. The goal of the MB3 Program is to
increase the diversity of perspectives on important individual and societal
problems that we look to solve as a field by creating a pipeline of talented and
diverse undergraduate students to become the next generation of psychologists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each year, 10 junior or senior undergraduate students will
be selected to participate in a year-long, paid research experience to work with
a mentor to execute a research project in one of four areas (i.e.,
developmental, cognitive and computational, behavioral and systems neuroscience,
and clinical science). During the Spring Workshop, students engage in a 10-week
virtual seminar to learn about the program mentors, the basics of conducting
research, and refine their interests. Upon completion of the Spring Workshop,
students begin their 10-week, in-person summer research program at Emory
University with their assigned mentor. During this period students engage full-
time in research and professional development activities. By the end of this
hands-on experience, students will have produced an interdisciplinary, basic
science research project. Topics include the genetics influences of compulsive
behaviors, biological mechanisms of social behavior in rodents, primate models
of auditory cognitive control, and human adjustment and resilience, to name a
few. Students will build competency in research methods, data science, ethics,
and career development. During the Fall Workshop, the final phase of the
program, students will meet with their mentor virtually to build strong graduate
school applications. Overall, these opportunities will build capacity in
behavioral science by increasing the number of psychological scientists from
diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is supported by the
Department of Defense ASSURE program in partnership with the NSF REU
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.