* 2244165
* NRT-AI: AI Advancements and Convergence in Computational, Environmental, and Social Sciences (AI-ACCESS)
* EDU,DGE
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2028
* William Yeoh, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 06/30/2028
* USD 2,990,135.00

Emerging AI and computational tools have the potential to bring about
significant transformation of scientific practice, especially in the
environmental and social sciences. In fact, the very nature of important
questions in those fields are themselves shifting as social systems are
increasingly embedded within computational platforms that mediate daily human
activity. However, while huge datasets are rapidly becoming commonplace across
the environmental and social sciences, the right methods for understanding data
generated by human behavior, as well as accessible tools for studying them, are
lacking. In response to this urgent need, this National Science Foundation
Research Traineeship (NRT) award establishes the AI Advancements and Convergence
in Computational, Environmental, and Social Sciences (AI-ACCESS) NRT Program at
Washington University in St. Louis (WashU) in collaboration with University of
Houston-Downtown (UHD). The AI-ACCESS program will prepare a cohort of new
investigators, trained at the intersection of AI, environmental science, and
social sciences, with the skills to capitalize on the synergy in the convergence
of AI and environmental social science. The program anticipates training forty-
nine (49) doctoral students, including twenty-four (24) funded trainees. AI-
ACCESS trainees will fill a growing need for organizations that aspire to
develop data-driven policies and computational algorithms to address
environmental and social challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The AI-
ACCESS program leverages WashU's graduate programs in computer science,
environmental science, environmental engineering, public health, and social work
to develop a new transformative training program with transdisciplinary
education, research, and mentoring opportunities. The program includes prefatory
courses in AI and machine learning, statistical and causal inference, and
environmental sustainability; required courses in communication, teamwork, and
ethics; and specialization in one of three research tracks -- computational
sciences, environmental sciences, and social sciences. The program also includes
recruitment efforts focused on increasing diversity through outreach and by
exploiting the synergistic potential between the REU site at WashU and partner
UHD, a minority-serving institution; diversity retention efforts through
community building activities and peer support programs; and diversity training
efforts to ensure that all AI-ACCESS personnel belong in a diverse, inclusive,
and connected environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship
(NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and implementation of
bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education
training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate
students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through
comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and
aligned with changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.