* 2244380
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Approaches to Environmental Adaptation
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Richard Mbatu, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2026
* USD 142,120.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences
(SBE). The international community has now realized that the global effort to
significantly reduce carbon emissions is insufficient to halt the worsening
effects of environmental change. The current consensus holds that we must engage
in building and disseminating adaptation knowledge to adjust to environmental
change. This REU Program will address current recommendations by producing
environmental adaptation research that synthesizes pertinent interdisciplinary
and environmental justice information in its design and implementation. In this
light, this undergraduate research opportunity offers a diverse and
underrepresented group of students the chance to gain research experience on
environmental adaptation and have a better understanding of the challenges
facing the United States and the rest of the world. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
order to prepare undergraduate students for environmental adaptation research at
the upper levels and later graduate programs and careers in environmental
adaptation research fields, the project draws on the diversity of faculty
expertise and graduate student mentors across various disciplines at the
University of South Florida. The research uses an interdisciplinary approach
that employs multi-level analysis to better understand barriers and facilitators
of social, cultural, economic, political, and scientific issues of environmental
adaptation. In addition to gaining actual research experience, students will
also build networks, acquire professional development abilities, and comprehend
interdisciplinary research. Projects will be designed to benefit the University
of South Florida’s Tampa Bay community and other communities around the country
most vulnerable to the impacts of environmental adaptation. The outcome will be
an emerging group of young researchers, trained in interdisciplinary approaches
to environmental adaptation research, capable of understanding the complexities
of the environmental adaptation problem, and synthesizing complex responses to
the problem in ways that encourage and engender social, cultural, political, and
economic change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.