* 2244735
* Developing Pareto front models for the improved description of plant's dynamic root system architecture
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2027
* Magdalena Julkowska, Boyce Thompson Institute Plant Research
* Standard Grant
* Amina Eladdadi
* 03/31/2027
* USD 550,000.00

Wild tomato root stocks are used to enhance cultivated tomato productivity and
environmental resilience. Visually distinct root shapes of wild tomato can be
distinguished by evaluating the root architecture as a network in which lateral
root tips, which absorb water and nutrients, need to be connected to the root
base, which supports shoot growth. This network design considers two competing
objectives: minimizing the building blocks of a network (cost) and minimizing
the transport time from root tips to root base (speed). To improve the relevance
of the model to the physiology of plants, the model will be expanded to include
the effects of gravitational forces and account for anatomical differences
between the main and lateral roots. To identify the genes underlying root
network design, we will use genetic approaches and generate mutant plants that
will be evaluated for network efficiency, as well as plant productivity and
resilience. Understanding mathematical and genetic mechanisms underlying plant
architecture will lead to designing better crops with improved productivity and
stress resilience, thereby contributing to increased sustainability of food
production. Additionally, an improved understanding of biological networks and
how they grow can be applied to transportation networks, allowing transit
systems to naturally scale with population growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will develop methods for explaining and optimizing the structure of
natural transportation networks, such as the root system architecture of wild
tomato plants. Initial work will involve developing a numerical optimization
algorithm for constructing minimal Euclidean Steiner trees that are subjected to
non-linear constraints. We will apply the Euclidean Steiner tree algorithms
towards quantifying how tomato root architectures optimize trade-offs between
conserving material costs and ensuring efficient nutrient and water transport,
especially when growth trajectories are constrained by gravitational forces and
differential cost/transport qualities imposed by the differences in root
anatomy. We will also study measurements of root architecture growth to reverse-
engineer an algorithm for constructing optimal Steiner trees using purely
distributed computation. Our goal is to use forward genetics to identify genetic
components underlying the development of optimal architectures under non-stress
and salt stress conditions. The identified algorithms, ideotypes and genetic
mechanisms will serve as targets for plant breeding and genetically engineering
stress-resilient crops. We anticipate that the methods we develop can be
generalized towards explaining, designing, and optimizing transportation
networks found in other natural and engineered systems. In the future, our work
can provide insight into designing public transport networks that scale
efficiently.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the Division
of Mathematical Sciences, Mathematical Biology Program and the Division of
Integrative Organismal Systems, Plant Genome Research Program (PGRP) in the
Directorate for Biological Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.