* 2244984
* Constraining the Mechanistic Effects of Spatial Resolution on Global Air Quality Modeling
* GEO,AGS
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2026
* Randall Martin, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin (Ben) E. Brown-Steiner
* 02/28/2026
* USD 499,732.00

The investigators in this project will perform a series of chemical transport
model simulations in order to study the errors that arise in model simulations
due to coarse horizontal resolution. Many modern chemical transport models,
which are used to study atmospheric chemistry in our atmosphere, are
computationally expensive, and as such many research groups continue to rely on
relatively coarse resolution simulations. However, recent advancements have
enabled higher spatial resolution simulations, and the investigators in this
project will study biases and differences in model simulations that arise from
different spatial resolutions. The knowledge gained in this project will enhance
our ability to simulate and study smaller-scale atmospheric chemistry phenomena,
is likely to increase confidence in and usage of high-resolution models in the
future, and would enable more atmospheric chemistry research relevant to
communities at the local and regional scale. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
proposed work, the investigators will utilize a high-performance implementation
of GEOS-Chem (GCHP) that has recently developed distributed-memory
parallelization that enables just this type of scale-varying research. There are
three primary research goals in this proposed work: (1) to quantify and
interpret the mechanistic resolution-dependence of non-linear chemistry with a
focus on nitrogen oxide, ozone, and nitric acid; (2) to quantify and interpret
the mechanistic resolution-dependence of emission segregation with a focus on
nitrate aerosols; and (3) to quantify and interpret the errors in simulated air
quality trends due to inadequate or too-coarse spatial resolution. Success in
this work is therefore likely to have a positive impact on the GEOS-Chem,
atmospheric chemistry, and climate-chemistry communities, as well as policy
makers that could use these simulation results to make decisions regarding air
quality within their own communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.