* 2244424
* REU Site: Smart and Secure Future Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Heather Richter Lipford, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Jill Denner
* 02/28/2026
* USD 350,685.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site at the University of
North Carolina-Charlotte engages a diverse group of 10 undergraduate students
each summer in an intensive 9-week research experience. The Site research theme
of Smart and Secure Future Computing engages students in interdisciplinary
research focusing on applications in cutting edge domains such as smart homes,
transportation, healthcare, and other advanced systems. The goals of the REU
Site program experience are to develop studentsâ€™ research skills and confidence
through exposure and training in interdisciplinary research in the focus areas
of cybersecurity and artificial intelligence. To achieve these goals, the REU
participants work together with faculty, graduate students, and peers on
research projects. Research project work provides participants with a firsthand
opportunity to apply and expand their knowledge, to better understand the
societal and global impacts of research, to bring these experiences back to
their home institutions and to apply lessons learned to contribute to cutting-
edge computing applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this REU
Site is to create a collaborative community that supports and engages a diverse
group of undergraduate students in research to advance the state of the art in
cybersecurity and artificial intelligence. The REU Site mentoring approach aims
to cultivate a community of learning through regular training in research
skills; tiered mentoring of faculty, graduate students, and peers; and
communicating and sharing research results. The UNC Charlotte REU Site
emphasizes participation of promising students from underrepresented groups in
computing and from institutions that have limited research programs.
Undergraduate students are recruited from throughout the region and country to
participate in the program. This experience will further prepare students for
graduate school and computing research, and improve their perceptions of
computing as a career, all while contributing to research projects in
cybersecurity and artificial intelligence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.