* 2244041
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Program in Multi-scale Biological Networks
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Natalia Kirienko, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2026
* USD 135,930.00

This REU Site award to William Marsh Rice University, located in Houston, TX,
will support the training of 10 students each year for 10 weeks during the
summers of 2023-2025. It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily
from schools with limited research opportunities and/or members of under-
represented groups, with an emphasis on students enrolled at proximal minority-
serving institutions, including community colleges and four-year institutions,
will be trained in the program. Students will learn how research is conducted,
and many will present the results of their work at scientific conferences.
Students will conduct research in interdisciplinary projects, guided by mentors
from various science and engineering disciplines. At the end of the program,
students will have a better understanding of how biological networks work.
Assessment of the program will be done thru the online SALG URSSA tool. Students
will be tracked after the program to monitor their career paths. NSF ETAP system
will be used to register participants
(https://www.nsfetap.gov/).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU program will expose
students to the contributions made by different science, technology,
engineering, and math (STEM) disciplines toward the detailed understanding of
living systems as integrated networks. Students will work in laboratories that
draw from an array of approaches - from classical biochemistry and genetics to
complex theoretical modeling. Research areas include: (i) biomolecular
structure, function, and evolution, (ii) naturally-occurring genetic networks,
(iii) synthetic biology and metabolic networks, and (iv) ecological networks.
Participating faculty mentors will be from a range of departments including the
Biosciences, Bioengineering, Chemical &amp; Biomolecular Engineering, Chemistry,
and Computer Science. Students will also participate in workshops focusing on
ethics and the responsible conduct of research, professional communication, the
graduate school application process, and more. Application to the program will
require a transcript, resume, research statement, and two letters of
recommendation. Participants will be selected by a faculty committee, which will
assess student alignment with the program based on demonstrated excellence in
STEM coursework and interest in research. More information about the program is
available by visiting https://ibb.rice.edu/nsf-reu-bionetworks or by contacting
the PI (Dr. Kirienko at kirienko@rice.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Silberg at
joff@rice.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.