* 2244213
* Collaborative Research: REU Site: Arctic REU Greenland - Earth and Environmental Processes from the Inland Ice to the Ocean along the Aasivissuit-Nipisat World Heritage Corridor
* GEO,OPP
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Colin Shaw, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 08/31/2026
* USD 110,177.00

Concord College, located in WV, and Montana State University (MSU) will organize
an international Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) program. The
program will engage three cohorts of students over three summers in an
international field experience in Greenland that will be followed by laboratory
analysis and final presentations at Concord or MSU. The REU Site will focus on
the natural and environmental characteristics of a coastal region in Greenland
that includes a World Heritage Site. The program offers opportunities for
students to conduct both field and laboratory work in structural geology,
earthquake geology, climate change, social sciences, paleoecology, glaciology,
geo-microbiology, mineralogy, and petrology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
addresses a diverse array of questions in polar science ranging from bedrock
geology and earthquake rupture dynamics to hyperspectral albedo calibration and
ecological succession along a retreating icecap margin. The projects are unified
by an integrative approach to understanding Earth systems along an ice to ocean
transect at the Arctic Circle. REU students will test a new hypothesis for the
origin of multi-fault earthquake rupture and generate a geologic data set that
will provide a unique compliment to geophysical and geodynamic investigations
for multi-fault rupture processes, collect and analyze hyperspectral data to
derive a better calibration of satellite albedo data, and explore
ecological&lt;br/&gt;and geomicrobiological gradients evolving along the
retreating ice margin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.