* 2244195
* REU Site: Inclusive and collaborative approach to cellular and molecular biology for undergraduate researchers at Delaware State University
* BIO,DBI
* 02/01/2024,01/31/2027
* Hakeem Lawal, Delaware State University
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 01/31/2027
* USD 419,001.00

This REU Site award to Delaware State University (DSU), located in Dover,
Delaware will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during the
summers of 2024-2026. It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily
from schools with limited research opportunities or from an under-represented
group, will be trained in the program. The site is open to all but will focus on
students from DSU and partnering HBCUs. It will leverage the success of HBCUs in
educating students from under-represented backgrounds, and the interdisciplinary
research activities at DSU, to engage students in a rigorous summer internship
in a culturally-congruent atmosphere. This program will help broaden the
participation of individuals from underrepresented groups in STEM by increasing
their involvement in research activities that would help them be competitive for
matriculation into STEM graduate programs. Students will learn and practice how
research is conducted, and many will present the results of their work at
scientific conferences. Assessment of the program will be done through the
online SALG URSSA tool. The NSF ETAP system will be used to register
participants (https://www.nsfetap.gov/). Students will be tracked after the
program in order to determine their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
scientific focus is to provide high-impact interdisciplinary summer research in
cellular and molecular biology to HBCU students. The departments/programs
involved include neuroscience, cell biology, physics, and computational science.
The research projects are varied and include those in neuroscience,
microbiology, stress response to climate change, and machine learning. The
program components also include weekly research meetings and strong professional
development activities. Students will be recruited through March to provide
ample opportunity for students to apply. Students will be recruited based on
resilience (not GPA), response to essay questions, and references from mentors.
The selection will be conducted by a committee comprising the PI, Co-PI, and
potential mentors. More information about the program is available by visiting
the NSF REU website at
http://www.nsf.gov/crssprgm/reu/list_result.jsp?unitid=5047 or by contacting the
PI (Dr. Hakeem Lawal at hlawal@desu.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Erin Perchiniak at
eperchiniak@desu.edu). This project is jointly funded by the Division of
Biological Infrastructure in the Directorate of Biological Sciences, the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the
Historically Black Colleges and Universities - Undergraduate Program (HBCU-
UP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.