* 2244480
* REU Site: Experience the Full Data Science Pipeline through Research and Practice
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Jia Chen, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 03/31/2026
* USD 389,922.00

Data Science is an emerging interdisciplinary field that uses scientific methods
to extract insights and knowledge from various types of data whose origin
includes scientific experiments, digital processes, sensors, social media,
mobile devices, and more. Companies, government, and local agencies are turning
to data scientists to mine such data for insights with the goal of improving
business operations, benefitting public and social services, advancing
scientific discovery, or understanding user behavior. While data science is at
the heart of cutting-edge applications and research, the current workforce is
ill-equipped to meet the demand, not only in numbers but also in diversity. Such
a diversity gap, albeit being a major current challenge that universities and
the industry face, also presents a tremendous opportunity: broadening and
diversifying the reach of data science research and practice, as it is being
taught and advanced at top-tier research institutions such as the University of
California Riverside, to a highly talented and currently under-served portion of
the student population nationwide. Motivated by the notion that undergraduate
research contributes significantly to success in science and engineering for all
students, this REU Site is established to offer 10 undergraduate students the
full data science pipeline experience through research and practice via the
eight-week summer program with optional follow-up research, professional
development, and career mentoring activities throughout the
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU Site will expose undergraduate students
recruited nationally to the full data science pipeline: from data acquisition,
data modeling, to real-world applications. The main activities contain the
eight-week summer program (boot-camp, research projects, housing and travel,
ethics training, poster presentation, social interaction, and mentoring
activities) and year-long engagement. The goal of this project is to provide
meaningful data science research opportunities to a broader audience, including
women, underrepresented minorities, and economically disadvantaged undergraduate
students from institutions that do not have major research operations like the
University of California Riverside. Students will be recruited primarily from
minority serving and Research II universities, institutions without Computer
Science or Computing Ph.D. programs, and community colleges. Participating
students will engage with research projects including big data management,
statistical data modeling, genomics data mining, and social media mining.
Finally, the student participantsâ€™ research projects, even though they are
tailored to fit within the confines of a summer internship, all address cutting-
edge problems in data science research and have the potential for advancing the
respective data science sub-areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.