* 2244132
* REU Site: Global Change Ecology at the Smithsonian Environmental Research Center
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* John Parker, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2026
* USD 377,741.00

This REU Site award to the Smithsonian Environmental Research Center (SERC),
located in Edgewater, MD, will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks
during the summers of 2023-2025. It is anticipated that a total of 30 students,
primarily from schools with limited research opportunities, or from an under-
represented group, will be trained in the program. The SERC REU program focuses
on how aspects of global change, including ecosystem conservation, climate
change, and altered biodiversity, are changing ecosystem functions. During their
internships, students will participate in field research, laboratory work, data
analysis, and professional development, including sessions related to coding in
R, scientific communication, and STEM careers. Interns will practice
communicating with a variety of audiences, producing both a formal presentation
for a scientific audience and a short video for lay audiences that describes the
results and implications for their independent research projects. They also work
with their mentors to find ways that their research informs, and is informed by,
other disciplines to better understand the impacts of their work beyond the
research sphere. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many will
present the results of their work at scientific conferences. Assessment of the
program will be done through the online SALG URSSA tool. Students will be
required to register in the NSF ETAP system (etap.nsf.gov) and tracked after the
program to determine their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent
centuries, humans have dramatically altered the planet through habitat
fragmentation, increased greenhouse gases, species introductions, excess
nutrient loading, and native species extirpation. Determining and ultimately
mitigating the consequences of these global transformations is a major goal in
ecology and the primary focus of the REU program at the Smithsonian
Environmental Research Center. The environmental issues of the 21st century are
complex and require a multi-disciplinary approach. Our students are trained in
many subfields including ecology, biogeochemistry, genetics, quantitative
ecology, and science communication, resulting in rich experiences and scientific
impacts. SERC researchers and interns collaborate with experts across the
Smithsonian, as well as in communities and partner organizations, to conduct
work that combines natural and social science research, community and
stakeholder engagement, and education as part of the Smithsonian’s pan-
institutional Working Land and Seascapes, Interconnected Health, and Urbanized
Estuaries initiatives. This allows REU interns to expand their networks beyond
SERC and engage a variety of voices and range of expertise that they can use to
develop and implement their independent projects. In recent years, SERC REU
intern projects have included studies on drivers of change in summer flounder
populations in Chesapeake Bay, the impacts of rhizobia strain diversity on the
productivity and herbivore resistance of soybean plants under different climate
change scenarios, relationships among vegetation, salinity, and methane
emissions from tidal saltmarshes, and estimations of carbon sequestration from
seagrass beds in Belize using remote sensing. Since 2001, SERC’s REU interns
have conducted novel research resulting in 77 presentations at national and
international meetings and 44 peer-reviewed articles. More information about the
program is available by visiting https://serc.si.edu/internships, or by
contacting the PI (Dr. Alison Cawood at cawooda@si.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. John
Parker at parkerj@si.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.