* 2244337
* NRT-URoL: Chemically-mediated biotic interactions in the age of metabolomics, genomics and enhanced macroecological data
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Lee Dyer, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 07/31/2028
* USD 3,000,000.00

In order to meet the immense challenges of our times, there is a need for
scientific leaders who can navigate complex and changing biological,
technological, and human-social systems. This National Science Foundation
Research Traineeship (NRT) award to the University of Nevada, Reno establishes a
first-of-its-kind interdisciplinary graduate training program at the interface
between chemistry and biology, utilizing recent advances in chemistry, genomics,
and mathematical modeling to train students to answer fundamental questions
concerning the generation and maintenance of biodiversity. The project will
train sixty-eight (68) masters and doctoral students, including twenty-three
(23) NRT-funded trainees, working across the disciplines of organic chemistry,
molecular biology, bioinformatics, genomics, metabolomics, ecology, and
evolution. The program’s goal is to create both technically and culturally
skilled graduates that will become the next science and culture-change leaders
in natural resource management agencies, the pharmaceutical and agricultural
industries, and academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This training program is built
around a cohesive research theme: understanding the causes and consequences of
phenotypic variation in plants and animals with respect to chemically mediated
interactions in biotic communities using novel methods to link genome-to-
phenome. The program will provide cutting-edge training in the Chemistry of
Biological Interactions (CBI) and the ethical and inclusive conduct of research,
leveraging faculty-trainee teams, research focus teams, newly developed courses,
reciprocal graduate mentoring, undergraduate mentoring, a whole-program learning
community, and various applied partnerships for the practice of ecological
theory, synthetic chemistry, drug discovery, and/or public lands management.
Trainees will demonstrate both the depth of technical expertise and breadth of
interdisciplinary knowledge required to address previously unattainable research
questions related to: 1) the synergistic biological activity of natural
products; 2) the effects of natural products or environmental contaminants on
trophic interactions; 3) diffuse coevolution across multiple trophic levels; 4)
the role of chemical and species interactions in shaping genomic variation; and
5) the generation and maintenance of biological diversity. CBI Fellows will
learn how to build and sustain diverse, interdisciplinary research teams whose
members are prepared to enter the workforce with the communication, teamwork,
and ethics skills that make their science accessible and pertinent to global,
resource management, and industry partners and the people these institutions
serve. Fellows will be well-equipped to mentor future generations of scientists
through their accumulated outreach and education experience. Finally, trainees
will understand and appreciate the global nature of modern science through
international exchange opportunities. Importantly, this training program will
create a model interdisciplinary chemical ecology program that can be adapted by
other institutions and a set of communication, teamwork, and ethics training
resources that can be integrated into other graduate
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.  &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the NSF Research Traineeship program and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.