* 2244371
* REU Site: Security for Emerging Networks in Energy and Intelligent Transportation Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Ahmad Alsharif, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Jill Denner
* 02/28/2026
* USD 349,951.00

This funding establishes a new Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Site at the University of Alabama (UA) to address the security challenges and
privacy concerns of emerging networks in energy and intelligent transportation
systems in smart cities. A smart city is a framework, predominantly utilizing
information and communication technologies, to develop, deploy, and promote
sustainable development practices to address growing urbanization challenges.
With the advances in computing resources, sensing capabilities, and wireless
technologies, traditional networks in different sectors in smart cities, e.g.,
energy and transportation, are being evolved into emerging networks to make
smart cities a reality. Emerging networks will allow real-time flow of enormous
amounts of data, and thus, these networks have the potential to open various
vulnerabilities and threats that include unauthorized device/network access,
location tracking, false data injection, impersonation, data modification,
sensor attacks, jamming, spoofing, etc. Furthermore, although there is a need
for a growing, qualified, and dedicated cybersecurity workforce to ensure the
secure, privacy-protected, reliable, and effective operation of these emerging
networks, higher education is not keeping up with the increasing demand for
future cybersecurity workforce. Motivated by the security challenges and the
need for cybersecurity workforce, this REU site will host a diverse group of
undergraduate students at UA to offer cutting-edge research and development
activities in the area of cybersecurity for energy and intelligent
transportation systems to support various objectives and ensure that as a nation
we are not only ahead of the adversaries, but also well-prepared to combat any
cyber threat that stems from the emerging networks in smart
cities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project will introduce practical
innovations and mechanisms to address the security and privacy issues in
smart/micro grid communication networks, sustainable internet of things (IoT)
networks, electric mobility, and vehicle-to-vehicle (V2V) and vehicle-to-
infrastructure (V2I) communication networks in connected vehicle environments.
The intellectual merit of the projects includes (i) secure communication
protocol design for emerging networks such as microgrid networks and V2V
networks; (ii) achieving secure computation over encrypted data; (iii) combining
applied cryptography with various machine learning and data analytics techniques
to address the unique security challenges in these emerging networks; and (iv)
attack modeling, detection and mitigation for different networks including smart
grid communication networks, sustainable IoT networks, V2V and V2I communication
networks, and electric mobility services. This REU site will provide the
students the familiarity with applied cryptography and machine learning, which
could build a strong foundation for early-career student researchers. This REU
site will not only provide the necessary undergraduate research environment,
especially for female and minority students, but also contribute to the
development of a diverse and technologically skilled cybersecurity
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by CISE and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.