* 2244200
* REU Site: Synthesis and Characterization of Bioactive Orbioinspired Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Tara Meyer, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 08/31/2026
* USD 405,000.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site award to the University
of Pittsburgh, located in Pittsburgh, PA, supports the training of 10 students
for 10 weeks during the summers of 2023-2025. In this REU Program, funded by the
Division of Chemistry, participants pursue collaborative research projects, with
a focus on the synthesis, characterization, and simulation of biological
molecules or bio-inspired materials. An overall effort to promote belonging,
anchored by evidence-based intervention and cohort-building social activities,
is combined with training on research-relevant topics. Through targeted
recruitment of applications and promoting belonging, this site broadens
participation in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student participants undertake
individual projects that span a range of topics, including sequence-controlled
biodegradable polymers, DNA nanostructures for bottom-up nanofabrication, and
modeling biomolecules adsorbed on graphene. Students are also trained in
research-related topics/skills, including laboratory safety, research ethics,
personal conduct, and graduate school application skills. In addition, the site
implements belonging interventions that are based on activities that have proven
successful in decreasing performance disparities in STEM at the University of
Pittsburgh. Four outcomes are targeted: participants will 1) persist in science
education and careers; 2) see themselves as having the potential to pursue a
science career; 3) exhibit persistence in the face of challenges; and 4)
experience similar outcomes regardless of their demographic and socioeconomic
background. To ensure that the applicant pool is diverse, student participants
are recruited, in part, from the 6-institution collaborative to which the
University of Pittsburgh belongs. This collaborative, which is organized by the
National Organization for the Professional Advancement of Black Chemists and
Chemical Engineers, includes three HBCUs. The team will also leverage the
established network with colleagues in Puerto Rico, and the feeder network for
ongoing internally funded Summer Undergraduate Research Fellowship (Pitt SURF)
program to further strengthen recruitment efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.