* 2244985
* Collaborative Research: ERASE-PFAS: A "concentrate-and-destroy" technology for treating per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances using a new class of adsorptive photocatalysts
* ENG,CBET
* 10/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Dongye Zhao, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 06/30/2024
* USD 312,596.00

Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) have been manufactured and widely
used in hundreds of consumer products and industrial processes for decades.
Release of PFAS into the environment has resulted in drinking water supplies for
millions of U.S. residents to become contaminated at levels exceeding United
States Environmental Protection Agency health advisory limits. Unfortunately,
conventional water treatment processes are not effective at removing or
destroying PFAS due to the unique molecular properties of these compounds. This
has created an urgent national need for water treatment technology to address
this problem. The goal of this research is to address this problem through a
multi-phase research project focused on developing “trap and destroy”
technology. This technology utilizes a new class of adsorptive materials to
efficiently capture PFASs from water, followed by degradation using targeted
ultraviolet and sunlight-assisted reaction. Successful completion of this
research will benefit society through the production of effective PFAS treatment
technology. Additional benefits result from increased scientific literacy
through enhanced public awareness of PFAS contamination, as well as by
increasing the diversity of the Nation’s STEM workforce by engagement of K-12,
undergraduate, and graduate students from underrepresented groups in research
and training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching research goal of this project
is to develop and fully characterize an innovative technology to cost-
effectively remove and degrade PFAS from contaminated water. The technology is
based on a new class of adsorptive photocatalysts that can selectively adsorb
PFAS from water to the photoactive solid surface, and then destroy PFAS in situ
under UV or solar light. This project will target both legacy PFAS and their
newer substitutes such as GenX. The research goals will be accomplished through
a series of interconnected research tasks to: i) develop adsorptive
photocatalysts optimized for treatment of a wide range of PFAS, ii) characterize
the speed, selectivity, and capacity of the adsorptive photocatalysts for PFAS
treatment, iii) characterize UV- and solar-light solid-phase photocatalysis of
the pre-adsorbed PFAS, and iv) explore ways to enhance photocatalysis through
amendment with low-cost oxidants and manipulation of reaction conditions. The
underlying reaction mechanisms will be investigated through all stages of the
research using state-of-the-science microscopic and spectroscopic analyses of
the materials, high-resolution spectroscopic analysis of the reaction products,
and modern density functional theory calculations. A preliminary cost analysis
will be carried out to assess the cost-effectiveness of the technology compared
to alternative treatment options. Successful completion of the project will
potentially lead to an innovative technology that can cost-effectively treat low
concentrations of PFAS in large volumes of contaminated water. More broadly, the
knowledge gained from this project will also advance our understanding of the
synergistic effects of nanoscale hybrid phases and multiple redox cycles on the
overall performance of reactive composite materials, and potentially transform
our knowledge on fabrication and application of carbon-modified, multi-phase
photocatalysts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.