* 2244043
* REU site: Chemistry for a Sustainable Future - an International Research Experience in the UK
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Terence Nile, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 03/31/2026
* USD 359,592.00

The Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site award to the University
of North Carolina Greensboro, located in Greensboro, NC, supports the training
of 8 students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2023-2025. In this program,
funded by the Division of Chemistry, participants pursue collaborative research
in chemistry at the University of Bath in the United Kingdom. Students will work
with faculty who are members of University of Bath’s Institute for
Sustainability, which brings together multidisciplinary expertise to address
problems related to climate and sustainability through research in sustainable
chemical technologies as applied to polymers, energy sources, catalysis,
chemical transformations and environmental chemistry. The students will also
participate in workshops and activities designed to enhance their communication
skills and understanding of scientific ethics, and prepare them to make the
transition to graduate programs or industrial positions in STEM fields. The
research, workshops and other activities will be infused with an international
perspective to help participants become part of a diverse, globally competitive
STEM workforce in the future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The students undertake
individual projects encompassing all fields of sustainable chemistry. These
include research into sustainable polymers from renewable sources, new battery
technology, upgrading of renewable resources and clean energy. The goal of the
project is to recruit a minimum of 50% underrepresented students in chemistry by
concentrating on two pools of students. The first focus is on students in a
local consortium of nine institutions (three HCBU’s, one MSI, six primarily
undergraduate institutions (PUI’s), one women’s college and a community
college). The second focus is concentrating recruitment efforts on HCBU’s, MSI’s
and PUI’s in the southeastern U.S.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.