* 2244218
* REU Site: Advancing Space Sciences through Undergraduate Research Experiences (ASSURE)
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Matthew Fillingim, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 04/30/2026
* USD 452,146.00

The Advancing Space Sciences through Undergraduate Research Experience (ASSURE)
program at the University of California Space Sciences Laboratory (SSL) provides
undergraduate students with an immersive experience in space science research
and engineering. Students are exposed to a multidisciplinary research laboratory
setting, conducting cutting edge research alongside leaders in the field. The
ASSURE program actively recruits participants from community colleges and other
institutions serving populations historically underrepresented in the space and
geosciences with the aim of providing research experience early in their
careers. The interdisciplinary approach taken in the program is reflective of
the range of skills that students may eventually face in the
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ASSURE program supports research projects
relating to the development of spacecraft instrumentation and hardware, data
analysis, and high-performance computing at the forefront of federally funded
geospace research. Students involved in the program acquire experience required
for design and management of experimental research programs and support a range
of on-going geospace missions. The research staff at SSL is composed of a
diverse international community working on a range of space physics missions in
radio astronomy, magnetospheric physics, heliophysics, planetary science, high
energy astrophysics, and maintains robust engineering facilities. The range of
work at SSL provides ASSURE students with the opportunity to gain a
comprehensive exposure to a range of geospace research, including space weather
and other phenomena of national importance. The program includes a bootcamp to
develop student skills early in the program, careful consideration to mentor
matching, an independent project, and the opportunity to present research at a
national conference. Students will be mentored on scientific communication
including seminars, elevator pitches, and poster presentations. The program
objectives are 1) to provide groups of underserved students (specifically
community college and first-generation college students) with authentic research
experiences, 2) provide students with access to research opportunities that are
not otherwise available to them, and 3) prepare and support researchers in
mentoring undergraduate research students. The program aims for students to 1)
expand their perspectives on science research, 2) increase their understanding
of research methodologies, 3) understand their specific research topic, 4)
increase their professional networks, 5) improve their science communication
skills, and 6) feel prepared to transfer to a four-year university.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is supported by the Department of
Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.