* 2244494
* REU Site: Research Experience for undergraduates in Programming Languages (REPL)
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2027
* Stephan Zdancewic, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 01/31/2027
* USD 322,095.00

REPL (Research Experiences for undergraduates in Programming Languages)
catalyzes the next generation of programming languages research by providing
structured research opportunities for undergraduate students. REPL integrates
its students with “PLClub,” Penn’s research group in programming languages. Over
10 weeks, students conduct cutting edge research, master the relevant
prerequisites, read and analyze prior work, understand ongoing research trends,
and learn how to prepare competitive PhD applications. REPL’s focus is to
provide these opportunities especially to those underrepresented in the
programming languages research community. Between 2012-2018, the Computing
Research Association (CRA) Taulbee survey shows only 4.9% of PhD students in
computer science who study programming languages and compilers are domestic
underrepresented students. REPL is the first REU (NSF or otherwise) designed for
underrepresented students with focus on programming languages. Programming
languages themselves are the basic tools by which all modern software is
constructed, so studying how to improve the reliability, quality, and
performance of programming languages is essential to modern computing
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;REPL research focuses on fundamental questions
concerning the correctness of computation. How do we specify and prove the
correctness of a program? And how do we make these methods scale to large
systems? From 2015-2022, PLClub faculty Steve Zdancewic, Benjamin Pierce, and
Stephanie Weirich co-led an NSF Expedition in Computing on these questions that
explored the “Science of Deep Specification.” Among other things, the expedition
helped us reason about the Haskell programming language, LLVM compiler
optimizations, web servers, and even the correctness of a lightbulb controller,
yet much is left to do. Lightbulb control software, like much software we use
daily, seems simple, but fully specifying and proving that it behaves correctly
is not. This research uses the tools of formal mathematics, program semantics,
and interactive theorem provers to make progress on these problems. Developing
techniques to build highly-trustworthy software systems is a problem for the
next generation: the one that REPL trains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.