* 2244182
* REU Site: Systematics, Evolution and Conservation for the 21st Century
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Cheryl Hayashi, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* John Barthell
* 04/30/2026
* USD 598,311.00

This REU Site award to the American Museum of Natural History (AMNH), located in
New York, NY, will support the training of 12 students for 10 weeks during the
summers of 2023-2025. It is anticipated that a total of 36 students, primarily
from schools with limited research opportunities or from an under-represented
group, will be trained in the program. The program, Systematics and Evolutionary
Biology for the 21st Century, aims to build research capacity and strengthen
skills in students who participate, growing the field of biological sciences
with an aim to diversify the discipline as a whole. Students will learn how
research is conducted, and many will present the results of their work at
scientific conferences. Assessment of the program will be done through the
online SALG URSSA tool. Students will be tracked after the program in order to
determine their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theme of the REU program
is systematics and evolution and students will be mentored in lab and field
techniques, analytical methods, as well as scientific communication and
collaboration. Students will be mentored by museum scientists. Interested
students will register in the NSF ETAP system (https://etap.nsf.gov). In
selecting participants, emphasis is placed on student-project and student-mentor
matching. Student research projects will cover the various fields of the
systematics discipline from descriptive taxonomy to population genomics,
linguistics and phylogenomics; students will learn to collect different types of
neontological and paleontological data, and acquire experience with advanced
morphological, molecular, and computational methods. Students will learn about
the role and responsibility of museums as stewards of diversity through time and
space by gaining familiarity with the AMNH’s vast collections. Further
enrichment will be through weekly lectures and training sessions as well as
workshops on ethics and responsible scientific conduct. More information about
the program is available by visiting https://www.amnh.org/research/richard-
gilder-graduate-school/academics/fellowship-and-grant-
opportunities/undergraduate-fellowships/reu-biology-program, or by contacting
the PI (Dr. Jessica Ware, jware@amnh.org) or the co-PI (Dr. Cheryl Hayashi,
chayashi@amnh.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.