* 2244937
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: TTP: Medium: Toward Complete, User-Friendly, and Trustworthy Confidential Computing with Gramine
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Donald Porter, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 06/30/2027
* USD 598,444.00

This project aims to mature Gramine, previously known as Graphene or Graphene-
SGX, from a successful, open-source (LGPL v3.0) research prototype into a
robust, easy-to-use, and trustworthy building block for confidential computing
applications. Confidential computing protects code and data in use, building
upon recent hardware trusted execution environments (TEEs), such as Intel's SGX
enclaves. Confidential computing is essential for cloud computing applications
that use sensitive data, such as health applications, where one must balance the
economic benefits of cloud computing with regulatory compliance or other
security concerns. Gramine is a "lift-and-shift" framework for running
unmodified applications in Intel SGX. The project addresses various barriers to
adopting Gramine in production settings, including challenges in compatibility,
usability, and security of Gramine. The project's novelties are creating a
robust, general-purpose, open-source, Linux-compatibility layer that can easily
migrate legacy application code from one platform to another---here, emerging
confidential computing hardware. The project's broader significance and
importance is to accelerate the study of confidential computing and other
emerging computational platforms. Gramine is already a building block for over
100 academic papers and several commercial product prototypes. Gramine is
publicly available at
https://github.com/gramineproject/gramine.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
focuses on three aspects of Gramine development. First, the project expands the
set of system interfaces and applications that work on Gramine, with the goal of
supporting 90% of the applications installed on a representative Debian/Ubuntu
system. Second, the project improves the Gramine user experience, by addressing
deployment issues, simplifying configuration and policy decisions, better
integrating with other software frameworks, and expanding the set of supported
TEEs. Third, the project improves the trustworthiness of Gramine's code base
with advanced testing and analysis, as well as rewriting critical code in Rust
programming language.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.