* 2244162
* NRT - Stakeholder Engaged Equitable Decarbonized Energy Futures
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Shalinee Kishore, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 07/31/2028
* USD 2,998,655.00

Carbon-based energy sources like coal, gasoline, and diesel contribute to
greenhouse gas emissions which are a leading cause of climate change. Efforts to
reduce the harm caused by fossil fuel energy generation include renewable
technology solutions and policy changes. However, many solutions are expensive,
and access to them is unequal. Low-income groups have historically spent a
disproportionate amount of their income on energy and may face additional
economic burden in the future due to uneven deployment of energy technologies
and programs. Developing new clean energy solutions and finding low-cost and
equitable ways to deliver them will require a workforce trained to innovate non-
carbon energy solutions and integrate them with infrastructures and policies so
that environmental, economic, and health benefits can be equitably shared. This
future workforce will need to engage with communities to tailor energy solutions
to address needs; communicate effectively with stakeholders from industry,
policy organizations, and government agencies; and ensure awareness of the
environmental, economic, and health implications of clean energy solutions among
impacted communities. This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship
(NRT) award to Lehigh University will establish a program to train a new class
of energy workers with the skills needed for developing and delivering clean,
equitable energy solutions via interdisciplinary training in engineering,
policy, economics, environmental science, data science, and population health.
The project anticipates training 64 trainees, including 24 funded Ph.D. trainees
and an additional 40 graduate students who will enroll in certificate programs
and participate in research projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NRT Program will
innovate the training of Ph.D. and Master’s students through stakeholder
engagement, equity considerations, and interdisciplinarity to pioneer impactful
solutions while developing key skills for energy sector leadership in academia,
industry, government agencies, and policy organizations. This will be
accomplished through seven novel program pillars: (1) coursework on stakeholder
engagement that culminates in an annual student-led stakeholder workshop; (2) a
required course on ethics and equity in technology; (3) a multidisciplinary
engineering, policy, environmental science, economics, and population health
graduate coursework and certificate program; (4) participation in
interdisciplinary research teams that target locally based but universally-
relevant topics in equitable energy decarbonization and require thesis
contributions connecting technology, policy, and stakeholders; (5) required
stakeholder-based internships; (6) community building to amplify the project’s
vision among a broader student population; and (7) professional development and
leadership seminar series to introduce students to a wide range of roles in the
energy sector. Program outcomes will be measured by the efficacy in meeting
identified learning objectives, workforce preparedness of trainees, and ability
to recruit and retain students and address workforce diversity in the energy
sector.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.