* 2244515
* REU Site: Cybersecurity Research of Unmanned Aerial Vehicles
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Mustafa Akbas, Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University
* Standard Grant
* Jill Denner
* 02/28/2026
* USD 380,418.00

This funding institutes a Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site at
Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University (ERAU). Each year, over the summer, ten
highly motivated undergraduates will conduct an intense 10-week Unmanned Aerial
Vehicles (UAV) cybersecurity research program complemented by professional
development activities that prepare them for future cybersecurity careers and
graduate schools. Students will research existing UAV cyber threats and
mitigation strategies and explore new techniques and algorithms to safeguard UAV
systems. The REU program will focus on providing unparalleled opportunities for
undergraduate students, especially those from underrepresented and minority
groups and from institutions with limited resources, by engaging them in real-
world cybersecurity research of UAVs. Through small-group, high-quality
mentoring practices, the REU training will not only aid in enhancing the safety
and security of UAVs in personal and commercial applications but will also build
research confidence among REU participants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall
objective of this project is to immerse undergraduate students in research-
intensive training in the cybersecurity field and encourage them to think
creatively and independently through hands-on project activities. REU
participants will be engaged in faculty-led projects such as UAV cyber-attacks,
UAV cyber defense mechanisms, privacy protection methods for UAV communications,
and Physical Layer-based cybersecurity. They will participate in activities that
range from literature reviews, technical seminars, and workshops to the
preparation, presentation, and dissemination of research findings. The three
major goals of the REU Site are: (1) to expose undergraduate students to a
variety of cybersecurity projects that are bound to build the interest, skills,
and knowledge necessary to pursue cybersecurity careers; (2) to increase the
number of underrepresented undergraduates in cybersecurity and STEM fields
through diversity recruitment emphasis, and (3) to provide undergraduate
students with strong professional skills for their future careers and graduate
schools. The REU Site will leverage ERAUsâ€™ state-of-the-art facilities, research
labs, and faculty expertise to promote interest in cybersecurity and develop
research skills of the undergraduate students which, in turn, will contribute
towards cybersecurity education, training, and workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.