* 2244839
* CRII: SHF: Homotopical Logic Programs
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Rose Bohrer, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 06/30/2025
* USD 164,646.00

This project provides a novel programming language centered around programming
with shapes and structures, such as points, edges, and surfaces. This style of
programming supports applications ranging from creative crafts like sewing to
key computing topics like cryptography and computer-checked mathematics. The
project’s novelties are its focus on programming with constraints, solving those
constraints automatically by a computer, and providing a language that is
suitable for application-level programming without extensive mathematical
background, in contrast to traditional approaches. The project’s impacts are
providing an elegant programming environment for the aforementioned application
domains, providing a deeper understanding of the underlying theories of
computation, and providing novel outreach activities, which use geometrically-
intense crafts like sewing as an on-ramp to the rich mathematics of programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator develops HoTTLP, a logic programming (LP)
interpretation of Homotopy Type Theory (HoTT). LP is the paradigm of
programming-as-proof-search. HoTT is a style of type system with rich, higher-
order notions of equality. Previous efforts to apply HoTT focused on its
implementation within theorem-proving software, which entailed a sharp learning-
curve. The project’s use of LP enables a simpler, application-level language
that can be used without prior experience in specialized theorem-proving
software, thus reducing the learning curve. The project answers these research
questions: i) What types in HoTT can be interpreted as LP clauses? ii) What
HoTTLP clauses should be considered well-typed? iii) What does it mean to solve
HoTTLP constraints? iv) How can (backward and forward) proof search for HoTTLP
be described precisely? v) What data structures and algorithms enable the
implementation of those proof search procedures? vi) What do the nascent
applications of HoTT stand to gain from HoTTLP? These contributions to the basic
science of computing have potential impacts across diverse applications of
computing. The outreach activities will provide students with a unique window
into the field of programming language theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.