* 2244127
* Understanding the sorting, transport and fate of RNA cargo in Extracellular Vesicles at single molecule resolution
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2027
* Shawn Polson, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Adrienne Cheng
* 03/31/2027
* USD 1,000,003.00

Extracellular vesicles (EVs) are a diverse group of lipid bilayer-bound vesicles
of varying sizes and origins that are released out from all living cells.
Initially thought of as cellular “dust” or “garbage bags”, EVs have now been
found to play a role in a myriad of biological activities, ranging from
maintaining homeostasis to cancer progression. EVs can carry a range of cargo,
including proteins, lipids, and nucleic acids (such as DNA and RNA), that
contribute to their diverse functions. While much research has focused on
understanding the synthesis and release of EVs from the cell, little research
has been conducted on how cargo gets sorted and packaged into EVs. This project
focuses on the RNA component of EVs and seeks to understand the selection,
packaging, and transport of linear and circular RNAs in EVs. Circular RNAs have
a multitude of regulatory functions, and dysregulation of circular RNA
expression has been linked to disease outcomes. Overall, this project will
provide a new understanding of RNA transport via EVs. The project will also have
educational impact through training of next-generation scientists through
recruitment students at multiple stages, including K-12 students, first-
generation college students, and undergraduates from low-income families.
Students will gain multidisciplinary skills by incorporating studies of cell
biology, biochemistry, imaging, bioinformatics, and computational
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extracellular vesicles (EVs) have been found to
carry a wide variety of biomolecules including DNA, RNA, proteins, and lipids;
however, their content varies based on the physiological state of the cell
producing them. Moreover, EVs have been implicated in a wide spectrum of
physiological and pathological conditions, and they can serve as important
players in cell-cell communication. Leveraging the PI's previous expertise with
single-molecule imaging systems for studying intracellular transport of RNAs
from the nucleus to distant sites in cells, this project will address the long-
standing question of how RNA cargo is sorted and packaged into EVs. There have
been several theories proposed, but none of these are substantiated with direct
visual evidence. Reporter constructs and genome-wide RNA sequencing of EV RNA
cargo will be used to determine how and what factors govern the selective
packaging of RNA cargo. The role of EV surface marker heterogeneity in RNA cargo
content will also be evaluated, as well as its effect on uptake of EVs by
recipient cells. The analysis of RNA sorting, tracking of RNA movement into EVs,
and eventual transfer of RNAs into recipient cells will help to uncover the
biological function of RNA cargo. Use of imaging at single-molecule resolution
will provide the first visual validation of sorting and delivery processes and
will serve as the basis of future advancements in our understanding of cell-cell
communication, thereby enabling better engineering of EVs for therapy and
diagnostic purposes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences (MCB) and the Established Program
to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.