* 2244683
* Quantum Dynamics Approaches to Simulate Polariton Photochemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Pengfei Huo, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 03/31/2026
* USD 490,637.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
in the Division of Chemistry, Pengfei Huo of the University of Rochester is
developing new theoretical approaches to simulate quantum dynamics of polariton
photochemical processes. Coupling molecular excitons to a quantized radiation
field inside an optical cavity generates hybrid light-matter states, so called
polaritons. Polariton chemistry has the potential to provide a new paradigm for
enabling chemical transformations. Theoretical investigations play a vital role
in understanding new knowledge and basic principles in this emerging field. Dr.
Huo and his group are working to develop new quantum dynamics methods for
accurate and direct simulations of polariton photochemical processes. With these
new theoretical approaches, Dr. Huo and his team will investigate the dynamics
of such molecule-cavity hybrid systems to glean information on the basic
principles in polariton photochemistry. Dr. Huo will continue his 'Journey to
the Molecular World' summer school for high school students in the Rochester
City School District, which aims to inspire their curiosity and enthusiasm about
molecular science. Dr. Huo will also collaborate with his colleagues to organize
a new Telluride workshop on polariton chemistry, which will bring together
experimentalists and theorists for exchanging the most recent scientific
discoveries in polariton chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Accurately simulating
the non-adiabatic dynamics of the molecule-cavity hybrid system remains a
challenge and lies beyond the current scope of photochemistry and quantum
optics. Existing approaches are often based on quantum optics model Hamiltonians
that break down under the strong light-matter coupling regime, or mixed quantum-
classical (MQC) simulations that have known deficiencies. To address these
challenges, Dr. Huo and his group will develop new non-adiabatic methods that
are based on the rigorous quantum electrodynamics Hamiltonian and provide
accurate dynamics simulations compared to the commonly used MQC approaches. Dr.
Huo and his team will also develop new on-the-fly simulation techniques based on
the quasi-diabatic propagation scheme to perform ab-initio polariton non-
adiabatic dynamics in realistic molecule-cavity hybrid systems. The proposed
work aims to provide a set of transformative theoretical tools and frameworks
that can accurately simulate real-time polaritonic quantum dynamics. These
theoretical investigations have the potential to provide fundamental knowledge
of quantum light-matter-interaction-induced chemistry and facilitate new
discoveries in polariton chemistry, inspiring transformative design principles
that take advantage of the intrinsic quantum behaviors of photons. Such
fundamental knowledge and insight obtained from this theoretical work has the
potential to profoundly impact catalysis, energy production, and the field of
chemistry at large.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.