* 2244304
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research Experiences on Resilient and Sustainable of Infrastructure System in Smart Cities (RSISSC)
* ENG,EEC
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Allison MacKay, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2026
* USD 435,993.00

The three-year REU Site, Undergraduate Research Experiences on Resilient and
Sustainable Infrastructure System in Smart Cities (RSISSC) at The Ohio State
University will host a 10-week summer research experience for 10 undergraduate
students each year to work collaboratively on research problems in Smart Cities.
Participants will engage in interdisciplinary projects and conduct hands-on
research while working closely with faculty and graduate research ambassadors.
Participants will expand their networks and professional preparation for
graduate degrees in civil, environmental, and geodetic engineering. Research
activities will be enhanced through guest lectures and field trips. The REU
students will learn how to conduct scientific research and how to effectively
communicate, network, and present their research to a general audience. The REU
Site will offer a new framework to share ideas under the umbrella of the ‘Smart
City’ that will provide a rich context to prepare students for future careers in
civil, environmental and geodetic engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three-
year REU Site, Undergraduate Research Experiences on Resilient and Sustainable
Infrastructure System in Smart Cities (RSISSC) at The Ohio State University will
host a 10-week summer research experience for 10 undergraduate students each
year to work collaboratively on research problems in Smart Cities. The research
findings obtained by REU participants will directly enhance the operation of
Smart Cities through the applied development of coupled sensor and data
analytics strategies and through the application of novel materials and
technologies. The RSISSC REU program focuses on diversifying the workforce with
underrepresented science and engineering students. The project provides research
training to engage in developing Smart City solutions to address the combined
pressures that the growing population, aging infrastructure assets, and changing
climate have on the safety and security of urban society. Importantly, the REU
research advances are cross-cutting across civil infrastructure systems,
geospatial data collection and analysis, public health protection, and energy
systems. This cross-cutting will occur at interfaces between civil,
environmental, and geodetic engineering sub-disciplinary areas. By bringing
together undergraduate students, faculty, and graduate students, the REU Site
will offer a new framework to share ideas under the umbrella of the ‘Smart City’
that will provide a rich context to prepare students for future careers in
civil, environmental and geodetic engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.