* 2244450
* REU Site: Non-Invasive Deep Brain-Computer Interfaces
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Jing He, Kennesaw State University Research and Service Foundation
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 04/30/2025
* USD 323,650.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site will enable eight
undergraduate students each year to undertake cutting-edge research topics in
Robust Intelligent non-invasive Deep brain-computer interface (BCI) Systems at
Kennesaw State University (KSU). The overall goal of this interdisciplinary
program is to provide undergraduate students with a multi-mentor academic
environment. The REU Site will use the creative potential of BCI technology to
attract and broaden the participation of women and underrepresented minorities
in the Computing and Engineering fields. The KSU REU program focuses on
recruiting students from a broad range of disciplinary backgrounds who are
interested in pursuing research careers in Computer and Information Engineering.
To achieve this, this REU site will: (i) involve eight students per summer for a
10-week long research project in BCI and related technology with mentored
research projects conducted in collaboration with other subfields, (ii) provide
training in tools and technologies that are common in these research areas,
(iii) inspire participating students to consider STEM as a career path and
pursue STEM career at the graduate level, (iv) specifically target participation
of women and underrepresented minorities, and (v) encourage participation of
undergraduate students who have limited research opportunities at their home
colleges and universities. The mentoring team for each REU student includes
members not only from computer science but also from diverse backgrounds,
including data science, information technology, and engineering technology.
Students will participate in various activities to broaden future career
opportunities such as graduate study, research scientists, outstanding science
and engineer positions, and faculty career path. In addition, REU students will
submit their final research papers to target conferences and journals. The
investigators and mentors are all women faculty at KSU, which can attract more
underrepresented groups to this program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recruited students
will be offered an innovative multi-disciplinary STEM cyber-learning environment
and hands-on practices. Through the KSU REU program, eight REU students will
fully work on whole-cycle research projects and master professional research
skills under the guidance of experienced faculty and industry mentors. These
research projects will have a high-level focus on Brain-Computer Interface
(BCI)-related topics covering advanced topics in robust intelligence, using non-
invasive electroencephalography (EEG) data. This REU site will (i) engage
undergraduates in the integrated design of IoT devices, healthcare, big data
analysis, cyber security, and deep machine learning methods, (ii) encourage
students to participate in student data mining competitions, (iii) help the REU
students enhance their presentation skills, research abilities, as well as
patent and publication preparation, (iv) provide a transformative career
experience for students who are on the brink of making decisions about their
post-undergraduate career directions, and (v) provide strong interdisciplinary
research opportunities for women and underrepresented undergraduate Students.
KSU REU program will organize field trips, workshops, seminars, poster day
events, and various social activities to enrich the educational and research
experiences. The research carried out by the participating undergraduate
students will advance the state of the art in incorporating BCI techniques for
various applications such as healthcare (speech and motor disability, mental
health, public health and disease spreading), empathy training, privacy
preserving data analytics, and machine learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.