* 2244372
* REU site: Summer Research at the University at Albany's RNA Institute
* BIO,DBI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Andy Berglund, SUNY at Albany
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 05/31/2026
* USD 120,825.00

This REU Site award to State University of New York at Albanyâ€™s RNA Institute,
located in Albany, NY, will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks
during the summers of 2023-2025. An anticipated total of 30 students, primarily
from schools with limited research opportunities or from a group under-
represented in STEM, will be trained in the program. Students will participate
in hands-on research focused on scientific discovery in, and around, ribonucleic
acid (RNA) science and RNA-based technologies. This work benefits society by
generating innovation and building infrastructure capacity for future research,
diagnostic, and therapeutic applications. Students will learn how research is
conducted, and many will present the results of their work at scientific
conferences. Assessment of the program will be done through the online SALG
URSSA tool. The NSF ETAP system will be used to register participants
(https://www.nsfetap.org/). Students will be tracked after the program in order
to determine their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU in RNA focuses on
students participating in scientific discovery in ribonucleic acid (RNA) science
and RNA-based technologies. The program encompasses faculty from multiple
departments including Biological Sciences, Chemistry, Biomedical Sciences, and
Physics. Students will gain hands-on research experience, one-on-one mentoring,
and cohort-based guidance on STEM educational and career opportunities.
Applications to the program include, a transcript, letters of recommendation,
and short personal essay. Students can browse summaries of potential research
projects and mentors on the REU in RNA website and will rank and select up to
three mentors and a general research area of interest (chemistry, biology,
physics, or engineering). Potential projects include using RNA folding to
predict RNA structures, transcriptional regulation by ribosomes, applied DNA
nanotechnology, developmental biology &amp; regenerative medicine, and toxic RNA
disease &amp; therapeutics. Program PIs and senior faculty will select
candidates based on faculty input, academic potential, proposed mentor, and
previous experience. Prior research experience is not a prerequisite for
participation nor will it dominate the selection criteria. More information
about the program is available by visiting http://www.albany.edu/rna/reu-in-rna,
or by contacting the PI (Dr. Berglund at aberglund@albany.edu) or the co-PI (Dr.
Kent at skent@albany.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.