* 2244916
* Conference: Critical Materials and Clean Sustainable Energy - A Square Table Workshop
* MPS,DMR
* 12/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Roderick Eggert, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 08/31/2023
* USD 129,105.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Materials act as core enablers of
transformative technologies that can help address global concerns such as
climate change, sustainable manufacturing, and critical materials supply chains.
Addressing climate change through adoption of clean sustainable energy will
place additional demands on critical materials needed for new and existing
technologies. This Square Table will explore the challenge of material
constraints to the adoption of clean sustainable energy with particular
attention to how the Materials Genome Initiative (MGI) approach can help address
supply chain constraints on critical minerals and materials. These constraints
will be considered within the context of overarching themes of scalability,
manufacturability, and sustainability. The scope of the table includes materials
used directly in clean energy as well in other applications that impact supply
of and demand for such materials. Participants will help to identify gaps in the
Materials Innovation Infrastructure and identify the parts that need to come
together. The Square Table will facilitate interactions of communities spanning
the materials development continuum, including researchers, industry, and end
users.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award is to support a Square Table on Critical Materials for Clean Sustainable
Energy, to be held in December 2022. The Materials Genome Initiative (MGI)
Strategic Plan proposed National Grand Challenges that can be addressed by
accelerating materials development as a mechanism to build out the Materials
Innovation Infrastructure. This Square Table will inform the scoping of a
potential MGI grand challenge through identifying opportunities to accelerate
the adoption of clean sustainable energy by addressing critical materials
challenges. The four sides of the Square Table will facilitate interactions of
communities spanning the materials development continuum: (1) critical
minerals/materials community, (2) data/computational (the Materials Genome
Initiative), (3) advanced manufacturing, and (4) sustainability. The goal of the
meeting is to foster stimulating discussions between individuals whose work at
the frontiers of their own discipline may not yet intersect in a substantial way
yet but whose exchange of knowledge, thoughts, and ideas could identify research
discoveries and directions that have high potential impact on, and may be
transformative for, critical materials for clean sustainable energy. The outcome
of the meeting will summarize the overarching questions discussed in the
meeting, the key challenges and opportunities identified in the meeting, and the
new, potentially transformative ideas that emerge from the
discussions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.