* 2244622
* Collaborative Research: RUI: MULTILEVEL EFFECTS OF URBANIZATION ON WILDLIFE HEALTH: AN INTEGRATIVE APPROACH
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Elizabeth Addis, Gonzaga University
* Standard Grant
* Douglas Levey
* 06/30/2026
* USD 210,700.00

Urban areas are growing worldwide, causing significant loss of habitat for
wildlife. Exactly how such changes in habitat lead to declines in wildlife
populations is not fully understood. The associated mechanisms are hard to study
because the species most negatively impacted simply don’t occur in urban
habitats. This project focuses on a species, the Western Deer Mouse, that is
found in both urban and rural habitats. Researchers will collect data on
habitat, such as food availability and noise, and on mouse health, such as
immune function and stress, along a gradient from urban woodlots to nearly
pristine forests in and around Spokane, Washington. Data will be used to
identify which factors most impact wildlife health in urban areas. Because
wildlife can carry diseases that are passed to humans, information about the
health of urban species has direct relevance to human health. Many undergraduate
students from three institutions will be involved in the study, thereby gaining
important interdisciplinary training. Additionally, two in-class research
activities based on this project will be developed and implemented in courses at
the three institutions, giving hundreds of additional students experience in
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Peromyscus sonoriensis was selected as a model
organism because it inhabits a wide diversity of environments across an
urbanization gradient, thus facilitating natural comparative analyses of direct
and indirect impacts of urbanization. Most other studies focus on only one or a
few variables of urbanization and the models that result are simplistic, as many
variables are involved and frequently co-vary. This study uses a suite of
urbanization variables that are predicted to affect, and be indicators of, an
animal’s health. Correspondingly, “health” will be assessed with a variety of
metrics of stress (acute and chronic), body condition (e.g., parasite infection,
reproductive status), immune function (e.g., quantification of neutrophils, B
cells, helper T cells), and gut microbiome analysis. Using research sites
located along an urbanization gradient, researchers will: 1) quantify
urbanization and its effects on habitat characteristics, 2) assess multiple
metrics of deer mouse health, and 3) integrate responses between and within
habitats and organisms to investigate multi-dimensional effects of urbanization
on deer mouse health. The mechanism-based findings can be used in efforts to
conserve or remediate habitats in the face of encroaching urbanization, enabling
a proactive rather than reactive approach to conservation and
restoration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.