* 2244835
* Conference: Seminar on Stochastic Processes 2023
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Sunhi Choi, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Wilmer
* 02/29/2024
* USD 49,860.00

The Seminar on Stochastic Processes 2023 (SSP 2023) will be held at the
University of Arizona in Tucson, Arizona on March 8-11 2023. These seminars have
been held annually (with the exception of 2021) since 1981 and are an important
regular conference series for North American probabilists, bringing together a
diverse group of accomplished researchers, early-career investigators, and
graduate students. The primary goals of SSP 2023 are to present the most
significant recent progress in probability theory and stochastic processes and
to enable participants to discuss their work with peers. The five main speakers
and tutorial lecturer were chosen for their prominence in the field and for the
collective breadth of their research areas. SSP 2023 will also incorporate
activities intended especially for new researchers; these will include two
90-minute tutorial lectures, a poster session with accompanying mini-talks, an
open problem session, and a panel discussion on topics of particular interest to
early-career researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stochastic processes are
fundamental to understanding the way randomness occurs in the real world and are
used to model a wide variety of physical, biological, ecological, and financial
phenomena. Some of the topics that will be addressed in this meeting include
probability motivated by problems from physics, such as percolation, random
matrix theory and spin systems; the probabilistic theory of mean field games;
the derivation of partial differential equations and stochastic partial
differential equations from underlying stochastic microscopic dynamics; and
random phenomena in fractal-like environments. Financial support to attend the
conference will be preferentially given to graduate students, postdocs, women,
members of under-represented or marginalized groups, and to early-career
researchers who may not otherwise be able to attend the conference. Additional
information may be found on the conference webpage,
https://ssp2023.math.arizona.edu/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.