* 2244396
* NRT AI: Artificial intelligence for Changing Climate and Environmental SuStainability (ACCESS)
* EDU,DGE
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2028
* Chunlei Fan, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 06/30/2028
* USD 2,995,210.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate change is a pressing issue with major
implications for societal well-being, particularly for disadvantaged
communities. Climate-related extreme events such as hurricanes, flooding,
drought, heatwaves, wildfires are escalating around the world. Machine-learning
(ML) based Artificial-Intelligence (AI) approaches have shown great promise in
reducing and responding to changing climate. However, climate change research is
fractionated in diverse disciplines (computer science, data science, AI,
geosciences, environmental science, and engineering). This delays the progress
towards a better understanding of the impacts of climate change and ML/AI
solutions. This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship award to the
Morgan State University will provide substantive, hands-on research experience
for students from underrepresented minority populations who can tackle grand
environmental challenges using interdisciplinary methods. The traineeship will
prepare 50 PhD students including 25 funded trainees from diverse fields (bio-
environmental science, computer science, civil engineering, mathematics,
electrical and computer engineering) with technical, dynamic interdisciplinary
and professional skills to responsibly solve grand climate change
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The traineeship program places a strong
emphasis on a convergence research approach to climate change, which is a
pressing 21st century challenge. Major research efforts will focus on three
areas: a) AI for water reuse; b) emerging contaminants and ML/AI prediction; and
c) disease ecology, climate change and AI. The program consists of an
interdisciplinary team of environmental chemists, environmental scientists,
computer scientists, engineers to focus on research, educational, and career
development activities. Over a five-year period, the career and scientific
activities will include: a) mentored research thesis; b) advanced experimental
courses; c) a series of professional workshops on leadership, scientific ethic,
and science communication skills; d) domestic internship opportunities; e)
summer workshops on changing climate and solutions; and f) international
research internships. Trainees will work in teams to solve real-world
environmental challenges, and a seminar with invited distinguished speakers and
professional development activities will all help to foster a friendly and
collaborative inclusive positive learning environment. The outcome will be a
cohort of students from groups historically underrepresented in STEM fields with
a strong multidisciplinary background and understanding of how AI can provide
solutions for changing climate, environmental pollution, and water quality
management. The goal is to provide a rewarding opportunity for all trainees to
conduct novel, hands-on citizen science research at Morgan State under the
guidance of diverse faculty and postdocs. A second major goal is to increase the
participation of students from minority groups and stimulate their interest to
pursue future careers in the STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research
Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM
graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research
areas through comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-
based, and aligned with changing workforce and research
needs.  &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.