* 2244254
* REU Site: Thermal Energy Management on Multiple Scales
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2026
* John Meacham, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 03/31/2026
* USD 436,092.00

This three-year renewal REU Site project "Thermal Energy Management at Multiple
Scales" is housed at Washington University. The primary objectives are to expand
student participation in thermal energy management research on multiple scales
and to attract a diverse pool of curious, motivated students into engineering
careers. The ability to control temperature and the transfer of thermal energy
(thermal management) is critical to addressing the most important global
challenges: clean and renewable energy production; inexpensive, efficient and
reliable transportation; and ever-increasing data storage and processing
demands. A large and diverse STEM workforce is critical to our global
competitiveness. To broaden participation, the site will comprise at least 50%
students from schools with limited research opportunities in STEM, 50% women,
and 30% racial/ethnic underrepresented minorities or people with disabilities.
This REU site will help increase the participation of women and underrepresented
minorities in engineering careers through two proven strategies: (1) providing
undergraduate research experience and (2) teaching students the societal
importance of engineering through exposure to a variety of industrial,
entrepreneurial, and academic career options; tours; and discussions with
engineers. Ten students each year will study research topics involving heat and
power, ranging from novel battery technologies, to enhanced cooling of micro-
electronics and power electronics, to radiation in carbon capture processes over
ten weeks in the summer. This will expose students to a range of engineering
challenges, research methodologies, and careers that address the ever-expanding
need for thermal-fluids engineers. The site will prepare students for their
careers by teaching them how to communicate through oral presentations, posters,
and written papers or reports. To further broaden participation, students will
undertake an outreach project by assisting in teaching a short engineering
course to underserved high school students in Washington University’s College
Prep program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year renewal REU Site project
"Thermal Energy Management at Multiple Scales" is housed at Washington
University. The primary objectives are to expand student participation in
thermal energy management research on multiple scales and to attract a diverse
pool of students into engineering careers. This REU site will advance the
current understanding of fundamental heat and mass transfer, while translating
discoveries to applied technologies for thermal energy management at the
nano-/microscale, component, and system scales. The ability to control
temperature and the transfer of thermal energy (thermal management) is critical
to addressing the most important global challenges: clean and renewable energy
production; inexpensive, efficient and reliable transportation; and ever-
increasing data storage and processing demands. This REU site will advance the
current understanding of fundamental heat and mass transfer, while translating
discoveries to applied technologies for thermal energy management at the
nano-/microscale, component, and system scales. For 10 weeks during the summer,
students will be immersed in research projects tied to emerging technologies,
such as metal-air batteries and nanofluidic and micro-/nanostructural thermal
transport enhancement, while also learning the role of thermal-fluids engineers
in the micro-/power electronics, chemical/material processing, transportation,
and energy industries. The site will be interdisciplinary, approaching topics in
thermal energy management from mechanical and chemical engineering perspectives.
Activities will include lunches with faculty, research skills seminars,
lab/industry tours, preparation for the GRE, and social activities. Participants
will have multiple one-on-one advising sessions with the PI to define and
develop a plan for achieving personal goals, and students’ progress will be
tracked after the summer ends. The summer will culminate with students preparing
a technical report, conference proceeding, or journal article as well as
presenting their research results through a poster and oral presentation at a
final research symposium. The fall after their summer experience, two students
will have the choice of presenting their posters at ASME’s International
Mechanical Engineering Conference and Exposition or AIChe’s Student
Conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.