* 2244390
* REU Site for Energy-Efficient Devices and Systems (R-SEEDS)
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2026
* Lina Sawalha, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 03/31/2026
* USD 405,191.00

The REU Site for Energy-Efficient Devices and Systems (R-SEEDS) at Western
Michigan University (WMU) aims to engage undergraduate students in energy-
efficient technology research, design, and development. The development of
energy-efficient technologies (i.e., technologies that require less energy to
perform the same function) is a very effective approach to combat pollution and
climate change, improve the competitiveness of industries and businesses, and
reduce costs. This three-year program will support the creation of a workforce
capable of conducting interdisciplinary research in energy efficiency. It will
inspire a new generation that is conscious of the effect of energy consumption
on the environment and can research and develop energy-efficient systems and
technologies. The program will also train and educate a diverse workforce of new
researchers, resulting in more technological prosperity in the US. Ten
participants each year will be engaged in 10-week intensive team-based projects,
working on cutting-edge research. This experience will prepare them for graduate
programs and high-demand jobs in energy efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU
Site for Energy-Efficient Devices and Systems (R-SEEDS) at Western Michigan
University (WMU) aims to engage undergraduate students in energy-efficient
technology research, design, and development. The three-year R-SEEDS program
will offer research projects in a broad range of exciting engineering and
computing topics, such as computer architectures and systems, electric grid
component design, autonomous vehicles, nanosatellites, plasma-assisted
combustion, industrial carbon capture, neurobiological engineering, and
microplasma sterilization. Ten students each year will learn the different
challenges imposed by implementing energy-efficient systems and ways to overcome
those challenges. The program will further train students to prepare them for a
career in engineering and science through several workshops and seminars on
energy efficiency, sustainability, research methodologies and tools, research
ethics, research as a career, graduate studies, and presentation and writing
skills. All activities will be supervised by academic advisors from three
engineering departments: Electrical and Computer Engineering, Mechanical and
Aerospace Engineering, and Chemical and Paper Engineering, with support from
industrial partners. The participants will engage with the advisors’ research
group, and academic and industry collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.