* 2244151
* REU Site: Integration of Chemical Theory, Computation and Experiment at Duquesne University
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Jeffrey Evanseck, Duquesne University
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 04/30/2026
* USD 390,000.00

The Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site award to Duquesne
University, located in Pittsburgh, PA, supports the training of 10 students for
10 weeks during the summers of 2023-2025. Funded by the Division of Chemistry,
the Duquesne REU site continues to impact the professional chemistry careers and
education of undergraduates and faculty from Appalachian regional institutions
with limited research infrastructure and/or from underrepresented populations.
To meet this challenge, Duquesne University delivers a quality research
experience, with a focus on computational and theoretical chemistry, that
motivates undergraduates and faculty to achieve their highest academic
performance and best prepare them for scientific research and discovery. The
core idea is to establish meaningful, year-round, and long-term research
collaborations driven by the need for academic productivity and excellence in
undergraduate training. The REU site serves national interest by promoting
advances in the basic sciences, training and support of the U.S. scientific
workforce, and advancing prosperity and welfare.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
project focuses on strong financial and infrastructure support of research
collaborations that invigorate PUI/HBC/LSAMP faculty, who in turn directly
impact students and learning environments at their home institutions. Duquesne
has NSF-funded resources, established research programs, proven record in
student placement, and strong partnerships with local industry. REU students
receive explicit training to reinforce the scientific method, scientific writing
and speaking, ethics, safety, and workshops on state-of-the-art instrumentation
to complement their experimental research and build invaluable skill sets. Each
student has the opportunity to present their research locally, regionally, and
nationally to expand their professional exposure and networking to make more
informed career decisions and best prepare for graduate school. The
PUI/HBC/LSAMP faculty are empowered through meaningful and productive academic
collaboration to enhance their professional development. The broader impacts of
this work include meaningful research experiences to attract and retain the
nation’s diverse student talent pool, which has the consequence of enhancing and
diversifying the U.S. workforce by adding experts in the fields of chemistry or
biochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.