* 2244549
* REU Site: Chemistry Pathways to Building Functional Materials at the University of Texas at Dallas
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Michael Biewer, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 08/31/2026
* USD 350,000.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduate (REU) site award to University of
Texas at Dallas (UTD), located in Richardson, TX, supports the training of 8
students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2023-2025. In this REU program,
funded by the Division of Chemistry, participants pursue collaborative research
projects, with a focus on materials chemistry involving chemical synthesis,
material characterization, and semiconductor technologies. Alongside research,
participants also take part in a professional development and ethics training
program, with a focus on science communication and preparation for graduate
school or industrial careers. Through independent research projects and workshop
and seminar series, this site broadens participation in STEM. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The REU participants will discover improved chemical processes for
the synthesis of organic-inorganic functional materials and biomaterials. The
proposed research plan will support research at the interface of chemistry and
materials chemistry, with a particular emphasis on fabricating and testing
devices in the UTD clean room facility. These projects include improved organic
semiconducting materials, dynamic covalent chemistry in 3D printing, hybrid
perovskites for neutron detection, preparation of metal nanoparticles for bio-
applications, and dynamics of protein-nucleic acid complexes. This site is
committed to broadening participation by encouraging women and underrepresented
groups in research at this chemistry and materials science interface.
Participants gain an exposure to chemistry research in semiconductor technology
and clean room techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Site is supported in part
by funds provided to the National Science Foundation by the Semiconductor
Research Corporation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.