* 2244994
* Collaborative Research: Changes and Impact of Right Ventricle Viscoelasticity Under Acute Stress and Chronic Pulmonary Hypertension
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Christian Puttlitz, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Lucy T. Zhang
* 06/30/2026
* USD 337,430.00

The failure of the right ventricle can indicate a higher risk of mortality in
diseases like pulmonary hypertension and heart failure with preserved ejection
fraction. People with these diseases often report exercise intolerance, which
suggests that their response to physical stress is impaired. This research
project aims to improve our understanding of the mechanical behavior of the
right ventricle and how it affects its pumping function. The concept of
viscoelasticity, which refers to the immediate (elastic) and delayed (viscous)
resistance of cardiac tissue during contraction and relaxation, will be used to
study how cellular behavior and the overall performance of the heart are
affected. The research will include a comprehensive analysis of the
viscoelasticity of the right ventricle tissue and its implications in organ
function. The findings of this study could be used to the care and management of
approximately 6.7 million heart failure patients, which are projected to
increase with the aging population. The research team plans to engage young
minds and advance the education of the next generation of bioengineers, with a
focus on mentoring women and first-generation students to enhance diversity in
the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of the research is to discover
how the ventricle wall viscoelastic properties change under acute stress and
chronic pulmonary hypertension and impact organ function. To characterize the
tissue biaxial viscoelasticity with disease progression and at varied heart
rates, the passive viscoelasticity of the right ventricle will be measured
experimentally by stress relaxation and cyclical tensile tests and simulated
computationally with our validated models. To reveal the cellular and
extracellular componentsâ€™ contributions to tissue viscoelasticity, drug
treatment will be performed to depolymerize microtubules and degrade collagen
and changes in tissue viscoelasticity will be quantified. A new multiscale
constitutive model will be developed to predict the viscoelasticity of myofibers
and collagen as well as collagen recruitment. Finally, organ function changes
will be measured with right ventricle viscoelasticity altered by chronic
hypertension and acute stress. Educational activities include the distribution
of various STEM kits to elementary and middle-to-high school students in
northern Colorado, participation in existing K-12 public outreach events on
campus. Additionally, there will be training and mentoring of underrepresented
undergraduate and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.