* 2244169
* REU Site: Microbiology at the host-pathogen interface
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* David Weiss, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2026
* USD 130,856.00

This REU Site award to The University of Iowa, located in Iowa City, IA, will
support the training of 10 students each year for 10 weeks during the summers of
2023-2025. It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools
with limited research opportunities or from an under-represented group, will be
trained in the program. The primary objectives of the program are to generate
new knowledge and to strengthen our nation’s STEM workforce by encouraging
students to pursue a career in basic science and giving them skills to succeed
in that path. Students will learn how microbiology research is conducted, and
many will present the results of their work at scientific conferences.
Assessment of the program will be done through the online SALG URSSA tool.
Students will be tracked after the program in order to determine their career
paths. Students will be required to register their participation in the NSF’s
ETAP website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the program is host-pathogen
interactions involving bacteria, viruses, and parasites. Each student will
conduct an independent laboratory research project under the guidance of a
faculty and a graduate student or postdoctoral co-mentor from the Department of
Microbiology and Immunology. Participants will be instructed in communicating
their research in short talks, a written report, and a campus-wide poster
session. Participants will also attend workshops, seminars, and social functions
to broaden their understanding of microbiology, graduate school, career options,
and responsible conduct of research. Applications will include a form, personal
statement, information on career goals, research interests, two letters of
recommendation, and college transcripts. Prior research experience is not
required. Students are selected by the program directors based on their academic
record, letters of recommendation, and potential for outstanding careers
involving microbiology research. More information about the program is available
by visiting https://medicine.uiowa.edu/microbiology/education/summer-research-
experience-undergraduates-reu-microbiology, or by contacting the PI (Dr. David
Weiss at david-weiss@uiowa.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Gina McGrane at regina-
mcgrane@uiowa.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.