* 2244705
* WTG: Beyond the black box: understanding the use of algorithmic risk assessments in the juvenile justice system
* SBE,SES
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2025
* Kelly Murphy, Child Trends Inc
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 01/31/2025
* USD 450,000.00

Research has consistently shown that youth, who come into contact with the
juvenile justice system, are less likely to re-offend when the intensity of the
intervention that they receive (e.g., placement in a secure residential facility
vs. participation in community-based services) is aligned with their relative
risk for reoffending (Lipsey, 2009). Accordingly, juvenile justice systems
throughout the nation have adopted research-based, juvenile risk and needs
assessment tools that can be used to inform youths’ case plans. These tools,
many of which are algorithmically based, are used by decision makers, such as
judges, to estimate youths’ risk for reoffending as well as identify factors
that may make reoffense more (or less) likely. Although research has generally
shown that risk assessment tools are more accurate and less biased than the
unstructured judgements of decision makers, some research has shown that these
tools have the potential to perpetuate and mask racial disparities and other
historical inequities (Goal et al., 2021; St. John et al., 2020). Research on
risk assessments has been limited, however, by the fact that it has almost
exclusively focused on the tools themselves—rarely examining how decision makers
use the tools in practice. This limited focus is problematic because in
practice, these tools are intended to provide information to decision makers
rather than replace them. Thus, biases can potentially be introduced not just in
the risk assessments themselves but also in decisions on whether to accept or
reject the assessment's recommendation. To address this issue, this study will
examine how decision makers use risk assessments. Importantly, we will examine
how different contextual factors affect the use of the tool as well as how the
use of the tool affects youth outcomes. A key goal of this study will be to
develop policy and practice guidance to promote more effective and equitable use
of risk assessments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the study aims, we will
partner with a juvenile justice agency in a Southern state—which implements a
statewide juvenile risk and needs assessment tool—to conduct a three-year mixed-
methods study. We will conduct primary data collection, including a survey and
focus groups, with judges and analyze secondary data from the state juvenile
justice and education agencies, law enforcement, and the American Community
Survey. Secondary data will include variables such as youths’ sociodemographic
characteristics (e.g., race/ethnicity, age, and sex); risk assessment scores;
case histories (e.g., offense severity); disposition received (e.g., probation,
commitment); recidivism (12-month re-adjudication); and educational outcomes
(e.g., high school completion) as well as community characteristics, such as the
presence of racial disparities in policing, median household income, and the
percent of residents that are people of color. These data allow us to directly
identify cases in which the disposition a youth received differs from what the
risk score recommended. We will use data from June 2017 to July 2023 (with
sensitivity analyses performed to assess how inclusion of data from the pandemic
affects study results), which we anticipate will include approximately 23,000
youth records. We will use regression analysis and multi-level modeling to
answer our research questions—assessing both (1) the circumstances that increase
the likelihood a decision maker will override the risk assessment; and (2) how
use (or non-use) of risk assessments’ recommendations affect youths’ educational
outcomes and likelihood of reoffending. We will supplement administrative data
with the primary data collection to gather more in-depth data on how judges’ use
and perceive the use of risk assessments. We will present the study findings in
multiple ways, so they are accessible to both practitioners and researchers,
including formats such as a webinar, conference presentation, and journal
articles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.