* 2244455
* Collaborative Research: REU Site: Water resources and quality in the Riviera Maya, Mexico
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Kenneth Voglesonger, Northeastern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 08/31/2026
* USD 63,630.00

The Yucatán Peninsula in Mexico is a critical natural laboratory for
undergraduate students to explore issues related to water resource management, a
crucial topic in today's society. With a highly permeable aquifer and rapid
transport of contaminants to the subsurface, the Yucatán Peninsula has
significant potential for groundwater pollution. This renewal REU site provides
an opportunity for undergraduate students to conduct research in the field in an
international setting, work with faculty mentors from four institutions, and
gain a holistic understanding of water-related issues in the region.
Additionally, the project will link the cultural and historical aspects of the
Yucatán Peninsula with modern water issues, helping to train the next generation
of water professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;STEM undergraduates from
underrepresented populations will work on five interconnected projects related
to groundwater flow, anthropogenic pollution, inorganic and stable isotope
geochemistry, and microbiology, under the guidance of experienced mentors. The
data collected and analyzed will contribute to the overall understanding of
groundwater system functioning and human impacts in the region. Through this
project, students will learn responsible scientific research conduct,
professional development, and contemporary water-related issues, preparing them
for future careers in STEM fields. The project will also focus on recruiting and
supporting traditionally underrepresented students in STEM fields, creating a
diverse community of future water professionals. Additionally, the project will
share its research findings with the local officials in Mexico through the
Centro de Investigación Científica de Yucatán (CICY) and publish them in open
access journals, making them accessible to scientists in Mexico and Latin
America. This project's broader impact will not only advance knowledge of water
resource management in the Yucatán Peninsula but also improve undergraduate
research training and contribute to a diverse and inclusive community of water
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.