* 2244034
* REU Site Renewal: Functional Genomics Research for Undergraduates
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Charles Wray, Jackson Laboratory
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2026
* USD 135,000.00

This REU Site award to The Jackson Laboratory (JAX), located in Bar Harbor, ME,
will support the training of 10 students for 10 weeks during each summer in
2023-2025. It is anticipated that a total of 30 students, primarily from schools
with limited research opportunities or from an under-represented group, will be
trained in the program. Undergraduates will conduct hypothesis-driven research
in genetics and functional genomics with JAX research mentors who lead active
and collaborative research programs. The program supports student development of
highly sought-after computational and data analysis skills. Students will learn
how research is conducted, and many will present the results of their work at
scientific conferences. Assessment of the program will be done through the
online SALG URSSA tool. The NSF ETAP system will be used to register
participants (https://www.nsfetap.org/). Students will be tracked after the
program in order to determine their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU
Site curriculum includes: an online course and certificate program through JAX-
developed Minicourses, in-person coding workshops, a formal journal club,
professional development seminars, and workshops on the ethical, legal, and
social issues in genetics research including Science Advocacy panels. The REU
cohort will join the JAX Summer Student Program, a Living Learning Community for
up 30 students per year with a well-established structure. Possible student
projects are in the areas of computational strategies using genetic data to
understand complex genetic systems, fundamental questions in genetics and
evolution, how protein glycosylation influences cellular signaling, using modern
computer vision tools to connect genetics to tissue structure and organ
function, and the genetics of complex traits. Program applications are available
through the website http://jax.org/ssp and are generally due the last Monday in
January and are reviewed by a team of professional JAX scientists on the basis
of the candidate’s research motivation as well as the candidate’s ability to
work independently and yet collaboratively. Researchers inviting students into
their labs for the summer make the final student selections. More information
about the program is available by visiting http://jax.org/ssp , or by contacting
the PI (Dr. Charles Wray, charlie.wray@jax.org) or the co-PI (Dr. Laura Muller,
laura.muller@jax.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.