* 2244042
* REU Site: Research Experience for Undergraduates in Robotics and Autonomous Systems
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Joycelyn Harrison, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2026
* USD 402,740.00

The REU Site: Robotics and Autonomous Systems (AUTOBOT) at the Kent State
University (KSU) will cultivate students’ interest and capacity to become
scientific and engineering contributors in this exciting field, by engaging
undergraduate students in cutting-edge research that underpins and enables
autonomous systems. Robotics and autonomous systems have revolutionized the way
we approach many mundane and some highly sophisticated tasks. From robotic
vacuum cleaners to self-driving cars and robotic surgeries, autonomous and
robotic systems promise to increasingly shape the way society gets things done.
In addition, the three-year KSU AUTOBOT REU Site will provide a transformative
experience for students to stimulate their intellectual curiosity, cultivate
enthusiasm, and build capacity for scientific exploration and research. Ten
students each year will engage in innovative and cutting-edge research projects
over a ten-week summer program. These kinds of efforts and projects can increase
the number of U.S. students exposed to research in robotics and autonomous
systems and educated on the merits of attending graduate school. This broader
impact is vitally important to students pursuing careers in autonomy and AI-
related fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three-year REU Site: Robotics and
Autonomous Systems (AUTOBOT) at the Kent State University will cultivate
students’ interest and capacity to become scientific and engineering
contributors to the expansion of this exciting field, by engaging undergraduate
students in cutting-edge research that underpins and enables autonomous systems.
Research projects within the program will incorporate scientific concepts
related to innovative robotic design, artificial intelligence (AI), human-robot
teaming, unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV), and guidance, navigation, and control
(GNC) technologies to enable the next generation of more advanced autonomous
systems. Ten students each year will participate in core research activities and
be led by faculty mentors experienced at working with undergraduate student
researchers. In addition to scholarly research, AUTOBOT students will be
supported in honing their technical presentation skills and be given the
opportunity to contribute to research publications as coauthors. A key focus of
the ten-week summer program is to establish relationships with students
demonstrating intellectual curiosity in STEM and provide a continuum of
engagement to facilitate the transition of students to graduate-level research
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Site is supported by the Department of
Defense in partnership with the National Science Foundation REU
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.