* 2244772
* Conference: 2023 Movement Ecology of Animals Gordon Research Conference and Seminar: Proximate and Ultimate Drivers of Animal Movement
* BIO,DEB
* 03/01/2023,08/31/2023
* Briana Abrahms, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 08/31/2023
* USD 20,000.00

Movement is an essential characteristic of living organisms that affects
ecological and evolutionary dynamics from the scale of single individuals to
entire ecosystems. As such, Movement Ecology has emerged as a dynamic, new field
of research dedicated to understanding the different forms of animal movement,
its ecological and evolutionary causes and consequences across taxonomic groups,
and its implications for conservation and management. The Gordon Research
Conference (GRC) on the Movement Ecology of Animals is the only international
forum for researchers in this burgeoning field of research. The GRC format
focuses on the presentation of cutting-edge, unpublished research in a
stimulating and cooperative environment, aiming to promote dialogue and
facilitate networking among scientists at all career stages. Funding from the
NSF will help broaden participation at the 2023 GRC on the Movement Ecology of
Animals by directly supporting the attendance of early career researchers,
members of historically underrepresented groups, and those serving in
undergraduate or minority-serving institutions. &lt;br/&gt;The 2023 GRC on the
Movement Ecology of Animals is entitled “Proximate and Ultimate Drivers of
Animal Movement”. Following this theme, invited presentations will define the
different ecological and evolutionary drivers of animal movement and consider
its diverse consequences for individuals, populations, and communities. This
theme is particularly timely given the current rate of rapid global change and
society’s reflections on how we can, and should, respond to it. The GRC will
also be held in conjunction with a Gordon Research Seminar (GRS) focused on the
theme “Theory and Hypothesis-Testing in the Movement Ecology”. The GRS is a
2-day meeting preceding the conference organized for and by Early-Career
Researchers (ECRs) to present new, unpublished research and discuss cutting-edge
ideas amongst peers in a welcoming and stimulating environment. NSF funding will
enable us to achieve three major goals of the joint meetings: 1) broaden
participation of diverse groups (in terms of race, gender, career stage, and
institution), 2) expand mentorship opportunities for ECRs, and 3) develop new
professional relationships to synthesize and stimulate research emerging from
the meeting to the broader scientific community. As such, this NSF award will
enhance the scientific and professional development of a more diverse group of
researchers who would otherwise most likely not be able to
attend.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.