* 2244717
* Unraveling the Energetics and Dynamics of Atom-Radical and Radical-Radical Reactions of Atomic Silicon and Silylidyne Radicals with Main Group Hydride Radicals
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Ralf Kaiser, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 05/31/2026
* USD 520,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
program in the Division of Chemistry and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), Professor Ralf I. Kaiser of the University of
Hawaii is using crossed molecular beam experiments to study elementary atom-
radical and radical-radical reactions of the simplest silicon-containing open
shell reactants with prototype second row main group hydride radicals forming
small silicon-bearing molecules under single collision conditions. These
experiments are exceptionally challenging since they target previously unstudied
bimolecular reactions of two open-shell transients involving the refractory
element silicon. Professor Kaiser and his students will investigate the energy-
dependent chemical dynamics of the bimolecular atom-radical and radical-radical
reactions under single collision conditions utilizing a state-of-the-art, ultra-
clean crossed molecular beam machine. The experimental results will be merged
with ab initio and quasi classical trajectory calculations in collaboration with
Professor Martin Head-Gordon (University of California, Berkeley). This study
will provide excellent opportunities for the training of graduate and
undergraduate students including women, veterans, along with indigenous
Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders, thus encouraging students to do hands-on
research in reaction dynamics and preparing them for leadership positions in
education and research. This project benefits society by incorporating outreach
activities through the organization of a symposium on silicon chemistry,
broadening the participation of underrepresented minorities, and enabling
educators to incorporate research activities into school and college
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on synergistic experimental
and computational studies of elementary reactions of two open shell reactants
comprising the simplest silicon containing species [atomic silicon (Si) and the
silylidyne radical (SiH)] and second row main group hydride radicals
[methylidyne (CH), amino (NH2), hydroxyl (OH)]. The significance of this project
is that our study provides new knowledge on the exotic main group silicon
chemistry at the molecular level leading to archetype dinuclear silicon-bearing
diatomics [SiE; E = C, N, O] along with their hydrogenated counterparts, of
which many have been only predicted to exist theoretically. The results will
also provide insight intol the underlying chemical dynamics and reaction
mechanisms, expose the chemical bonding and molecular structure of small
silicon-bearing systems, and provide a framework for considering silicon-based
molecules as molecular building blocks of, for example, silicon carbide and
silicate nanoparticles in the interstellar medium. These studies may change our
perception on the concepts of chemical bonding, reactivity, and electronic
structure of silicon in small molecules and how they compare to the isovalent
carbon counterparts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.