* 2244665
* REU Site: Research experiences for undergraduates in coastal biology on Florida's first coast
* GEO,OCE
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2026
* James Gelsleichter, University of North Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 02/28/2026
* USD 131,687.00

The University of North Florida's (UNF) Dept. of Biology will host a REU Site
Program focused on the field of Coastal Ocean Sciences. The project will bring
ten undergraduates to the UNF campus each summer for three years to complete a
10-week internship. The overall goal of the program is to enhance the training
and career development of early stage (rising Sophomores and Juniors)
undergraduate students who have not had significant research experience by
engaging them in the research and culture of this important field. Students will
be recruited each summer from a variety of urban universities (including a
partnering Historically Black College, Edward Waters College). Other partnering
organizations include the Guana Tolomato Matanzas National Estuarine Research
Reserve, South-East Zoo Alliance for Reproduction and Conservation, and the
Jacksonville Zoo.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research topics for interns will be
offered in three general areas, including 1) Ecology and conservation of coastal
and marine organisms, 2) Genetic, molecular and structural biology of coastal
and marine organisms, and 3) Behavior of coastal and marine organisms. All
participants will complete a one-week orientation during which they will receive
training in basic research skills like conducting literature reviews, dissecting
scientific papers, developing hypotheses, designing experiments, writing
proposals, and ethical research practices. Afterwards, students will be paired
with biologists from UNF or collaborating institutions to conduct mentored
research projects on major threats to coastal biological resources in North
Florida. During the program, participating students will complete two formal
writing assignments (a short research proposal and an Abstract) and give both an
oral and a poster presentation. Students will also be encouraged to present
their research findings at professional conferences and/or in manuscripts
submitted to professional journals. Additional career guidance on topics such as
designing research posters, scientific writing, finding and applying to graduate
schools, common types of jobs in coastal biology, and presenting scientific
information to a public audience will be provided in workshops throughout the
summer program. Students will attend regular research seminars by UNF faculty,
graduate students and previous REU participants that have recently received
graduate degrees. A strong evaluation plan has been developed to determine if
the anticipated results of the program (i.e., improvements in understanding of
the scientific research process, confidence in research related abilities,
awareness of academic and career options in science, and retention and graduate
school acceptance of students, especially underrepresented minorities) are
achieved as they have been in previous years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.