* 2244160
* REU Site: University of North Carolina at Greensboro - Complex Data Analysis using Statistical and Machine Learning Tools
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Sat Gupta, University of North Carolina Greensboro
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Wilmer
* 03/31/2026
* USD 405,000.00

Technological innovations now allow the collection of massive amounts of data at
low cost. Appropriate handling and analysis of such data is vital training for
the future generation of graduates. This award will support the University of
North Carolina at Greensboro Complex Data Analysis using Statistical and Machine
Learning Tools Research Experiences for Undergraduates site, which will provide
10 weeks of training and research opportunities in the analysis of complex data
to ten undergraduates each summer, 2023-2025. The program will aim to recruit
students from diverse backgrounds and educational institutions. This research
experience is intended to motivate student participants to go on to graduate
study in mathematical sciences and to become skilled data analytics
professionals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program will introduce students to a
range of analysis techniques for complex data. The research projects will
introduce them to a range of techniques appropriate to different types of data
complexity. Potential projects include working with geospatial sources (such as
Census, election, and epidemiological data) and human genome sequencing data.
Students in the program will also receive professional skills training and give
presentations on their work, submit papers for publication, and participate in
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.