* 2244313
* REU Site: Fluid Mechanics with Analysis using Computations and Experiments (FM-ACE)
* ENG,EEC
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Amy Lang, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 08/31/2026
* USD 483,088.00

This three-year renewal Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site
program, Fluid Mechanics with Analysis using Computations and Experiments (FM-
ACE), at the University of Alabama Tuscaloosa will host 9 undergraduate students
over 10 summer weeks in exciting and emerging areas related to fluid mechanics.
The project team will engage and mentor a diverse cohort of undergraduate
students from underrepresented groups with limited access to research facilities
in exciting and emerging areas related to fluid mechanics. A major goal is to
diversify and increase the number of engineers who pursue a graduate education
and develop a group of diverse and highly educated engineering researchers to
enter the U.S. workforce. The projects will advance knowledge in new research
areas relevant to national and global challenges in the areas of climate,
energy, and space/defense which all relate to the fluid mechanics, thereby
furthering our country's prosperity. The field of fluid mechanics is unique and
multidisciplinary. Fluid mechanics is still an engaging field of study where
innovation and exciting discoveries are actively taking place, such as high-
speed imaging, advanced laser diagnostics and powerful computing. One additional
aspect of this program that makes it unique is engaging undergraduate students
to all phases of a rewarding research experience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
three-year renewal Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site program,
Fluid Mechanics with Analysis using Computations and Experiments (FM-ACE), at
the University of Alabama Tuscaloosa will host 9 undergraduate students over 10
summer weeks. The participants doing research in exciting and emerging areas
related to fluid mechanics will be presenting their research at the American
Physical Society Division of Fluid Dynamics (APS DFD) conference. This component
of the program acts as an important follow-through mechanism to further
encourage REU participants to pursue graduate studies and contributes to the
success of the site by motivating both the student and mentors to obtain quality
research results. Other important objectives include providing a structure
wherein research and technical communication skills are cultivated. This site
involves basic and applied research in fluid mechanics across a range of
engineering disciplines as well as the training of undergraduate students in
state-of-the-art laboratory environments. Students will contribute to projects
that include, as a sampling, fundamental turbulence studies in CFD performing
Direct Numerical Simulations (DNS) on high-performance computers (HPC), Particle
Image Velocimetry (PIV) investigations of bio-inspired boundary layer control
mechanisms, and combustion studies using a color schlieren system. Moreover, as
in the past, we will recruit at least half of the participants from colleges
with limited STEM research opportunities and from underrepresented groups (with
a focus on women and African Americans); the gained experience and all outcomes
of the site including applicant statistics will be made publicly
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded with the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.