* 2244099
* Virtual Education Research in STEM Academy
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Thomas Bussey, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Julio Soto
* 04/30/2026
* USD 437,398.00

This REU Site award will support the training of 36 students for nine weeks
during the summer of 2023 – 2026. Students will be engaged in undergraduate
research in the area of discipline-based education research (DBER) in the
context of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) and the
social sciences. The project, "Virtual Education Research in STEM Academy" or
VERSA, is an intentionally designed virtual REU project consisting of one week
of on-site experiences at the beginning and end of each summer. Faculty and
near-peer mentor teams will work with students on a range of DBER research
projects and provide training in learning theories, equity and inclusion,
qualitative and quantitative methods, and research and communication
skills.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of VERSA is to provide
undergraduate students across the United States with an opportunity to engage in
the study and transformation of college STEM education through education
research that is grounded in various STEM disciplines. In so doing the principal
investigators aim to augment students’ thinking about teaching and learning in
science, their qualitative and quantitative DBER skills and science process
skills, the participants' sense of belonging to the scientific community, and
their interest in research- related careers. In addition, the project team aims
to expand and diversify the DBER community and its research priorities, thereby
contributing to wider efforts to make STEM education more inclusive. VERSA aims
to recruit a diverse cohort of students using a three-pronged strategy: i)
targeting established DBER networks as well as specialized networks that focus
on two-year colleges and minoritized students, ii) leveraging existing
partnerships with minority-serving institutions, and iii) producing and
promoting virtual resources for DBER. Evaluation of the VERSA project will use a
mixed-methods approach to assess short-term outcomes including potential changes
in participants’ self-efficacy and interests in research and sense of community,
medium-term outcomes including participants’ potential development of their
identity as STEM practitioners and their understanding of research as a
profession, and long-term outcomes including the potential for ongoing
participation in DBER and pedagogy. Students will be tracked after the program
in order to determine student career paths. Students will be asked to respond to
an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More information is
available by visiting https://sites.google.com/ucsd.edu/versa/home or by
contacting the PI at mtowens@ucsd.edu.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.