* 2244323
* REU Site: Unpacking the Significance and Rigor of Engineering Education Research
* EDU,DUE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Heidi Diefes-Dux, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Julio Soto
* 04/30/2026
* USD 392,226.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site project will support the
training of eight students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2023-2025.
Students will be engaged in investigating questions in the area of engineering
education research. Professional development activities will help students
improve their research and workplace people skills. Professional development
activities will be held weekly and include topics such as preparing for the
graduate record exam, writing personal statements, networking, finding and
reading research, writing about research findings, and mock research
presentations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Four research objectives guide the project.
First is to provide research experiences to undergraduate students with at least
half (50%) of the program participants coming from two-year and four-year
colleges and universities with limited research opportunities and half (50%)
coming from underrepresented groups in STEM (including first-generation college
students). Second is to provide participants with an immersive experience in
engineering education through research and professional development
opportunities with an emphasis on the significance and rigor expected in the
field of engineering education. Third is to enable participants to develop
research skills that are transferable to their STEM fields of study. Fourth, and
finally, is to promote and sustain, through undergraduate research experiences,
mentoring, and networking, the interest of undergraduate students in pursuing
graduate education in STEM, particularly engineering education research. The
recruitment strategy is focused on STEM majors, especially those from
underrepresented groups and institutions with limited research opportunities. As
part of the application process, students will rank their preferred projects.
The Principal Investigator will oversee final student selection to ensure good
mentor/mentee matches. Applications are due by March 1 each year. REU site
evaluation includes formative and summative student and faculty mentor
evaluations. A combination of qualitative and quantitative data will be
collected and analyzed to guide future programming. Students will be tracked
after the program in order to determine student career paths. Students will be
asked to respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information is available by visiting https://www.unl.edu/summerprogram/reu-
engineering-education-research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.