* 2244126
* REU Site: Championing Physics in Multicultural Miami: Dismantling Barriers for New Research Perspectives
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Vivek Nagendra Prakash, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 03/31/2026
* USD 429,809.00

This award supports a new Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site in
Physics at the University of Miami. The site aims to engage eight students each
summer in cross-cutting, frontier Physics research set in the dynamic and
multicultural city of Miami. Through one-on-one mentoring and hands-on research,
the students will get an in-depth, “insider” view of the scientific process, and
come to see themselves as important actors in advancing the discipline. A robust
set of “excursions” is also planned, as well as opportunities for community
engagement. Close links between scientists and their communities are critical to
counter disinformation and distrust of science, to create a better informed and
more empowered citizenry, and to ensure relevant, responsible, and compelling
research. Community engagement supported by the REU engagements will go beyond
sharing research; it will encourage support for science from families and
inspire even younger participants to pursue science
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate students will be involved in
projects including studying the biophysics of marine larvae, circadian clocks of
Drosophila (fruit-fly), navigation of crawling insects, random light design with
high photonic states, transport properties of novel materials, developing the
next generation of mm-wave and X-ray instruments, quantum computing, simulations
of exploding stars, and using modern computing to take on traditional, non-
trivial physics problems. Emphasis will be on developing skills in experimental
design, critical thinking, problem solving, scientific computing, data
acquisition and analysis, and communication. With access to cutting-edge
facilities and accomplished researchers, participants will be able to contribute
to advancing knowledge in their respective fields, with work leading to
presentations at conferences and peer-reviewed
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.