* 2244895
* CAREER: Petrogenesis of Hawaiian lavas, Constraints from metal stable isotopes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2022,01/31/2025
* Shichun Huang, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wade
* 01/31/2025
* USD 202,804.00

This CAREER project will focus on understanding the source of the magmas that
erupt in Hawaii. Hawaiian volcanism is often used as the best example of
magmatism formed by the rise of a mantle plume from deep in the Earth's
interior. The mantle plume hypothesis provides an elegant interpretation for
many intra-plate volcanism, such as Hawaii, which has been important in shaping
the Earth’s surface and its biosphere through Earth's history. However, many
aspects of mantle plumes, and even their existence, remain highly debated. In
this study, the investigator sets out to use several state-of-the-art
geochemical and isotopic tracers to understand the evolution of Hawaiian
volcanism, and its implications for the mantle plume hypothesis. Among those
proposed tracers, he will conduct the systematic analysis of several novel metal
stable isotope tracers on for a set of Hawaiian samples. The PI also plans a
winter education program focusing on analytical geochemistry, which will
leverage the geochemical analytical labs inside the department to train
undergraduate students with the cutting-edge geochemical analytical techniques.
This winter program is research oriented and requires the participating students
to complete a research project using the available analytical facilities under
the supervision of their faculty mentors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI proposes
an extensive metal stable isotope investigation, including Mg, Ca, Cr, Ti, and
Fe, on well-studied lavas from six Hawaiian volcanoes. They cover the whole
compositional and isotopic ranges in Hawaii, which represent a large portion of
those found in global ocean island basalts. The new metal stable isotope data,
together with the published geochemical data on the same lavas, will allow the
PI to better understand (1) the geochemical structure of the Hawaiian plume, (2)
the petrogenesis of Hawaiian lavas, and (3) their implications to the plume
hypothesis. The PI is actively recruiting students into a winter research
program using a variety of approaches. The diverse student body at UTK ensures
that a large proportion of the participating students will be from
underrepresented groups. The proposed research and education activities are
synergistic, because the PI plans to (1) use part of the proposed research as
student projects of the winter program, and (2) recruit qualified and motivated
students trained through this winter program to work on his proposed
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.