* 2244093
* REU Site: Research for Undergraduates Summer Institute of Statistics at Indiana University
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Javier Rojo, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 04/30/2026
* USD 152,321.00

The Research for Undergraduates Summer Institute of Statistics at Indiana
University (RUSIS@IU) will bring 10 students to Indiana University for 10 weeks
for each of 3 summers to study problems in statistics and its applications. The
Institute strives to attract students into graduate work in the mathematical and
statistical sciences and to facilitate their transition into research in areas
of high demand and national interest, including sectors of the workforce that
require data analytic skills where demands for human resources exceeds the
supply of qualified professionals. RUSIS @IU will recruit students from
underrepresented groups in STEM as well as students with limited access to
research opportunities at their home institutions, including students from
Community Colleges, Tribal Colleges, Historically Black Colleges and
Universities, and Hispanic Serving Institutions. While the program aims to
motivate students to pursue graduate studies in the statistical sciences, it
will also prepare students for a wide range of professional positions that
require high level training in statistics and data science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Instituteâ€™s objectives are accomplished through the
following mechanisms. Students will take an intensive short course in
probability and statistics and an intensive seminar in computation. In addition,
topics in stochastic processes, and statistical inference, with a special
emphasis on topics of current interest will be discussed. Students will then
participate in research projects from areas of current interest in high
dimensional data analyses, where statistical thinking can enable the extraction
of information from data to advance science, technology, and society. Topics
include multiple comparisons, dimensionality reduction, random matrices, extreme
value theory, multivariate survival analysis, statistical genetics, massive data
methodologies, and modeling of the power grid and other complex urban
infrastructures. Autonomous systems (e.g. autonomous cars) that make use of
statistical techniques such as pattern recognition, statistical learning, and
dimensionality reduction methodologies will provide interesting test cases.
Students will also participate in professional development activities including
the facilitation of student presentations at national meetings, short courses in
LaTeX and software used for research such as Mathematica, MatLab, and R, and
visits to scientific facilities for career
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.