* 2244279
* REU SITE: Research Experience for Undergraduates in Frontiers in Data-driven Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2026
* Shou-Hsuan Huang, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 01/31/2026
* USD 420,062.00

The Computer Science Department of the University of Houston will conduct a
Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site program in Data-Centric
Frontiers of Computing, an area of national importance. Exposure to meaningful
research activities allows participants to assess their ability to conduct
research which in turn benefits the notion by expanding its knowledge base in
computer science. In each of the three summers of the program, ten students are
selected for ten weeks of residential activities. The specific program
objectives are as follows: (1) Students will develop competency in scientific
research, as well as presentation and writing skills. (2) Students will produce
meaningful research results, which may be written up for publication in an
appropriate conference or journal. (3) Participants will learn to present and
disseminate research results. Technical activities will be integrated with group
activities, such as site visits to local area research laboratories and seminars
by academic and industrial researchers, as well as alumni of the REU program.
(4) Participants will sustain and increase their interest in research careers
after the summer, through continuing contacts and research participation,
including presentations of research results. The focus is on professional
development so students can continue to work on research projects at their home
university and be prepared for graduate studies. Students will take part in
workshops on career development, ethics and legal issues (e. g., intellectual
property), and methods of literature search; they will receive extensive advice
on questions related to graduate school, including how to choose a
program/school/advisor. The goal is for the programâ€™s mentors to make a lasting
impact on its participants beyond the program's duration. Program success will
be continually evaluated through student and faculty questionnaires, and by an
external evaluator; this feedback is used to improve the program.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Interesting and meaningful research projects are proposed
in this project. A crucial aspect of any research endeavor is verifiable facts.
In most computer science (CS) research, it is data that embody these underlying
facts. It is therefore important that participants learn about the core tenets
of research, objectivity and verifiability. Projects analyzing various types of
data are proposed to expose participants to these core tenets of research.
Students are recruited from universities that offer limited research
opportunities in computer science, such as historically black colleges. Many
talented students in such institutions are either unaware of research career
possibilities or lack access to opportunities to explore research firsthand.
Emphasis will be placed on attracting underrepresented minorities and females.
The program should attract new, nontraditional students into research, reinforce
their interest in CS, improve student retention in their academic programs, and
prepare them for graduate school.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.