* 2244711
* Collaborative Proposal: MRA: Macroecology of microorganisms: Scaling fungal biodiversity from soil cores to the North American continent
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2022,11/30/2024
* Kai Zhu, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 11/30/2024
* USD 193,119.00

Soil fungi are mostly invisible to the naked eye, but they provide a wide range
of ecosystem functions: as decomposers, they break down complex organic
materials, and as plant symbiotic partners, they help plants scavenge for scarce
nutrients that improve growth. Because both these roles involve a transfer of
critical elements, such as carbon, nitrogen, and phosphorus, these fungi play an
essential part in global nutrient budgets. Soil fungi can also regulate
ecosystems by acting as pathogens of plants and animals. In some cases,
pathogenic fungi can have detrimental impacts such as crop disease outbreaks,
but more commonly, they promote biodiversity on a global scale by preventing any
single species from dominating the ecosystem. Despite their role in regulating
these critical ecosystem functions, little is known about what determines the
structure of fungal communities across the North American continent, and what
consequences future changes in fungal community structure may have. One of the
main barriers to this research goal is the lack of a large-scale, systematic
effort to sample and identify soil fungi. This research project will overcome
this barrier by quantifying patterns of soil fungal diversity using two new,
next-generation DNA sequencing datasets that characterize soil fungal
communities across the North American continent: the National Ecological
Observatory Network (NEON) and the Dimensions of Biodiversity project on North
American soil fungi (DoB-FUN). By leveraging state-of-the-art modeling
techniques to consider not only how soil fungi change with the environment, but
how those changes may depend on their neighboring plant communities, this
project will transform our understanding of soil microbial
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By integrating two of the most extensive
datasets on soil fungal communities with nearly identical sampling design,
molecular methods, and spatial range, the investigators will have an
unprecedented opportunity to answer two key questions about the fundamental
factors that structure microbial geographic ranges and biodiversity. (1) What
are the key environmental variables, and (2) how are they influenced by the
interactions and associations between fungi and plants? The researchers will
leverage this information with a novel three-pronged approach to modeling
biodiversity at the community-level: top-down, bottom-up, and integrated
methods. This approach overcomes a significant limitation in previous studies,
which fail to account for the importance of species interactions in controlling
microbial distributions. The novel data and models will help solve critical
challenges in scaling predictions from microorganisms to macrosystems. In the
context of rapid environmental change, this project can make some of the first
robust predictions of change and uncertainty in microbial diversity at the
continental scale. While preliminary results have already highlighted the
possibility for substantial future changes in fungal community composition and
geographic distribution, the synthesis of top-down, bottom-up, and integrated
modeling approaches will lead to significant advances in our understanding of
fungal biogeography and the ability to forecast the response of fungi to future
environmental stressors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.