* 2244111
* REU/RET Site in Nanomaterials
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* David Blank, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 03/31/2026
* USD 521,805.00

Non-technical summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Minnesota (UMN)
will host a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site that brings 10
talented undergraduates from a nationwide pool of applicants for an intensive
10-week research experience that includes extensive training and development of
career-building skills. Each participant pursues an independent research project
within the laboratory of a Materials Research Science and Engineering Center
(MRSEC) faculty member and delivers a poster and a formal oral presentation at
the program’s conclusion. The RET component draws six middle and high school
teachers from the greater Twin Cities for a six-week research experience and 25
additional teachers for a three-day RET-led workshop. RET participants have
their own research projects and work to develop and disseminate standards-based,
crosscutting, engineering laboratory activities for middle and high school
classrooms. The goal of the REU/RET site is to train the next generation of
science and engineering professionals while increasing participation of
traditionally under-represented groups. The MRSEC REU program expands its
extensive network of four-year colleges, Tribal Colleges and Native American
Serving Nontribal Institutions, Historically Black Colleges and Universities,
Hispanic-Serving Institutions, and Community Colleges to provide high-quality
research experiences in MS&amp;E, primarily to students from undergraduate
institutions with limited research opportunities, and to high school teachers
from the Twin Cities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU Site brings 10 talented undergraduates from
a nationwide pool of applicants to the UMN campus for an intensive 10-week
research experience that includes extensive training and development of career-
building skills. The UMN MRSEC REU Site enhances the overall awareness and self-
expectation of the participants, while increasing their knowledge and
appreciation of Materials Science and Engineering (MS&amp;E). This is
particularly important for undergraduates from two-year and four-year colleges
and minority serving institutions (MSIs), who do not have extensive research
experience, and who have little or no exposure to MS&amp;E. The UMN MRSEC
comprises two Interdisciplinary Research Groups (IRGs) addressing pressing
problems over a wide range of hard to soft materials: IRG-1, Ionic Control of
Materials and IRG-2, Mesoscale Network Materials. Each IRG integrates the six
basic elements of materials science and engineering – synthesis, theory,
structural characterization, property evaluation, processing, and applications –
required for effective innovation in materials research and development. MRSEC
faculty and students are based in five different science and engineering
departments, assuring a particularly broad and interdisciplinary experience for
all participants. The research advisors represent an appealing blend of junior,
senior, and mid-career faculty; all are acknowledged leaders in their fields and
have proven records of mentoring undergraduate
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.