* 2244423
* REU Site: Broadening Participation and Resiliency in Physics
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Jennifer Curtis, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 03/31/2026
* USD 481,587.00

Non-Technical Summary &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Georgia Tech will host a Research
Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) program that provides holistic summer
research opportunities to a diverse population of undergraduates. The REU's
significance is its development and sustained support of the next generation of
physicists. It is structured to address the leaky STEM pipeline for
underrepresented minorities and women by providing (i) high-quality research
experiences in an inclusive climate, (ii) hard and soft skills that support
success in STEM fields, and (iii) embedding participants in a supportive network
of REU alumni, mentors, and supporters that extends well beyond the summer. A
central component of the Georgia Tech Physics REU program is its partnership
with the local HBCUs, Clark Atlanta University, Morehouse College, and Spelman
College, which prioritizes four out of twelve REU positions for their students.
Students are exposed to a broad range of physics through weekly discussions of
their progress (Monday Mentoring Meetups), a Frontiers in Physics seminar
series, and a trip to a National Laboratory. Participants will gain timely
technical skills in a three-day hands-on Computational Physics workshop. Beyond
the summer, long-term mentoring and facilitated peer networking will improve
outcomes. The combined impact of a high-quality, immersive summer research
experience in a supportive and inclusive environment and the possibility of
joining a diverse lifelong community of like-minded physicists in the Georgia
Tech REU alum network will ultimately improve the number, the success, and the
well-being of underrepresented minorities, women, and all REU participants who
pursue higher education in physics or another STEM field. Hence, these
activities serve national interest by advancing the field of physics, supporting
education and diversity, and fostering a new generation of knowledgeable,
resilient, and well-prepared scientists so that they may pursue their highest
goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Georgia
Tech Physics REU site has a longstanding focus on broadening participation in
physics. The aims of this NSF REU program are to: (i) provide high-quality
inclusive research experiences, in combination with a series of professional and
scientific development activities, (ii) motivate and prepare resilient
undergraduates to pursue, and succeed in, graduate study, (iii) assemble a cadre
of participants that reflects the diversity of the U.S., (iv) attract students
from institutions that have limited research activities, (v) continue engagement
of the participants beyond the summer and throughout their careers, and (vi)
foster collaborations between Georgia Tech and the Atlanta University Center
Consortium (AUCC: Morehouse College, Spelman College, Clark Atlanta) to enhance
inclusive educational and research opportunities for students in the AUCC. Each
participant will work with a faculty member who has an active research group in
an area of interest to the student. Available physics research projects will
range from quantum materials to the physics of living systems to astrophysics.
The program will benefit from shared activities with established REU programs
(~5) in other disciplines within the College of Sciences. At the end of the
program, students share their research in poster and oral presentations at a
College-wide REU Research Symposium. Students will be encouraged to present at
external conferences, and AUCC students will have the option to continue
research at Georgia Tech beyond the summer. Long-term mentoring of REU alums
will strengthen their resilience and support their journeys beyond college.
Networking between the REU alum cohorts will be facilitated via the 'Alum in the
Hot Seat' series, a newsletter, and the GT REU Physics Linked In
Group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.