* 2244322
* REU Site: Earth and Planetary science Interdsciplinary Internships at Carnegie (EPIIC)
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Dionysios Foustoukos, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 04/30/2026
* USD 152,304.00

The Earth and Planetary science Interdisciplinary Internships program at
Carnegie will introduce the process of research at the intersections of:
Astronomy, Astrobiology, Bio-/Isotope Geochemistry, Cosmochemistry, Data
Science, Experimental Geochemistry, Geophysics, High-Pressure Mineral Physics,
Mineralogy, Organic Geochemistry, and Petrology; to undergraduate students
without significant previous research experience. The EPIIC REU will provide the
resources and opportunities needed for undergraduate students, especially those
with limited options for STEM-related research, to grow into a new generation of
scientists. The program will recruit its students from a highly-diverse group of
institutions that includes community and liberal arts colleges, 4-year
universities with/out strong research programs. At least half of the internships
will be offered to under-represented groups in STEM education (race, gender,
income, disability, veteran status). The program will immerse students into a
vigorous research environment to build participant self-confidence as they gain
new skills, and thus foster their future involvement in science. EPIIC will
provide a learning environment that embraces diversity, prepares students for
academic careers, and which is based on mutual respect for peers’
intellectuality and ideas; thus preparing them to be active members of our
pluralistic society. The project, therefore, is expected to promote the progress
of science and advance the prosperity and welfare of postsecondary
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this highly interdisciplinary REU program,
students will conduct cutting-edge research and gain hands-on experience that
includes training with sophisticated experimental and analytical equipment. The
10-week program is planned to ensure successful completion of students’ research
activities and expects their participation in national meetings and peer-review
publications. Students will be full members of their mentors’ research groups,
attend weekly seminars and social events, and live together on the campus of
American University to help establish a collegial cohort. EPIIC’s intensity and
training will prepare its participants for graduate student life. Maintaining
student-mentor(s) communications beyond the summer REU program is encouraged to
facilitate participant transition into STEM-related careers. The program will be
evaluated by a series of surveys and tools employed under the guidance of an
external advisor. The long-term success of the program success will be measured
by: i) the number of REU students who follow a STEM-related career, including
the number of community college students that transfer to a 4-year university as
science majors, ii) the extent of the participation of students underrepresented
in STEM education, and iii) students’ understanding of the broader impacts of
scientific discovery on the establishment of an ethical, inclusive and fact-
driven society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.