* 2244953
* CDS&amp;E/Collaborative Research: A Symbolic Artificial Intelligence Framework for Discovering Physically Interpretable Constitutive Laws of Soft Functional Composites
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Lin Cheng, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Reha Uzsoy
* 05/31/2026
* USD 287,689.00

This Computational and Data-Enabled Science and Engineering (CDS&amp;E)
collaborative research grant supports fundamental research to enable automatic
discovery of constitutive laws for soft functional composites using symbolic
artificial intelligence (AI). Soft functional composites are essential to
emerging technological and economic areas such as stretchable and wearable
electronics, soft robotics, and sensing and actuation. Conventional methods for
constitutive law discovery are usually time-consuming, inefficient, and often
ineffective for complex cases. This project will significantly accelerate the
constitutive law discovery process by leveraging symbolic AI technology not only
for soft functional composites but also other material classes. The software
tools developed will be made available to the research and education communities
through a website. This project will also train undergraduate and graduate
students, including underrepresented groups, workforce in the transdisciplinary
area of AI, mechanics, and materials science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
will establish a symbolic AI framework for discovering physically interpretable
constitutive laws of soft functional composites, involving general tensor
functions of constitutive laws, both scalar and tensor-based operators, and
statistical analysis for noisy data. The project will establish general tensor
functions of constitutive laws for different anisotropic materials using
modified representation and symmetry theories. The symbolic-AI architecture will
be built upon genome representation, physics constraints, symbolic tree search,
and statistic modeling, and will be applied to discover and interpret mechano-
physical constitutive laws of soft functional composites with various
microstructures. The tool and the insights it provides will expedite the design
and applications of soft functional composites, and eventually other material
classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.