* 2244324
* REU Site: Advanced Technologies for HYpersonic, Propulsive, Energetic and Reusable Platforms (HYPER)
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Ali Gordon, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 03/31/2026
* USD 405,000.00

The Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site: Advanced Technologies for
Hypersonic, Propulsive, Energetic and Reusable Platforms (HYPER) at the
University of Central Florida (UCF) addresses challenges in next-generation
modes of transportation and energy generation. Realizing planned platforms for
advanced space travel and energy production can only be achieved through
multidisciplinary research. This renewal REU site will actively recruit and
partner a diverse group of approximately 30 students over 3 years with leading
faculty and graduate students at UCF. Together, these teams will advance the
fundamental knowledge needed to overcome technical barriers limiting hypersonic
flight. REU students will be matched with individual research projects based on
their interests and skills. With the majority of their time engaged in cutting-
edge research, participants also will benefit from research-oriented seminars,
professional development workshops, software training, and launch pad facility
tours. HYPER has several goals, most importantly, to prepare students for PhD-
level research and research-oriented careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site: Advanced Technologies for Hypersonic,
Propulsive, Energetic and Reusable Platforms (HYPER) at the University of
Central Florida (UCF) addresses challenges in next-generation modes of
transportation and energy generation. HYPER will cultivate and unite
multidisciplinary interests to study advanced structures and systems with
application to hypersonics, space, propulsion, and energy. For example,
components in launch vehicles are subjected to combined extreme environments
where fluid-structure interactions are key considerations. Also, advanced
manufacturing must be better understood to improve component performance and
reduce weight. Frameworks for modeling digital versions of systems must be
created to predict overall performance more accurately. Ten participants each
year will gain hands-on research training in contemporary challenges such as:
(1) utilizing advanced manufacturing techniques for high-value components, (2)
developing propulsion methods for hypersonic flight, (3) developing novel
methods for improved internal cooling and heat transfer effectiveness, (4)
mitigating flutter through advanced rotor dynamic control, etc. The collection
of projects are crafted to engage students in PhD-level topics; these research
topics rely on approaches that cut across disciplines and techniques (e.g.,
experiments and simulations). As a result, HYPER will play a key role in
preparing a workforce of young engineers and scientists for research careers in
these areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.