* 2244506
* REU Site: Program in Nanotechnology for Biology and Bioengineering
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2026
* Denis Wirtz, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2026
* USD 151,652.00

This REU Site award to Johns Hopkins University, located in Baltimore, Maryland,
will support training for 14 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2023-2025. The REU program will provide undergraduate students with a
challenging research experience in the rapidly growing area of
nanobiotechnology, a discipline at the interface of biology, chemistry, physics,
materials science, and engineering. Some of the student research projects
include self-assembly of DNA nanotubes, development of methods to study cell
shape and adhesion, self-assembly of pi-conjugated peptides into optoelectronic
materials, and biophysics of membrane proteins. In addition to research, the REU
program includes oral presentations, poster presentations, scientific seminars,
journal club, communication seminars, field trips to industry/government
partners, and multiple social activities to build a strong cohort experience.
Students are required to complete a Responsible Conduct of Research training and
lab safety training before starting research. Underrepresented minorities,
students from institutions with limited research opportunities, first generation
students, students from families with a low to moderate income, and students
with disabilities are encouraged to apply. Students are selected by an
admissions committee of faculty reviewers. Selected students will be required to
register in the NSF Education and Training Application system (ETAP).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that a total of 42 students, primarily
from schools with limited research opportunities, will be trained in the
program. The overall objective of this program is to provide REU students with a
truly unique educational experience, with the research experience at the core,
while at the same time serving as an ideal foundation for future graduate
research. A common web-based assessment tool, SALG URSSA, used by all REU Site
programs funded by the Division of Biological Infrastructure will be used to
determine the effectiveness of the training program. Students will be tracked
after the program to determine their career paths. Students will be asked to
respond to an automatic email sent via the NSF reporting system. More
information about the program is available by visiting
https://inbt.jhu.edu/education/undergraduate/nanobio-reu/, or by contacting the
Director of Academic Programs, Sulaiman Jenkins
(sjenki48@jhu.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.