* 2244490
* REU Site: Smart and Sustainable Construction in the Digital Era
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* H David Jeong, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 08/31/2026
* USD 402,904.00

The Department of Construction Science at Texas A&amp;M University will host a
new 3-year REU site featuring smart construction technologies and sustainable
construction methods that will transform the construction industry. The REU site
will focus on emerging digital technologies and processes that are promising to
transform construction into a safer, more productive, more resilient, and more
sustainability aware sector. Ten undergraduate students will participate in a
10-week summer research experience program each year, which will be reinforced
with enrichment activities and professional development activities. Participants
will learn analytical skills, independent thinking and cognitive skills, and
collaboration skills that are required for developing, testing, and validating
emerging digital technologies and sustainable solutions for construction. This
unique REU program will provide current STEM-field undergraduate students with
another career path to construction through research and innovation. The project
will allow REU students to experience the whole process of research supported by
faculty mentors and potential STEM career pathways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Department of Construction Science at Texas A&amp;M University will host a new
3-year REU site featuring smart construction technologies and sustainable
construction methods that will transform the construction industry. The REU site
will focus on emerging digital technologies and processes that are promising to
transform construction into a safer, more productive, more resilient, and more
sustainability cognizant sector. Ten undergraduate students will participate in
a then-week summer program of highly innovative research projects sponsored by
federal and state funding agencies, as well as industry sponsors. The REU
students will conduct research on virtual reality, 3D-printing, drones, digital
twins, robotics, smart materials, energy simulation, machine learning and
artificial intelligence in the context of construction innovation. Faculty
mentors will carefully select research projects and develop mini-scale projects
at the appropriate level for undergraduates. Participants will learn analytical
skills, independent thinking and cognitive skills, and collaboration skills that
are required for developing, testing, and validating emerging digital
technologies and sustainable solutions for construction. This unique REU program
will provide current STEM-field undergraduate students with another career path
to construction through research and innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.