* 2244530
* REU site: Interdisciplinary Renewable and Environmental Collaborative (IREC)
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Guodong Du, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Pablo Sobrado
* 03/31/2026
* USD 390,000.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site award to the University
of North Dakota, located in Grand Forks, ND, supports the training of 10
students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2023-2025. In this program, funded
by the Division of Chemistry, and the Established Program to Stimulate
Competitive Research (EPSCoR), participants pursue interdisciplinary and
collaborative research projects encompassing chemistry, chemical engineering,
and atmospheric science. Along with their research, they participate in a series
of educational and professional development activities, which include training
in science communication and ethics in research conduct, participation in
community outreach, and workshops on graduate school and career options.
Students are jointly mentored by a team of faculty from different disciplines,
broadening participation in STEM fields and giving them wider exposure to
various scientific approaches and challenges. The program is especially focused
on enrolling Native American students and first-generation students.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The REU students are engaged in interdisciplinary research in the
broad areas of renewable, environmental, and atmospheric science and
engineering. These projects include the synthesis of sustainable polymers from
renewable resources; development of luminescent carbon nanodots from biomass-
derived products; computational investigation of lignin solubilization; and
exploration of the chemical complexity of atmospheric aerosols and their impacts
on clouds. The students receive professional development training, especially in
effective science communication, to help them share science with a general
audience. This training is put to use during outreach activities for K-8
children, inspiring both the children and the REU students to pursue careers in
STEM fields. The program prioritizes recruitment of first-generation college
students and underrepresented minorities, targeting those from primarily
undergraduate institutions and Native American tribal
colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.