* 2244659
* Planning: South Dakota NSF EPSCoR Track-1 Planning Grant
* O/D,OIA
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2023
* Kinchel Doerner, South Dakota Board of Regents
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 12/31/2023
* USD 100,000.00

Over a one-year period, this planning grant will stage ten events across the
state of South Dakota to mature a selected project concept and research team,
using a collaborative, inclusive approach. The events include planning visits to
partner universities and South Dakota state government agencies, planning
meetings to develop priorities for the future five-year project, and workshops
to engage potential participants. Initial strategic planning was held in
conjunction with the South Dakota Biotechnology Association Summit, held in
Brookings, South Dakota, October 2022.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This planning
project from the South Dakota Board of Regents has the potential to develop the
intrastate teamwork needed for a future EPSCoR Research Infrastructure
Improvement Track-1 proposal on the general theme of the agricultural carbon
cycle and how Artificial Intelligence (AI), Machine Learning (ML), and precision
agriculture can contribute to reducing agriculture’s carbon footprint. The
agricultural carbon cycle topic is consistent with South Dakota’s state Science
&amp; Technology plan, which identifies Agricultural Sustainability and Food
Security as key areas for the state. Agriculture is the principal source of
greenhouse gas emissions in South Dakota, accounting for 46% of the state’s
gross greenhouse gas emissions. There is an urgent need to explore efficient
solutions to effectively reduce agriculture’s carbon footprint. The aim of this
planning grant is to identify which of these challenges South Dakota researchers
are ready to tackle and which can be accomplished within the future five-year
project period. The planning project’s partner research universities include
South Dakota State University, South Dakota School of Mines &amp; Technology,
the University of South Dakota, and Dakota State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.