* 2244129
* REU Site: Intelligent Energetic Systems Engineering (INTENSE) REU
* ENG,EEC
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Michael Hargather, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 07/31/2026
* USD 324,846.00

The three-year renewal REU Site: Intelligent Energetic Systems Engineering
(INTENSE) at New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology (NMIMT, New Mexico
Tech) will engage 8 undergraduate students each year in unique research related
to robotics, smart materials, explosives, rocket propellants, drones, and shock
physics. A distinct need persists for more U.S. citizens with research
experience to fill science and engineering positions across the country,
particularly for the Department of Defense (DOD), Department of Energy (DOE),
and National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) complexes and
associated industrial bases. Students involved in this REU site will develop
skills and research experiences to potentially fill these hiring needs. During
the summer research experience each student participant will complete an
individual research project with mentorship from NMIMT faculty, building their
skills, knowledge, and exposure to science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) disciplines. The students will investigate the
interdisciplinary engineering and science of intelligent systems and energetic
systems, including specific projects to explore aerodynamic drone design and
control, and development of additively manufactured rocket propellants.
Participants will be exposed to cutting edge research facilities at NMIMT and at
prominent national facilities through tours of Sandia National Laboratories and
White Sands Missile Range. Students will be recruited from institutions with
limited undergraduate research opportunities, especially in the Southwestern
U.S. region. The INTENSE REU will have focused recruitment from groups
underrepresented in STEM careers including Hispanic, Native American, and
Veteran populations, supporting NMIMT’s Hispanic Serving Institution status.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three-year renewal REU Site: Intelligent Energetic
Systems Engineering (INTENSE) at New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
(NMIMT, New Mexico Tech) will engage 8 undergraduate students each year in
unique research related to robotics, smart materials, explosives, rocket
propellants, drones, and shock physics. The INTENSE REU objectives and impacts
are to increase interest in STEM research and graduate studies, increase
technical knowledge of Intelligent and Energetic Systems, expand participants’
“Engineering Toolbox”, increase exposure to STEM career opportunities, enhance
STEM opportunities for minority and under-represented populations, and develop
long-term social and mentoring relationships and opportunities with student
cohorts and faculty mentors. Each summer, eight students will participate in a
ten-week program conducting research in laboratories with faculty and graduate
student mentors. Energetic systems topics including explosives, propulsion,
shock physics, and high-rate impacts are taught at extremely few universities
nationally, with NMIMT being a recognized national leader in the field. INTENSE
REU participants will be exposed to ongoing unique research that is being
performed through a range of federal funding mechanisms, including collaboration
with federally funded research and development centers (FFRDCs). Participants
will broaden their engineering “toolbox” through hands-on research and a series
of group Toolbox Development Activities covering topics including: library
resources, experiment planning and data analysis, graduate school applications,
entrepreneurial engineering, and technical communication. REU participants will
build peer and mentor relationships through social, group, and mentoring
activities which will enhance life-long learning. They will present their
research to the community though a technical poster conference held at NMIMT at
the end of each summer. Mentor training for faculty and graduate students will
improve relationships, increase research effectiveness, and provide long-term
connections with REU students. Targeted recruitment will engage students from
underrepresented groups in STEM research with the goal of increasing persistence
in STEM fields and expanding the diversity of the national
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Site is supported by the Department of
Defense in partnership with the National Science Foundation REU
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.