* 2244919
* Collaborative Research: NSFGEO-NERC: Hurricane Risk Amplification and Changing North Atlantic Natural Disasters
* GEO,AGS
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Colin Zarzycki, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Eric DeWeaver
* 02/28/2026
* USD 84,365.00

This is a project jointly funded by the National Science Foundationâ€™s
Directorate for Geosciences (NSF/GEO) and the National Environment Research
Council (NERC) of the United Kingdom (UK) via the NSF/GEO-NERC Lead Agency
Agreement. This Agreement allows a single joint US/UK proposal to be submitted
and peer-reviewed by the Agency whose investigator has the largest proportion of
the budget. Upon successful joint determination of an award recommendation, each
Agency funds the proportion of the budget that supports scientists at
institutions in their respective countries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is a
remarkable fact that hurricanes forming in the tropical Atlantic can pose a
threat to the northeastern US and Western Europe, both well outside the tropics
and on opposite sides of the Atlantic. The ability of hurricanes to inflict
damage at such long range is well known in the US, with recent examples
including Sandy in 2012 and Ida in 2021. On the other side of the basin Ophelia
(2017) and Leslie (2018) caused severe damage in Ireland, Portugal, and Spain.
Such storms are a natural topic for collaboration between NSF and NERC given
their transatlantic impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research under this award
seeks to understand the Atlantic hurricanes that make landfall at higher
latitudes, taking into account their full lifecycle and impacts. Lifecycle is an
important consideration as hurricanes can transform considerably as they
encounter the cool ocean surface, frontal temperature contrasts, and upper-level
ridges, troughs, and jet streams of the middle latitudes. By the time a
hurricane makes landfall in Ireland or New York it is likely to have undergone
at least a partial transition from the warm core, vertically aligned structure
of a tropical cyclone to the cold-core, westward-tilted structure and larger
areal extent of an extratropical cyclone. The lifecycle transitions of these
hurricanes complicate efforts to understand and predict their behavior and
anticipate changes in their frequency and intensity due to climate variability
and change. Changes in hurricane structure also create important differences in
impacts, for instance storms which retain their tropical characteristics at
landfall are typically more damaging, but storms which have largely transformed
into extratropical cyclones are considerably more common. They can also create
disruptions over a wider area, as was the case with Hurricane
Sandy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key challenge in work on hurricanes at higher
latitudes, referred to here as cyclones of tropical origin (CTOs), is scarcity
of observations, as CTOs occur infrequently and the observed record is
relatively short. This project takes advantage of several archives of model
simulations which substantially augment the observations, including ensembles of
seasonal forecasts from the European Centre for Medium-range Weather Forecasts.
The forecast ensembles contain many examples of CTOs which could have happened
but did not, thus boosting the sample size for CTOs from perhaps 3 per year to
300 per year. The project also uses specialized models to look at hurricane
impacts, including a high-resolution coastal ocean model to simulate storm surge
and a hydrological model for flooding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has
societal value due to its emphasis on hazardous weather events. The project
includes a concerted effort to provide actionable guidance to decision makers.
The ensembles available from seasonal forecasts and other model output allows
consideration of a wider variety of CTOs than have occurred in the observational
record, thus better representing the range of possibilities. The application of
storm surge and flood models to these simulated storms provides further guidance
on the range of possible CTO impacts. The range of possible storms and their
impacts is synthesized in the form of storylines, which are narrative
descriptions of the events and their impacts to be used for planning purposes.
The project supports a postdoctoral researcher, thereby promoting the future
workforce in this research area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.