* 2244770
* EAGER: Leveraging Chaperones to Escape the Plant RuBisCO Catalytic Catch-22
* BIO,MCB
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2025
* Matthew Shoulders, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 03/31/2025
* USD 300,000.00

Photosynthetic organisms use carbon dioxide from the atmosphere to produce sugar
and biomass that support all other life. The enzyme RuBisCO is responsible for
this chemical capture of carbon dioxide. Unfortunately, it carries out this
process only very slowly â€“ to the extent that carbon dioxide capture often
limits plant growth. Moreover, RuBisCO regularly and mistakenly reacts with
oxygen instead of carbon dioxide, wasting energy and further limiting plant
growth. An improved Rubisco, if translated into agriculture, would lead to a
significant increase in crop yields, improved food security, and better climate
resilience, and improving Rubisco function has long been viewed as an
agricultural technology holy grail. With the potential value of such an enzyme
in mind, researchers have asked whether it is possible to substantially improve
these areas of RuBisCO function, since natural evolution has failed to do so
thus far. One widely touted possibility is that RuBisCO is caught in an
evolutionary trap and cannot be improved. An alternative view is that subjecting
the enzyme to new-to-nature types of selection pressures and environments would
enable evolutionary innovations that actually can unlock a better RuBisCO. The
goal of this project is to test the latter idea, by integrating fundamental
biophysical concepts with state-of-the-art techniques for laboratory evolution.
The proposed research will also help to train the next generation of scientists
and engineers by involving high school interns each summer in the work.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Molecular chaperones interact with and assist other
proteins (clients) in the cell and, in doing so, can profoundly influence the
evolutionary trajectories accessible to their clients. In plants, RuBisCO
requires nearly a dozen of these molecular chaperones to assist its production,
regulation, and maintenance. How do the sequences and activities of these
chaperones impact the evolution of plant RuBisCO, and are there ways to optimize
the chaperones to open new regions of sequence space for RuBisCO? By applying
laboratory evolution to RuBisCO and its chaperones in a microbial host, this
project will seek to answer these questions. Next-generation mutagenesis
technologies and novel screening systems will be used to achieve two key goals:
(1) Demonstrating high-throughput in vivo directed evolution of plant RuBisCO
and its chaperones and (2) Testing the idea that co-evolution of RuBisCO and its
chaperones can lead to better evolutionary outcomes and enhanced enzymatic
properties relative to evolving just RuBisCO alone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.