* 2244049
* REU Site: High Performance Computing with Engineering Applications
* CSE,OAC
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Daqing Hou, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 01/31/2026
* USD 405,321.00

This award renews the support to a highly successful Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) Site at Clarkson University, Potsdam, New York for a second
three-year period. This site focuses on High Performance Computing (HPC) with
engineering applications, an area that is critical to national security,
scientific discovery, and technological innovation. To maintain the U.S.’s
leadership in this area, talented students with advanced training in HPC
software development are urgently needed to fully unleash the power of HPC.
Thus, the goal of this project is to encourage 30 talented undergraduate
students to pursue graduate study and careers in HPC by engaging them in
exciting, ongoing research projects and by cultivating their talents during a
ten-week summer research experience and beyond. The research projects available
for students are highly innovative, sharing the common theme of societally
relevant engineering applications that originate from diverse engineering
disciplines, including mechanical and aerospace engineering, chemical
engineering, civil engineering, electrical and computer engineering, software
engineering, and applied mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are targeted
efforts to recruit students underrepresented in HPC careers or who might
otherwise be unable to participate in academic research, such as historically
minority colleges and universities. Emphasis is placed on attracting
underrepresented minorities and female students. The processes used to recruit,
select, and onboard students incorporate proven best practices in support of
research experiences for undergraduates. Faculty advisors with expertise in HPC
applications mentor the students to be researchers by providing them with
specialized training in the design and development of HPC applications that are
rooted in highly engaging engineering innovations. This specialized training
provides the students with the highly valuable technical and analytical skills
that will benefit them in future pursuits such as graduate study or industry
work. The quality of this training is further enhanced by additional
professional development activities such as an HPC crash course, field trips,
invited speakers, weekly group research meetings, and a mentor training workshop
for faculty advisors. All student participants will be given the opportunity to
attend and present in professional conferences. The PIs plan to disseminate
their experience of delivering the REU Site through educational research
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.