* 2244040
* REU Site: Semiconductor Hands-On Research Experience (SHORE)
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Rebecca Peterson, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2026
* USD 388,489.00

This three-year REU Site: Semiconductor Hands-On Research Experience (SHORE) at
the University of Michigan seeks to address this workforce need by providing
10-week summer experiential training in nanofabrication of semiconductor
materials, devices, and related technologies to cohorts of students.
Semiconductor technology is critical to all facets of modern society. From day-
to-day consumer activities to state-of-the-art defense needs, the U.S. relies on
vigorous innovation, continuous performance improvement, and reliable
manufacturing of microelectronics. Expanded domestic production and growth of an
expanded and inclusive workforce in this field is urgently needed. To expand the
diversity of the semiconductor workforce, the Site will recruit participants in
partnership with minority serving institutions (MSIs) and other institutions
with limited nanofabrication capabilities. Each year, nine REU students will be
recruited to participate in 10-week summer research projects. The REU projects,
which will include projects designed alongside MSI faculty partners, will focus
on research enabled by the Lurie Nanofabrication Facility. In this way, the REU
site will provide opportunities for participants to engage in semiconductor-
related research at an experiential level not available at their home
institutions, to broaden participation of scientists and engineers who are
engaged in semiconductor-related engineering, and to facilitate their path to
pursue STEM careers and further graduate studies in the
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year REU Site: Semiconductor Hands-On
Research Experience (SHORE) at the University of Michigan seeks to address this
workforce need by providing 10-week summer experiential training in
nanofabrication of semiconductor materials, devices, and related technologies to
cohorts of students. Each year, nine REU students will be recruited to
participate in 10-week summer research projects. The research projects performed
by the REU Site participants, supervised and mentored by UM faculty and graduate
students, will address key research challenges in semiconductor materials and
devices, focusing on three thrusts: (1) wide bandgap materials and devices, (2)
complex oxide materials and devices, and (3) nanotechnology for devices. These
projects will address key societal needs that can be met by semiconductor
materials and device innovation such as: photocatalysis for solar fuels and
carbon sequestration needed to mitigate the effects of climate change; new
materials and integration methods to achieve nanoscale control of electronic
properties for the next generation of computational circuits and high-resolution
sensors; and innovation in photonics circuits and efficient power conversion
devices to reduce global energy consumption. In addition, the REU Site
activities will mentor students to develop critical scientific thinking skills
and technical expertise. The Site will furthermore provide professional
development opportunities, to enable the participants to confidently pursue
graduate studies and careers in STEM and nanotechnology. Post-program evaluation
will be performed to assess the success of the Site in achieving these goals.
The scientific discoveries, technological advances, and hands-on training and
career development of diverse cohorts of participants accomplished via this Site
will support expanded U.S. leadership in semiconductor
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Site is supported in part by funds
provided to the National Science Foundation by the Semiconductor Research
Corporation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.