* 2244878
* Improving Science Communication via Results-Blind Selection: Lessons from Registered Reports
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Alexa Tullett, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 04/30/2026
* USD 314,103.00

We are often told that science is trustworthy because scientists focus on how to
answer a question without getting to decide what that answer will be. For
instance, a psychological scientist might carefully design a study to compare
strict and lenient teaching styles, opening up the possibility that the answer
could be unexpected, or even disappointing. Unlike scientists, however, the
public learns the answers that have been selected by science journalists and
editors, a system that opens the door to distrust. This distrust is apparent in
a recent PEW report, which found that only 52% of Americans say that the media
do a good job of covering science, a rate that puts the US second-to-last among
the 20 countries surveyed. If journalists are more likely to report on
sensationalistic findings over those supported by strong evidence, this could
damage the dependability of those findings as source of guidance. Further, if
journalists are more likely to report findings that reinforce a particular
ideology, this could foster polarization and public distrust. The present
proposal will test one strategy for improving the trustworthiness of
psychological science reporting: journalists could select research based on
methods rather than results (results-blind selection). This approach thus shifts
the focus to prioritizing sound, rather than sensational, findings. By pursuing
concrete strategies for improving the trustworthiness of science journalism,
this proposal aligns with the National Science Foundation’s goal to “increase
the public value of scientific activity.” &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The idea that
results-blind evaluation could reduce bias and improve the quality of featured
research is the foundation for the Registered Reports academic article format,
first introduced at Cortex in 2013. Previous research shows that Registered
Reports are rated higher than the comparison papers on rigorousness and quality,
suggesting that results-blind selection may be an effective way to promote
quality and replicability. In the present project, we propose three studies. In
Study 1, we will recruit 400 journalists and test whether results-blind
selection of scientific studies can improve the trustworthiness of reported
research. In Study 2, we will recruit 250 participants and test whether results-
blind selection of scientific studies can increase public trust in science
journalism. Finally, in Study 3 we will re-contact 32 journalists from Study 1
and use group interviews to explore how results-blind selection could be
effectively integrated with existing journalistic norms and routines. These
findings will inform our understanding of existing mechanisms that rely on
results-blind selection – like Registered Reports – as well as our understanding
of the potential value of this approach to improving the quality the
psychological science that gets communicated to the
public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is co-funded by the Science of Science:
Discovery, Communications, and Impact and the Advancing Informal STEM Learning
Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.