* 2244031
* REU Site: Nanophotonics, Quantum Photonics, and Vision/Biomedical Optics at the University of Rochester.
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2026
* Andrew Berger, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 03/31/2026
* USD 405,000.00

The REU Site: Nanophotonics, Quantum Photonics, and Vision/Biomedical Optics at
the University of Rochester will engage participating students in the frontiers
of photonics research in nanoscience, bioscience and quantum science while at
the same time providing them with experiences to recognize the excellent career
opportunities, both academic and industry based, available in photonics. The
expected outcomes of the REU are (1) growth in participants’ photonics knowledge
and awareness of photonics as a career, (2) increased diversity in the pool of
students entering research and careers in photonics, and (3) research
productivity that rewards both REU students and faculty/graduate student
mentors. It has been widely recognized that understanding and controlling the
most elemental unit of light – the photon – is essential to innovating light-
based technology as well as evolving critical elements of our nation’s defense
and security. The significance of this REU Site is that it responds to this
national need and will enhance our nation’s capabilities by training top-quality
students to become key contributors in the commercial photonics sector, leaders
on the frontiers of fundamental photonic science and engineering, and the very
best educators in colleges and universities across the nation. Additionally,
this REU will increase diversity in graduate-level photonics research and the
workplace by prioritizing members of underrepresented groups, community college
students, and students from institutions lacking large STEM research programs,
all via pipelines already connected to the University of Rochester and The
Institute of Optics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU Site: Nanophotonics, Quantum
Photonics, and Vision/Biomedical Optics at the University of Rochester will
engage participating students in the frontiers of photonics research in
nanoscience, bioscience and quantum science while at the same time providing
them with experiences to recognize the excellent career opportunities, both
academic and industry based, available in photonics. To make the previous
possible the REU program will benefit from the existing University of Rochester
administrative and student support infrastructure, the Institute of Optics’s
strong ties with the local Rochester photonics industry (through the Rochester
Regional Photonics Cluster), meaningful relationships with both area community
colleges and partner undergraduate universities as well as the Institute’s
Industrial Associates program and its associated Summer School. The REU site
will also advance the knowledge of how best to train and inspire undergraduate
researchers. Multiple formative and summative assessments will measure students’
growth during the summer and in subsequent years, and the mentor/student
connections will stretch beyond the summer by bringing REU participants back to
the University of Rochester to participate in the Institute’s Industrial
Associates biannual symposium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Site is supported in
part by funds provided to the National Science Foundation by the Semiconductor
Research Corporation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.