* 2244896
* Collaborative Research: NSFGEO-NERC: C-FORCE Carbon-Cycle Feedbacks from Response to Carbon Emissions
* GEO,OCE
* 11/15/2022,10/31/2027
* James Zachos, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 10/31/2027
* USD 303,642.00

The Paleocene-Eocene Thermal Maximum (PETM) was a global warming event roughly
56 million years ago. The PETM coincided with major volcanism, when opening of
the North Atlantic Ocean led to the formation of the North Atlantic Igneous
Province. However, it is not clear what fraction of the increase in atmospheric
carbon dioxide across the PETM was caused by volcanism. It is also unclear
whether carbon cycle feedbacks influenced the carbon dioxide increase. This
project will use geophysical, geochemical, and numerical modeling techniques to
quantify the net global carbon cycle feedbacks across the PETM. The project’s US
participants will generate detailed new records of ocean chemistry and develop
novel modeling strategies. Together, these will help determine whether volcanic
emissions can explain the magnitude and pace of PETM environmental change. This
project will support a postdoctoral researcher at UC Santa Cruz and will provide
support and internship research opportunities for undergraduate students from UC
Riverside. This is a project that is jointly funded by the National Science
Foundation’s Directorate of Geosciences (NSF/GEO) and the National Environment
Research Council (NERC) of the United Kingdom (UK) via the NSF/GEO-NERC Lead
Agency Agreement. This Agreement allows a single joint US/UK proposal to be
submitted and peer-reviewed by the Agency whose investigator has the largest
proportion of the budget. Upon successful joint determination of an award, each
Agency funds the proportion of the budget and the investigators associated with
its own country.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To address uncertainties in carbon cycle
feedbacks on a warming planet, the project will measure how the global carbon
cycle responded during a past period of global warming that was driven by
emissions of carbon-based greenhouse gases to the atmosphere. The Paleocene-
Eocene Thermal Maximum (PETM) is the largest natural climate change event of the
last 65 million years, and the closest natural analog to the modern rates of
global warming and carbon greenhouse gas emissions. During the PETM, initial
global warming of 4-5 degrees C over a few thousand years was partially driven
by carbon emissions from an unusually massive episode of volcanism, and the
climate then gradually recovered to its pre-existing state over more than 100
thousand years. The project will use a novel model of the global carbon cycle to
compare the carbon supplied by volcanism with the total PETM carbon budget; the
difference between these two budgets can be attributed to carbon cycle
feedbacks. First, the project team will make new high-resolution estimates of
the rate at which volcanism supplied carbon to the atmosphere throughout the
PETM by measuring the processes that generated the magma. Next, new high-
resolution records of ocean acidification will constrain calculations of the
total budget of carbon emissions to the atmosphere that caused the climate
change. Finally, carbon cycle modeling will allow the scientists who make these
two sets of measurements to interface effectively to solve the net global carbon
cycle feedback problem for the first time. Furthermore, because Earth's carbon
reservoirs differ in isotopic composition, this project will fingerprint which
reservoirs most likely acted as carbon sources or sinks over the course of the
PETM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.