* 2244433
* REU Site: Applying the Tools of Physics to Explore the Macroscopic, Microscopic, and Quantum Worlds
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Jorge Noronha, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 03/31/2026
* USD 316,734.00

This award supports the renewal of the Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) site at the University of Illinois in Urbana-Champaign (UIUC). Each year,
12 undergraduate students will engage in hands-on, cutting-edge physics
research. These students will work with senior faculty on forefront research
projects in a variety of physics subdisciplines, with topics ranging from
mapping the phase diagram of exotic superconductors, to determining the atomic-
scale structure of DNA origami objects, to designing radiation-hard calorimeter
components for the ATLAS experiment at the Large Hadron Collider. In addition to
learning advanced research methods and gaining physics insight, the REU students
will receive training in technical communications, teamwork, and leadership
skills and receive graduate-school and career guidance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
REU students will be integrated into senior-faculty-led research groups and
contribute to on-going research projects in a variety of physics areas. The REU
projects at UIUC are neither "cookbook" exercises nor simple manual labor.
Students will have opportunities to write code that is subsequently used in real
experiments, simulate and test components for real instruments, build and
characterize novel devices, grow samples that are used in original research, and
analyze real data. They will be exposed to principles of the responsible conduct
of research and data management and preservation. They will receive instruction
in professional technical communication skills and practice leadership and
teamwork skills essential to their success as future scientists and engineers.
They will experience a holistic program that teaches them not only how to do
physics research, but also how to be successful
physicists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.