* 2244045
* NRT-QISE: a new interdisciplinary degree program for convergent research and graduate training in quantum information science and engineering
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Jay Gupta, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 06/30/2028
* USD 3,000,000.00

In traditional graduate programs, disciplinary specialization, student
assistantship funding, and lack of graduate-level industry engagement impede the
development of the diverse workforce needed to solve grand challenges in quantum
information sciences and engineering (QISE) and translate fundamental research
to commercial applications. This National Science Foundation Research
Traineeship (NRT) award to The Ohio State University (OSU) will expand upon the
NSF-funded QuSTEAM network for undergraduate education to establish a new
graduate degree program in quantum information science and engineering (QISE) at
both the MS and PhD levels. This program will be one of a few in the U.S. that
is not housed in a traditional academic department, but rather spans various
participating departments including physics, chemistry, mathematics, computer
science, electrical engineering, and materials science. A new graduate-level
curriculum will be developed using vetted principles from educational research.
The curriculum will feature a compact common core of QISE courses supplemented
by graduate modules to accommodate variations in trainee preparation from these
disciplines. In addition to courses, NRT trainees will be engaged in QISE
research from the start, and will develop professional skills in ethics,
technical writing and communication. They will also benefit from graduate-level
industry internships. The program will directly fund 25 trainees over the award
period, with 10-20 additional degree students funded from other sources, and
100+ students benefiting from taking courses as electives. The program will make
societal impacts through cutting edge research in QISE, national engagement, and
training of a diverse workforce in semiconductor and quantum technologies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new NRT program will embed principles highlighted in
the National Quantum Workforce Strategic Plan including distributed and modular
course content to accommodate diverse pathways into and through the program, an
expedited transition from courses to experiential learning, and evidenced-based
and inclusive course development using ‘Backward Design’ principles. NRT
trainees will expand the QISE research in areas such as hybrid quantum systems,
novel qubits based on molecules, semiconductor materials and technologies, and
integrated photonics for quantum networks. The OSU team is a leader in studying
how the properties of defects in semiconductors depend on, and can be tuned by,
the local environment, including proximity to other defects, interfaces and
electromagnetic fields. Overall, the goals of this program are to: 1) create a
proposal for developing a proposal for Master’s and PhD degrees in QISE at The
OSU; 2) develop and deliver three core graduate courses: Foundations in QISE,
Grand Challenges in QISE, and Classical vs. Quantum Computing, as well as two
interdisciplinary graduate elective courses in QISE; 3) evaluate program impact
and iterate to continuously improve student outcomes; 4) build on industry
partnerships to develop graduate internships, sponsored research projects, and
certificate programs; and 5) develop a long-term, sustainable model for graduate
research and traineeship in QISE for long-term impact. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development
and implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM
graduate education training. The program is dedicated to effective training of
STEM graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research
areas through comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-
based, and aligned with changing workforce and research needs.  
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.