* 2244445
* REU Site: Natural History Research Experiences
* GEO,EAR
* 11/01/2023,10/31/2028
* Ioan Lascu, Smithsonian Institution
* Continuing Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 10/31/2028
* USD 249,313.00

The Smithsonian Institution's National Museum of Natural History (NMNH), located
in Washington, D.C. will host a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
site during the summers from 2024-2028. The REU program will support 12 students
each summer for 10 weeks, during which students will conduct independent
research and participate in a variety of professional development workshops.
Projects focus on the NMNH's research strengths in geology, biology, and in
anthropology. Interns are given unparalleled access to the collections,
facilities, and intellectual resources of NMNH while they develop a research
project in close collaboration with a museum research scientist. The program is
designed to support and prepare participants for entry into scientific careers
by providing structured counsel on entering graduate school, designing,
conducting and publishing research, and presenting results to the scientific
community and the public. While these experiences will provide students with
technical skills and pathways into science careers, the training will also
encourage the development of critical thinking and presentation skills that will
be valuable in any future career. NMNH is committed to broadening participation
and enhancing diversity in natural history disciplines in order to develop an
internationally competitive scientific work force for the future. In addition,
the REU students will directly engage the museum-going public about their
research, interacting with thousands of museum visitors
annually.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Natural History Research Experiences (NHRE)
engages 12 undergraduate students annually in independent research projects
under the mentorship of National Museum of Natural History (NMNH) scientific
staff members. NHRE is designed for promising undergraduates who have had few
opportunities to fulfill their potential as researchers in natural history
disciplines. NHRE is structured around the mentor-student relation, with 80% of
the time being devoted to the research project. During the remaining time, the
interns participate in enrichment activities that include research, collections,
and outreach aspects. They also participate in professional development
activities, are discussants in decolonization workshops tailored to spark
critical thinking related to museum practices, and receive training in ethics,
communication, and workplace conduct. Projects focus on the NMNH’s research
strengths in geology, biology, and anthropology. Interns work on hypothesis-
driven research projects, which they can take ownership of at the end of the
program. Interns have unparalleled access to museum collections, facilities, and
intellectual capital to complete their projects. The success of the NHRE will be
judged by its effects on student attitudes toward STEM, interns’ subsequent
educational/career paths, the extent of mentor-student collaborations as
measured by peer-reviewed publications, presentations at professional
conferences, ongoing alumni mentoring and alumni peer networking, and by our
success in broadening participation in natural history careers. With more than 4
million visitors annually, the NMNH is uniquely positioned to educate and
inspire the public about natural history research. NHRE leverages Smithsonian’s
excellence in education and communication, exposing the interns to the entire
museum, not just the science departments. As part of our “The Expert Is In”
outreach program, interns will directly engage the museum-going public about
their research, interacting with thousands of museum visitors. NHRE is committed
to promoting diversity and inclusion in natural history disciplines, and
broadening participation: at least 50% of interns will be underrepresented
minorities, first-generation college students, persons with disabilities, and
veterans. Half of the NHRE participants will be from institutions without a
graduate program, where opportunities in STEM are
limited.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.