* 2244488
* REU Site: Cryptography and Coding Theory at the University of South Florida
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Jean-Francois Biasse, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Jill Denner
* 03/31/2026
* USD 427,000.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site award funds a new site
focused on cryptography and coding theory at the University of South Florida.
Cybersecurity plays a ubiquitous role in our daily lives. Cryptography and
coding theory provide the most essential blocks to secure our cyberspace.
Cryptography ensures confidentiality, integrity and authenticity of data, while
coding theory contributes to the availability of data in case of transmission
errors or unavailability of servers. Both areas address critical national
security issues. The cybersecurity job market is currently experiencing a
shortage of qualified personal, especially in the fields of cryptography and
coding theory, which require significant technical training. Meanwhile,
cryptography and coding theory are also active areas of research at the
interface of computer science, mathematics, and physics. The breadth of skills
required to perform successful independent research on these topics makes some
of the most promising research angles very challenging to approach for new
graduate students. For each of three summers, this REU Site offers 10
undergraduate students the opportunity to perform research for 10 weeks in
cryptography and coding theory under the mentorship of an interdisciplinary team
of senior personal with expertise in mathematics, quantum computing, applied
cryptography and hardware security. Additionally, this REU aims to mitigate the
gender gap and the diversity gap in cybersecurity by focusing its recruitment
effort on women and under-represented communities. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
REU Site focuses on some of the most active and interdisciplinary areas of
research in cryptography and coding theory. In particular, students are given
the opportunity to explore different angles of post-quantum cryptography, which
consists in the design of cryptosystems that will resist attacks from future
quantum computers. Research projects available to the students include the
design and analysis of cryptosystems based on Euclidean lattices, on error-
correcting codes, as well as the technical aspects pertaining to their practical
deployment. Students are also given the opportunity to explore the mathematical
aspects of block cipher design through projects on Almost Perfect non-Linear
(APN) functions, as well as the design of error correcting codes that optimize
the redundancy effort to mitigate the impact of the unavailability of servers.
This REU Site also offers participants opportunities for personal development
such as training in cryptography and coding theory by an interdisciplinary team
of senior personnel, and professional workshops on intellectual property and
graduate school applications. In addition, participants take part in an REU Site
research symposium at the end of the summer that brings together REU Site
participants from all disciplines across the University of South Florida.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is jointly funded by the Department of Defense
in partnership with the NSF Directorate of Computer and Information Science and
Engineering and the Division of Mathematical Sciences REU
programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.