* 2244003
* REU Site: Integrative Cell and Molecular Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Michelle Whaley, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 03/31/2026
* USD 378,979.00

This REU Site award to the Department of Biological Sciences at University of
Notre Dame, located in South Bend, IN, will support the training of 10 students
for 10 weeks during the summers of 2023-2025. It is anticipated that a total of
30 students, primarily from schools with limited research opportunities or from
an under-represented group, will be trained in the program. The program focuses
on providing participants a comprehensive introduction to scientific research.
It will give students experience in generating and analyzing their own research
results as well as effectively reporting scientific information. It will also
educate them on the important issues of professionalism, ethical conduct,
collaboration, and other skills needed to succeed in the scientific arena. The
recruitment of underrepresented minority students, and students without access
to research will be a high priority to increase the diversity of students
pursuing research careers. Students will learn how research is conducted, and
many will present the results of their work at scientific conferences.
Assessment of the program will be done through the online SALG URSSA tool. The
NSF ETAP system will be used to register participants
(https://www.nsfetap.gov/). Students will be tracked after the program in order
to determine their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The program
“Integrative Cell and Molecular Biology" will provide students with independent
research projects within an interdisciplinary research community. Program
mentors are drawn from varied disciplines, including genetics, cell biology,
physiology, neuroscience, evolution, ecology and biochemistry. Components of the
program include formulating research proposals, presenting results at a
symposium, writing a research paper and attending weekly seminars and
interactive workshops on topics like integrative research, research ethics, the
publication process and scientific writing. Students will be selected based on
academic record, the quality of the personal statement/cover letter,
recommendation letters, a sincere desire to pursue a research career, and
potential for outstanding research in cell/molecular biology. More information
about the program is available by visiting https://www3.nd.edu/~biosreu/ , or by
contacting the PI (Dr. Xuemin Lu at xlu1@nd.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Michelle
Whaley at Michelle.A.Whaley.3@nd.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is
supported by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.