* 2244316
* REU Site: Materials for Future Computing
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Vincent Sokalski, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 03/31/2026
* USD 377,478.00

Non-Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Semiconductors, like silicon, are
fascinating materials with unique electrical properties on which modern computer
chips are fabricated before being incorporated into products like computers,
smartphones, medical devices, and automobiles. However, the vast majority of
computer chip manufacturing currently takes place outside of the United States,
which presents significant economic and cyber security concerns. Moreover,
advancements in new materials are driving innovations in computing technologies,
which will drive advancements in next-generation computing devices. The
Materials Science and Engineering Department at Carnegie Mellon University (CMU)
will host a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site titled “Materials
for Future Computing” that supports the development of an engaged and qualified
workforce for the semiconductor industry. Working with local colleges and
minority serving institutions (MSIs), the site welcomes students from diverse
backgrounds who have not historically had as many opportunities to conduct
scientific research. Participants take a hands-on approach to learning about the
structure and properties of electronic materials as well as the fundamentals of
nanofabrication processes relevant to the computer chip industry. The experience
incorporates field trips to local companies and direct use of the state-of-the-
art CMU Materials Characterization and Nanofabrication facilities. Students
attend regular seminars to learn about best practices in conducting research and
are paired with a research mentor to work on an individual research project,
which is communicated in a final closing ceremony. The program perpetually
evaluates the student experience including outcomes beyond the 10-week period so
that the long-term goals of the program are
tracked.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site – Materials for Future
Computing - exposes students to state of the art facilities for nanofabrication
and advanced structural characterization of materials. As highlighted in the SRC
2020 Decadal Plan for Semiconductors, energy consumed from computation could
soon be comparable to global energy production. Thus, the discovery,
fabrication, and characterization of new materials is paramount to improving the
energy-efficiency of modern computers. The Materials for Future Computing
experience leverages existing CMU facilities including the Carnegie Mellon
nanofabrication facility (CMNF) and Materials Characterization Facility (MCF).
Students are paired with a faculty research mentor where they will conduct
research on an individual project related to electronic materials. In addition
to the individual research projects, students are offered a range of universal
experiences including weekly tutorials related to best practices in research,
weekly workshops held within MCF and CMNF including three off campus field
trips, regular collegial meetings, and roundtable discussions with the PIs. A
primary objective of this proposal is to expand opportunities to students who
have historically not had equitable opportunities to pursue scientific research.
The proposed REU site takes steps to recruit underrepresented minorities (URMs)
and promote gender diversity through outreach to minority serving institutions
(MSIs) and existing engineering professional societies. The Principal
Investigators work with local colleges in the Greater Pittsburgh Area that have
limited research opportunities and do not offer graduate school programs
including 2-year community colleges. The long-term impact of this site is to
broaden the participation of students in engineering and to strengthen research
and development in the semiconductor industry in the United
States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Site is supported in part by funds provided to
the National Science Foundation by the Semiconductor Research
Corporation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.