* 2244164
* NRT-HDR: WaterCube: Big Data Water Science for Sustainability and Equity
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Joan Rose, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 07/31/2028
* USD 3,000,000.00

Large and complex real-world water resource problems are affecting human well-
being across the globe. These problems are exacerbated by climate change, aging
infrastructure, emerging contaminants, and poor decision-making. Recent examples
in the United States include: the Flint water crisis; the years-long unsafe
drinking water in Jackson, Mississippi; the Colorado River crisis; wide-spread
contamination of water with per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS); and
prolonged drought followed by a extreme flooding in California. Advances in
sensors, robotics, genomics, and computational modeling are resulting in the big
data necessary to confront these challenges available at all scales. What is
needed is a workforce capable of translating these big data and complex research
outputs into meaningful restorative actions through partnerships with diverse
stakeholders, interest groups, and policymakers. This National Science
Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to Michigan State University (MSU)
will develop a collaborative graduate-training paradigm for advancing data
revolution-enabled water sustainability through an equity lens. Building on
synergistic, interdisciplinary collaboration among faculty from thirteen
departments across seven colleges, the project anticipates training 58 Ph.D.
students, including 33 NRT-funded trainees, from engineering, computer science,
biology, ecology, public health, and social science. This NRT program will
produce a highly competent workforce with the broad technological, scientific,
and cultural skills needed to address current and future water challenges.
Through focused effort on broadening participation in this critical area,
students from diverse ethnic, cultural, and socioeconomic backgrounds will be
trained to become successful research and policy
leaders.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NRT program will immerse students in a
holistic approach to training and convergent research where engineers, computer
scientists, biologists, ecologists, and social scientists work together to solve
water problems of paramount significance. Such a convergent research paradigm
promises progress in addressing critical challenges in water sustainability and
equity, examples of which include understanding and mitigating harmful algal
blooms, advancing wastewater surveillance to monitor outbreaks of infectious
diseases, and engaging disadvantaged communities in data-enabled water research
to support equitable outcomes. A graduate certificate program on Data-enabled
Water Sustainability and Equity will provide training that integrates data
science, water science, and environmental equity. Through dialogue-based team
science workshops, cohorts will reflect on disciplinary differences and
similarities and learn to communicate and collaborate in cross-disciplinary
partnerships. This NRT program will develop robust, structured mechanisms for
providing experiential learning for trainees, such as internships and
international research experiences. Outreach and other professional development
activities will allow the trainees to gain skills in effective mentoring,
leadership, and communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship
(NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and implementation of
bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education
training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate
students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through
comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and
aligned with changing workforce and research needs.  &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.