* 2244061
* REU Site: Novel Techniques and Applications in Catalysis Research Development and Molecular Dynamics
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Patrick Walsh, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Tomislav Pintauer
* 08/31/2026
* USD 390,000.00

This Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site award to the University
of Pennsylvania, located in Philadelphia, PA, supports the training of 10
students for 10 weeks during the summers of 2023-2025. In this program, funded
by the Division of Chemistry, undergraduate participants aim to develop diverse
approaches to improving chemical reactions, computationally mapping reaction
mechanisms and solid-state chemistry, and investigating chemical science with
relationship to semi-conductors. These efforts will be performed with the
mentorship of faculty and graduate students or postdoctoral associates. An
aspect unique to this site is that participants also gain exposure to high
throughput experimentation (HTE) methods, training that is often limited to
industry. Exposure to HTE provides a distinct experience for participants, one
with long-term leverage into both academic and industrial career pathways.
Participants take part in regular professional development activities where they
hone their communication skills, explore career paths, and learn about
responsible research conduct, preparing them for advanced degrees in
STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research projects available for participants span
a significant space across catalysis: method development, catalyst development,
and synthetic applications as well as extension into molecular dynamics, solid-
state chemistry and beyond. This program recruits students nationwide, with an
emphasis on underrepresented student groups. A wide raging network of industrial
and academic collaborations expose participants to a variety of viable career
pathways with the goal of sustaining a diverse and competitive chemical science
workforce. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Site is supported in part by funds
provided to the National Science Foundation by the Semiconductor Research
Corporation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.