* 2244715
* CAREER: Ethical implications of connected critical infrastructure in the food-energy-water nexus
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2022,12/31/2024
* Caitlin Grady, George Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Hamilton
* 12/31/2024
* USD 405,237.00

Sustainably managing Earth's physical resources and natural systems for food,
energy, and water (FEW) resources is of critical importance for society now and
into the future. Recent decades have seen the emergence of food-energy-water
nexus research that seeks to understand the interconnections and
interdependencies associated with these resources. Although progress has been
made in this regard, quantification efforts are needed to integrate the built
environment and human values into FEW research. The objective of this research
is to provide explicit consideration of critical infrastructure and stakeholder
values in quantification efforts to further understand FEW environmental
sustainability. The integrated research and educational plan builds the
foundation for the investigator's long-term career goal to cultivate and grow a
transdisciplinary research laboratory that catalyzes cross-cutting efforts to
elucidate complex interactions across critical infrastructure, developing
predictive understanding and offering solutions to food, energy, and water
management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific aims of this research are to:
develop inter-infrastructural datasets and network-theoretic models to quantify
FEW supply chain sustainability through connected critical infrastructure (CI)
and use environmental ethics frameworks to deploy values-informed mental models
that will develop understandings on socio-ethical implications of FEW-CI
sustainability. The project will develop fundamental theory surrounding FEW
nexus sustainability by filling several gaps in prior scholarship and advance
the state of knowledge regarding: i) how multilayer FEW-CI networks behave under
conditions of environmental sustainability, ii) how accounting for critical
infrastructure influences FEW quantification efforts, and iii) how stakeholder
values alter FEW modeling and resource management for sustainable systems.
Additionally, the investigator's Education plan, integrated with the research
plan through the theme of ethics, will offer undergraduate and graduate students
career-strengthening opportunities through international engagement, provide
engineering ethics teaching resources for the University and beyond, and engage
with policymakers to ensure that research outcomes are relevant to achieving
societal goals. The intellectual merit of the educational plan is grounded in
theory on best practices for ethics education across STEM disciplines. Finally,
the combination of data from FEW-CI open sources, theory-based socio-
experimental designs, and assessment and advice from leaders in multiple fields
will allow the investigator to build capacity for developing and deploying
transdisciplinary convergent research in environmental sustainability, forming
the basis to launch her 5- and 10-year career goals. The research and
educational activities will contribute to the following seven societal outcomes:
full participation of women, persons with disabilities, and underrepresented
minorities in STEM; improved STEM education and educator development; increased
public scientific literacy and public engagement with science and technology;
development of a diverse, globally competitive STEM workforce; increased
partnerships between academia, industry, and others; improved national security;
and enhanced infrastructure for research and education. Highlighting three of
the activities that contribute to these outcomes, the PI will: implement a study
abroad program in Vietnam and Singapore for undergraduate and graduate students
from underrepresented groups, furthering equity and career readiness of
participants; develop engineering ethics modules that directly contribute to
accreditation requirements; and organize virtual workshops to engage
policymakers in research and educational outcomes. Assessment and evaluation
will occur through a distinguished advisory board of senior faculty from
multiple institutions as well as consultations with an expert in educational
pedagogy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.