* 2244283
* NSF REU SITE:  ASSET: Advanced Secured Sensor Enabling Technologies
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Niki Pissinou, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Jill Denner
* 02/28/2026
* USD 405,000.00

This project is a renewal of a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Site at Florida International University that focuses on research related to
advanced, secured sensor-enabled technologies. Undergraduates will work with
faculty on research projects to explore new technologies and solutions utilizing
sensor networks and protocols, software, and hardware solutions essential to the
advancement and practical application of secure sensor technologies. This
research theme includes a range of research projects, including adversarial
machine learning attacks, efficient plausible deniability systems, resource-
constrained multi-dimensional blockchains, vulnerability detection frameworks
for securing ubiquitous systems, robust and secure wireless sensing systems for
human activity recognition, and leveraging hybrid Li-Fi/Wireless sensor networks
for internet of light. Undergraduates will participate in research that combines
intellectual merit and technical opportunities. They will have a broad impact in
m–health, vehicle platooning, cyberattacks, mobile crowd-sensing, and reduction
of bias in data analytics. The program aims to nurture students into STEM
research fields through a firsthand experience of an intense, interdisciplinary,
collaborative research environment. All activities foster the development of
collaborative communication among students and faculty to enhance and accelerate
the students’ research skills and learning in the field. If successful, the
program will motivate students to continue relevant research careers, build
human capacity in STEM research and knowledge, and increase workforce diversity.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project combines the fields of sensing, computing,
communications, and cybersecurity to create, develop, and implement new sensing
concepts with innovative and significant knowledge. It pioneers core
technologies, supportive algorithms, methods, architectures, and toolkits. The
program provides a high-quality scientific and cross-cultural experience to
motivated undergraduate students from underrepresented population groups
nationwide. It aims to influence their choices about further education and
future careers and increase their skills and confidence to pursue these choices.
With specific recruiting efforts that target underrepresented groups such as
women, minorities, and persons with disabilities, this REU program also aims to
increase the diversity of the scientific workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.