* 2244674
* Collaborative Research: Drivers and proxies of behavioral diversity in Late Pleistocene and Holocene hunter-gatherers
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Justin Pargeter, New York University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2026
* USD 70,674.00

The goal of this project is to study the conditions under which people establish
and maintain cultural boundaries. Ethnic and linguistic identity are central to
human social organization and enable people to identify with other group members
without personally knowing each of them. This "ethnolinguistic identity"
encourages cooperation at a scale that allows humans to solve problems that
could not be tackled with a smaller number of people but may also discourage
cooperation between groups. Because cooperation is an ongoing source of human
ingenuity and conflict today, it is essential to understand the conditions under
which it first emerged and was maintained by our forager ancestors. Did
populations become separate because they followed different patterns of resource
use across the landscape? Was interaction then discouraged because of the
development of cultural barriers? To what extent did ancient human groups share
information and/or resources while maintaining biological and cultural
boundaries? Archaeologists can now combine advances in ancient DNA,
computational simulations, and ancient environmental reconstruction with
analysis of cultural remains to understand the formation and consequences of
ethnolinguistic identities in early human populations. This study enhances
career opportunities and provide training for a postdoctoral researcher,
graduate students, and undergraduates. By embedding the work in local
communities, scientific training will occur within a multicultural research
environment that builds essential skills needed for maximizing the benefits of a
diverse STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The research team will conduct
research in two regions, where ancient DNA analysis has revealed that forager
populations began to maintain separate biological groupings near the end of the
last Ice Age cycle. The investigators will develop well-dated cultural and
environmental records from sites around and including where ancient DNA has been
discovered. The team will conduct new, high-resolution excavations and analyze
the remains they recover alongside existing materials excavated using lower
resolution methods in the 1970s. This increased detail will enable both datasets
to be brought into alignment and maximize their information value to show if
cultural remains such as stone artifacts, pigments, bone tools, and beads show
evidence of emerging cultural differences between groups known from ancient DNA
to have had little biological interaction. Using environmental data, the team
will build simulation models of forager resource use to understand how often
people would have encountered one another. They will use these models to test if
interaction rates or cultural barriers better explain the lack of genetic
exchange.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.