* 2244734
* WTG: Diffusion of Research on Supporting Mathematics Achievement for Youth with Disabilities through Twitter Translational Visual Abstracts
* SBE,SES
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Jessica Rodrigues, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 02/28/2026
* USD 311,844.00

All students have the potential for mathematics success and deserve access to
high-quality mathematics instruction. Yet students with disabilities tend to
have lower mathematics achievement than peers without disabilities and are
vastly underrepresented in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) education in the United States. Furthermore, the gap between research and
practice means that mathematics strategies that could benefit students with
disabilities are not consistently reaching the classroom. Such barriers to
mathematics learning may limit students’ career opportunities and deprive
society of an inclusive STEM workforce. This project seeks to develop effective
strategies for sharing mathematics-focused research with a teacher audience,
which may help to reduce inequality in mathematics and STEM outcomes for youth
with disabilities. The project will explore (a) current and innovative
strategies for communicating research focused on supporting mathematics learning
for students with disabilities and (b) the diffusion of research via social
media (i.e., Twitter) to a teacher audience. The project supports a diverse STEM
workforce through its research activities and by providing funded, STEM-related
research experiences to undergraduate students with disabilities who continue to
be underrepresented in STEM occupations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research plan
involves a robust intervention mixed methods design. Phase 1 entails analysis of
practitioner journals using Altmetrics and qualitative content analyses to
describe whether, how, and by whom mathematics-focused articles for supporting
students with disabilities have been shared on Twitter in recent years. Phase 2
leverages a partnership with the Council for Exceptional Children (CEC). A
randomized controlled trial will compare diffusion of 90 articles focused on
mathematics learning for youth with disabilities (a) without CEC Twitter
promotion, (b) with text-based CEC Twitter promotion, and (c) with innovative
CEC Twitter promotion using translational visual abstracts (TVAs; concise,
infographic-type overviews of practitioner journal articles). Project findings
will inform the development of guidelines for both the design and sharing of
TVAs—which will be shared via training webinars and other accessible
materials—to empower researchers, journals, and professional organizations with
novel approaches for improving research communication efforts and mitigating the
persistent research-practice gap.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is is co-
funded by the Science of Science: Discovery, Communications, and Impact program
and the EDU Core Research programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.