* 2244348
* REU Site: Mellon College Science Summer Scholars Program at Carnegie Mellon University
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Michael Young, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 04/30/2026
* USD 372,633.00

This REU Site award to Carnegie Mellon University, Mellon College of Science, in
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, will support the training of four scholars
participating in mathematical science or physics projects for eight weeks and
six scholars working on biology, chemistry, or computational projects for 10
weeks during the summers of 2023-2026. It is anticipated that a total of 30
students, primarily from schools with limited research opportunities or from
under-represented groups, will be trained in the program. In addition to
undertaking an independent research project, scholars participate in
professional development and community building activities organized by
departments and the Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion office of Mellon College of
Science. Scholars are also able to expand their networking outside of the daily
programming as they reside together. The goal is for scholars to develop
contemporary skillsets that can keep pace with developing technologies. By
promoting interdisciplinary collaborations to investigate scientific questions,
the program alumni will not only be able to handle real world problems but also
be the solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this program are to: a)
increase scholars access to information about graduate school, scientific
research, conference meetings, and other career opportunities with respect to
STEM research; b) help scholars build professional networks and foster a sense
of community within STEM research spaces; and c) improve scholars’ ability to
think creatively about research, and to work in interdisciplinary and
collaborative modes. Students are recruited nationally at ABRCMS/ SACNAS
meetings, via outreach visits, and by word of-mouth via former program
participants and faculty connections. Each department is responsible for their
own application and selection process with input from the Mellon College of
Science Diversity, Equity, and Inclusion office. Applicants are holistically
evaluated including their personal and professional accomplishments, and
extenuating circumstances. The centerpiece of the program is the
interdisciplinary experience. While scholars have deep experiences in their
chosen discipline. Engrained in our curriculum are opportunities for scholars to
expand their personal and professional networks. Scholars collaborate outside of
their discipline to solve problems and improve their understanding of their
chosen field. The current interdisciplinary world of today’s science requires a
range of skills and diversity of ideas to succeed in any endeavor. The inclusion
of multiple disciplines allows scholars to have more opportunities to network
and gain exposure to a community reflective of the growing workforce
diversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is supported by the Department of
Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.