* 2244427
* REU Site: Georgia Institute of Technology Mathematics REU Program
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Rachel Kuske, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Tyson
* 05/31/2026
* USD 53,868.00

The Georgia Institute of Technology Mathematics REU Program provides
mathematical research experience opportunities for undergraduate students. An
important goal of the program is to motivate talented undergraduates to pursue
graduate study and STEM careers, and to provide them the tools, the confidence,
and the support network to succeed. In addition to providing high quality,
inclusive research experiences for cohorts of undergraduates from diverse
backgrounds, the program also provides professional development training on
topics ranging from communication skills to navigating the job markets in
industry and academia. The program emphasizes the recruitment of students from
groups that are historically under-represented in mathematics, as well as
students from institutions that have limited research activities, such as
primarily undergraduate institutions. Throughout the eight week annual summer
program, groups of undergraduate students work intensely with faculty,
postdoctoral researchers, and graduate students on mathematical research
projects at the cutting edge. They also participate in weekly team building and
professional development activities, including seminars and training sessions.
The program culminates in a poster session for all participants, and
participants leave the program prepared to present their work at conferences
nationwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Georgia Institute of Technology Mathematics
REU Program recruits a diverse set of undergraduate students to participate in
projects on the cutting edge of mathematical research. Research topics include
curves on surfaces, knots in 3-manifolds, 4-manifolds, geometric surfaces,
convex geometry, approximations of polynomials, statistics of Latin squares,
random matrices, crowdsourced data, dynamical modeling, and neural networks.
Students work in groups with mentors and also participate in program-wide
activities. Weekly activities include a colloquium-style seminar where students
learn about other projects happening within the program and a professional
development seminar where students gain non-mathematical skills essential for
careers in STEM. Professional development topics include: applying to graduate
school, life in graduate school, imposter syndrome, creating and presenting
posters, and creating and delivering oral research presentations. Near the end
of the program, students participate in a poster session, and projects typically
culminate in a written report, with some of these submitted for publication.
Following the conclusion of the program, students are encouraged to present
their work at national conferences such as MathFest, the Gulf Coast
Undergraduate Research Symposium, the Young Mathematicians Conference, and the
Joint Mathematical Meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.