* 2244306
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Industrial Mathematics and Statistics
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Vadim Yakovlev, Worcester Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 04/30/2026
* USD 412,937.00

This award supports the REU site "Research Experiences for Undergraduates in
Industrial Mathematics and Statistics at Worcester Polytechnic Institute."
Twelve students per year will participate in a 9 week summer REU program. The
program provides participants with a distinctive educational experience in the
mathematical sciences by introducing them to the ways in which mathematicians
and statisticians use mathematics outside of the academic environment. Students
work in teams on two to three research problems of industrial and mathematical
significance; these problems are provided directly from industry and are of
immediate interest to the companies affiliated with the program. Students
coordinate with company representatives to define the problem and to develop
solutions. They work closely with faculty advisors to maintain a clear focus on
the mathematics and statistics at the core of the project. This summer research
program involves challenges not faced in traditional undergraduate programs and
engages participants with some of the many career possibilities open to students
with a strong mathematical background.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participants in this
industry-focused REU program begin by developing a project goals statement, in
consultation with a faculty advisor and a company liaison. Over the course of
the summer, students conduct the actual research while presenting their progress
to both an academic audience at the host institution and a corporate audience at
the sponsoring company. During the final week of the program, students give an
oral presentation in both settings and submit a final written report.
Professional development activities presenting mathematical career options in
academia and industry complement the research program. The selection process
focuses on students with a strong academic background but with limited
opportunities for research in mathematics at their home institutions. One
emphasis in the selection process is an openness to pursue a range of research
directions consistent with the nature of an industry-inspired research
problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.