* 2244011
* RAPID: Does riparian vegetation state mediate consequences of climate change-induced extreme flooding for stream-riparian food webs and communities?
* BIO,DEB
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Colden Baxter, Idaho State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Wojdak
* 12/31/2023
* USD 99,883.00

In June 2022, Northern Yellowstone National Park experienced rain-on-snow events
leading to a 1 in 500-year flood, devastating local infrastructure and capturing
public attention as a high-profile consequence of human-caused climate change.
Extreme disturbances, whether they be category 5 hurricanes, severe wildfires,
or extreme droughts, are becoming more frequent and intense. Natural resource
managers and policy makers need to understand the consequences of such extreme
disturbances and find ways to support ecosystem resiliency. Historically,
ecologists thought that though ecosystems were resilient to, or even benefitted
from, mild or moderate disturbances, extreme disturbances “reset” ecosystems to
some uniform, baseline state. NSF has approved RAPID support for this project,
to evaluate extreme disturbance in the context of Northern Yellowstone. The
study area contains considerable biodiversity throughout a mosaic of distinct
habitats. One source of this complexity comes from the restoration of predators
like wolves and grizzly bears, their interactions with herbivores such as elk
and bison, and the subsequent changes to plant communities. As a result, willows
and alders have regrown around some streams and rivers while others, just miles
away, remain dominated by grasses and sedges. Previous investigations showed
that different plant communities influence the diversity and productivity of
streams and rivers, but in ways mediated by local context that result in a
mosaic of ecosystem states. Just as the restoration of predators has not
uniformly changed this ecosystem, responses to the recent extreme flooding may
have been mediated by local context. In turn, results from this study may inform
management decisions and influence public perceptions regarding consequences of
such disturbances, as indeed past ecological studies have done for wildfire in
this region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through the opportunistic use of a natural
experiment and by comparing stream-riparian ecosystems before and after the
extreme flooding, this project will evaluate whether a homogenous “reset” of
stream-riparian ecosystems occurred, or if terrestrial wildlife dynamics that
influence riparian vegetation state, as well as pre-flood traits of aquatic
communities, mediated heterogeneous responses of stream-riparian organisms and
ecosystem processes. This project will collect parallel measurements after
flooding to those collected before, including stream-riparian habitat
characteristics, herbivory and riparian plant community composition and
structure, stream ecosystem organic matter dynamics, productivity and food web
interactions of aquatic invertebrates and fish, and riparian spider and bird
communities. If organism, community, or food web traits shape resistance,
resilience, and trajectories of change following the extreme flood, this will
provide an opportunity to evaluate how such “ecological memory” constrains
responses to future extreme events. If traits of organisms and communities are
indeed important to mediating responses to extreme disturbances, this project
may highlight the importance of conserving such complexity in the face of
climate change and the biodiversity crisis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.