* 2244231
* NSF REU Site: Research in Social Inequality and Social Problems
* SBE,SMA
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Alexander Hernandez, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 08/31/2026
* USD 366,046.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences
(SBE). The Department of Sociology at Texas A&amp;M University will immerse 8
students each year in an 8-week summer social science research experience. The
site will recruit undergraduates from groups underrepresented in STEM.
Participants will conduct research with faculty at Texas A&amp;M, joining a
faculty mentor's ongoing research program. The primary objectives of the program
are to: (1) increase the social science research opportunities available to
undergraduates from underrepresented groups; (2) prepare a future workforce to
engage in sophisticated evidence-based analyses of social inequality; (3)
increase the scientific literacy of participants; and (4) prepare students for
academic or non-academic careers with a research focus through both education
and intensive mentoring. The intended impact is to increase students'
understanding of research and increase the number of students from
underrepresented groups pursuing graduate education and professional careers in
science. Providing students with hands-on experience in research, intensive
mentoring, and research skills, the benefit to society is to expand the pipeline
of underrepresented groups into advanced social science research and increase
the ability of participants to conduct independent research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The most important intellectual merit of the program rests
not on the students' individual contributions to social science knowledge in one
summer, but on increasing the pipeline of talented students with meaningful
social science research experiences and interest in research. Activities for
each REU participant include: participating in a summer research seminar that
will focus on practical instruction in social science theory, methods, and
practices; learning about graduate educational opportunities and careers in
science; completing a research project with a faculty mentor; writing a research
paper; and presenting their research findings at a professional academic
conference. This REU program is designed to interest students from
underrepresented groups in the possibility of research-based careers and prepare
them with the skills necessary to succeed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.