* 2244754
* Collaborative Research: Are Bornean Areas of Endemism the Evolutionary Source of Southeast Asias Remarkable Terrestrial Biodiversity?
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2027
* Jacob Esselstyn, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Fujita
* 05/31/2027
* USD 342,632.00

Borneo is the largest and oldest island in Southeast Asia. It sits in the middle
of a region of high species diversity and is subject to increasing human
threats. The biodiversity of Borneo is poorly known, but surveys of the nearby
islands of Java and Sumatra have shown these islands to be a complex patchwork
of unique habitats and species. This diversity is the result of a complex
evolutionary and geological history driven by the periodic fall of sea levels,
creating land bridges that enabled dispersal among the islands. This project
will address the hypothesis that Borneo was an important source for many of the
species that have evolved across the region. Understanding Borneo’s role in
driving biodiversity in Southeast Asia is essential to providing clear
strategies for conserving one of the planet’s most diverse and threatened
islands. An exchange program will provide hands-on training for Indonesian and
Malaysian colleagues in museum curation and species identification. Social media
campaigns and field blogs will disseminate real-time updates which reach to over
1 million followers. This project will also provide training and mentorship for
a diverse pool of graduate students and a postdoctoral
researcher.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A combination of museum-based genomic analysis
with new field-collected samples will provide the foundation to test the
hypothesis that Borneo has significantly contributed to the biodiversity in the
region via its potential Areas of Endemism, or regions with rich communities of
endemic species. Small mammals such as rodents will be used as the exemplar
models, though the implications of this project span all floral and faunal
groups. Field expeditions at six locations of Northern Borneo will augment the
specimens that currently exist in museum collections, providing the sampling
necessary to test the presence of seven hypothesized Area of Endemism on the
island. All specimens will have hundreds of nuclear genes and complete
mitochondrial genomes sequenced in order to generate intraspecific phylogenies
with robust sampling across Borneo, enabling statistical analyses that will
evaluate genomic patterns of diversity as additional evidence for the proposed
Areas of Endemism. In addition to insights into conservation strategies by way
of a deeper understanding of Borneo’s evolutionary and biogeographic histories,
results from this research will include the likely discovery of new species,
taxonomic revisions, and valuable vouchered specimens with high-quality tissues
that will be preserved in museum collections.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.