* 2244479
* CCF: SHF: CORE: Small: Towards Systematic Quality Control of Physically Unclonable Functions (PUFs)
* CSE,CCF
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2025
* Wenjing Rao, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 12/31/2025
* USD 599,467.00

Physically Unclonable Functions (PUFs) are relatively new devices, often
electronic, currently being designed and investigated for potential use as
hardware security primitives for various security applications. Electronic PUFs
work by exploiting some inherent randomness in the chip manufacturing process,
which produces analog features with slight random variations that are combined
to yield a digital function. This randomness, usually considered undesirable in
traditional chip manufacturing processes, here is harnessed and, when coupled
with an analog-to-digital process, realizes a "challenge-to-response" Boolean
function. The hope is that each device's list of challenge-response-pairs (CRPs)
is unique and hence may be used in security applications such as device
identification, authentication, and on-demand cryptographic key generation.
Strong PUFs promise a huge CRP space exponential in hardware size and hence able
to generate, on demand, many and/or very long keys with minimal hardware
throughout a device's lifespan. Despite the appeal of strong PUFs, few
commercial realizations exist. To enable this, both 1) how to properly
manufacture and test strong PUFs, and 2), once fabricated and tested, how to
properly integrate such devices into security protocols need to be addressed.
The latter is well studied; this awardâ€™s research will focus on the relatively
unexplored former question. In this project, which brings together two faculty
in complementary areas (statistics / information theory and electronic design
automation / hardware security), the team will develop a systematic framework
for the testing, diagnosing, repairing, and strengthening of strong PUFs. They
will train undergraduate and Ph.D. students in testing and verification of
hardware security primitives -- engineers with a deep understanding of this new
area are indispensable for future trusted IC design and verification teams in
the US. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research departs significantly from existing
work on PUFs which has largely focused on either proposing new PUFs and
evaluating their properties, or on security attacks / defenses of PUF-based
protocols. Looking towards a future with ramped up domestic chip fabrication,
the investigators focus on what would be needed to bring the promise of PUFs to
fruition through: 1) developing new statistical, native fault models for PUF
instances, PUF-production lines, and PUF-aging processes; 2) devising testing
and diagnosing techniques able to quickly and accurately identify such faults.
This could be fed back to electronic design automation tools to iteratively
enhance PUF quality control. This differs markedly from existing testing
techniques which test chips against a golden behavior. The investigators will
also develop techniques to repair faulty, aging, or unreliable PUFs through
challenge selection, which may be incorporated into PUF protocols. This line of
work represents a careful and statistically motivated exploitation of the
largely overlooked huge challenge space of strong
PUFs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.