* 2244383
* REU Site: Scientific Study of Interpersonal Relationships Across the Lifespan
* SBE,SMA
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2026
* Nicole Campione Barr, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Josie Welkom Miranda
* 03/31/2026
* USD 291,600.00

This project is funded from the Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)
Sites program in the Directorate for Social, Behavioral, and Economic Sciences
(SBE). The scientific study of interpersonal relationships over the lifespan is
important to our broader understanding of the human experience. These
relationships begin with our earliest interactions and continue into later life,
and through them we learn how to communicate with, and support others, as well
as handle conflicts and negativity. These relationships are also studied through
a variety of disciplines, including psychology, family sciences, and
interpersonal communication. However, the science of these important, everyday
interactions is typically overlooked by undergraduates as 1) being a science,
and 2) being a viable option for future study and professional goals. While
undergraduates in the fields of Communication, Human Development and Family
Sciences, and Psychological Sciences are often interested in relationships, the
majority of those undergraduate majors who go on to graduate study largely apply
to more applied areas within these fields of study (i.e., mass communication,
marriage and family therapy, clinical/counseling psychology). This REU Site aims
to educate students on what it means to scientifically study interpersonal
relationships across the lifespan. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This 9 week on-campus
summer program (8 students per summer) is centered on the interdisciplinary,
lifespan developmental, and diverse nature of the scientific study of close
relationships. This REU site will take advantage of the collaborative and
interactive research environment fostered by the Family and Relationships
Research Network of Missouri (FARR-net) at MU. Each undergraduate will be
mentored by a primary FARR-net-affiliated faculty member from the departments of
Communication, Human Development &amp; Family Sciences, or Psychological
Sciences, to design a project related to one or more primary close relationships
(i.e., parent-child, sibling, friends, romantic/marital partners) from a
developmentally-informed perspective. Participants will also receive
professional development training in applying to graduate programs and
competitive fellowships, as well as opportunities to engage in science
communication and research dissemination through on-campus and professional
research conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.