* 2244583
* REU Site: Coastal Ocean Research through the University of Southern California Wrigley Institute for Environmental Studies
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Diane Kim, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 03/31/2026
* USD 90,505.00

The University of Southern California (USC)'s Wrigley Institute of Environmental
Science and the USC Department of Biology will host a Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) program. The program will bring undergraduates to USC each
summer for three years for a ten-week internship. Participating interns will be
housed at either the USC Wrigley Marine Science Center (WMSC) on Catalina Island
or the USC University Park Campus, Los Angeles. Potential research topics are
focused on the theme of coastal oceanography and include a wide range of
studies. Interns will also participate in a variety of professional development
activities and workshops as well as field-based activities. Interns may have the
opportunity to participate in scientific
conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Participating USC faculty have come from seven
different departments/sections at USC (Earth Sciences, Marine Environmental
Biology, Spatial Sciences, Environmental Studies, Archaeology, Civil
Engineering, and Molecular Computational Biology), and all have active,
nationally-funded research programs and strong publication records. The program
also recruits top research faculty mentors or co-mentors from minority-serving
institutions and local 4-year public and liberal arts colleges who routinely
work at the WMSC in the summers. Therefore, REU Interns can choose from
potential research projects in a wide variety of fields, such as marine
biogeochemical cycles, population genetics, genomics, marine Nitrogen cycles,
microbial ecology, protistan diversity, molecular ecology archaeology,
hydrology, phytoplankton biology and physiology, marine bacteria, viruses,
archaea, benthic and marine invertebrate ecology, physiology, evolutionary
adaptation, microbial eukaryotes, ecophysiology of corals, trace metals,
microbiology, squid-Vibrio symbiosis, Human-environment interactions,
sustainability, kelp forest ecology, neuroendocrinology, and Tardigrade
diversity and ecology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.