* 2244278
* REU Site: Frontier Research and Training in Astronomy for the 21st Century
* MPS,AST
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Shardha Jogee, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* James Higdon
* 02/28/2026
* USD 261,456.00

The University of Texas at Austin wishes to continue its 10-week summer REU
(Research Experiences for Undergraduates) program hosting 8 students each year.
Students will work closely with a diverse group of mentors from within the
Astronomy Department to conduct theoretical and observational research in
frontier areas of astronomy, including star formation, Solar System and
exoplanet studies, stellar and galaxy evolution, dark matter/energy
astrophysics, cosmology, and astronomical instrumentation. The students will
have access to the facilities of the McDonald Observatory and the Texas Advanced
Computing Center (TACC), which are both affiliated with UT Austin. An emphasis
is placed on summer research publication and all students will present their
research at winter AAS meetings. Professional development activities (e.g.,
computational methods training from TACC and a week of hands-on research at
McDonald Observatory) are also included. Other activities will focus on the
development of confidence in underrepresented minorities (URM) and first-
generation students. Students in the REU program will produce blogs, short
videos, and StarDate Radio programs featuring their experiences and research.
These products will be distributed to K-12 teachers at teacher professional
workshops for further dissemination to students throughout
Texas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Admission decisions are holistic and consider
academic preparation and trajectory, grit/initiative, research engagement,
community engagement, contributions to an inclusive campus, and other factors.
The program has an ambitious goal of accepting at least 50% women and 50% URM
into the program and will specifically not recruit from within UT Austin. The
mentors are experienced and have received training in effective mentoring by the
Texas Institute for Discovery Education in Science (TIDES). The pool of mentors
is already diverse and committed to broadening participation in the STEM
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.