* 2244492
* REU Site: Trust and Reproducibility of Intelligent Computation
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2026
* Ganesh Gopalakrishnan, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 02/28/2026
* USD 405,000.00

This Research Experience for Undergraduates Site addresses the growing reality
that modern society is increasingly dependent on complex software components to
work as expected (trustworthy) and produce consistent results (reproducible).
Trustworthiness and reproducibility govern adoption and acceptance of the
results produced by software across a range of applications including medical
diagnostics, facial recognition, traffic analysis, network security, and
chemical reaction control. Computing educators are obliged to instill in the
next generation of scientists and engineers -- today’s undergraduates -- an
understanding of principled methods that enhance software system reliability,
trustworthiness, and reproducibility. A typical undergraduate student is not
sufficiently exposed to these concerns nor the aforesaid supportive methods, and
yet they will be the ones building future intelligent systems. Thus, this REU
site will address these issues, as well as emerging dangers such as introducing
bias into AI-based applications or leaking personal data demand instruction in
ethical considerations of software systems, another aspect of
trustworthiness.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Student participants will learn the
state-of-the-art methods typically used in trustworthy and reproducible science
and engineering. Weekly training and activity sessions will bring the entire
cohort together for pre-packaged exercises, e.g., using Jupyter notebooks,
software version control, automated defect detection, automatic performance
analysis and optimization, and data analysis. These activities are deployed on
one-of-a-kind, translational research platforms operated by the University of
Utah, namely the NSF-funded Cloudlab and the POWDER project. Additional
activities through the university’s Office of Undergraduate Research and the
Utah Center for Inclusive Computing allow the researchers to offer workshops on
research best practices, ethics, and inclusion. With a focus on applications
that incorporate machine learning, achieve high efficiency, and the systems that
support the applications, each undergraduate participant will work with a
faculty mentor and their research group to complete a research project,
producing both a written research report and a well-packaged artifact that,
together, enable another person to understand the research, repeat the
experiments, and reproduce the results. Students are selected to the program
with the dual goals of broadening participation in computing and offering
research experiences to students with severely limited opportunities at their
home institutions. The program is assessed at the beginning and end, with an
evaluation of how students applied their new understandings to their research
projects, with follow-ups conducted as students apply to graduate school. The
project plans to share these assessments and the curricular material with other
institutions to propagate education in trustworthy and reproducible software to
galvanize the next generation of scientists and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.