* 2244288
* REU Site: A Cyberlinked Program in Computational Biomolecular Structure &amp; Design
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2026
* Jeffrey Gray, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2026
* USD 485,683.00

This REU Site award to Johns Hopkins University, located in Baltimore, MD, will
support the training of 12 interns for 10 weeks during each summer from 2023 to
2025. Research is conducted in various labs of the Rosetta Commons located
throughout the United States and abroad. It is anticipated that a total of 36
students, primarily from schools with limited research opportunities or from an
under-represented group, will be trained in the program. Students will learn how
interdisciplinary, collaborative research is conducted, and all will present
their work at scientific conferences. Upon completion of the REU program,
students will have gained an understanding of how to investigate biological
problems from a structural perspective; experienced computational molecular
design including artificial intelligence approaches; acquired a solid foundation
in research methodologies in biochemistry, biophysics, computational biology,
machine learning, and molecular engineering; gained skills to collaborate with
other scientists and engineers in other laboratories globally; and gained a
deeper appreciation for the contributions that improved technology in these
areas can make to society. The program will be assessed using the online SALG
URSSA tool. The NSF ETAP system will be used to register participants
(https://www.nsfetap.gov/). Students will be tracked after the program to
determine their career paths. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research uses
computational methods for prediction of the structure of biomolecules (which
underlies their behavior and function) and the design of new biomolecules
(important for materials, nanotechnology, and biotechnology). Example research
projects include “Antibody engineering by deep learning,” “Protein design using
generative methods,” and “Computational design of de novo proteins to control
biological signaling.” The training program consists of a one-week bootcamp
where students learn computer coding and structural biology, eight weeks of
research in distributed labs (across the US and abroad), and a final week
together at the annual Rosetta Conference. During the research period, students
will complete an independent research project under the mentorship of a host
lab, participate in weekly virtual journal clubs, prepare research proposals,
and prepare a poster for presentation at the conference. All participants
complete the Responsible Conduct of Research course. REU applications are
reviewed and chosen by an admissions committee consisting of Rosetta Commons
members at all career levels. More information about the program is available by
visiting www.rosettacommons.org/intern, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Jeffrey J.
Gray at jgray@jhu.edu) or the program administrator (Ms. Camille Mathis at
cmathis@jhu.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.