* 2244411
* REU Site: How Robustness and Resilience in Response to Biotic and Abiotic Stressors Shape Biological Processes
* BIO,DBI
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Gian Garriga, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/29/2024
* USD 152,309.00

This REU Site award to the University of California, Berkeley, located in
Berkeley, CA, will support the training of 12 students, primarily from schools
with limited research opportunities or from an under-represented group, for 10
weeks during the summer of 2023. The program will benefit faculty mentors by
providing them with dedicated students interested in research. The students, who
will work in the labs of outstanding scientists, will learn how to think like a
scientist, understand how to submit a successful application to graduate school,
and succeed in a scientific career. Many of the students will present the
results of their work at scientific conferences. Assessment of the program will
be done through the online SALG URSSA tool. Students will be required to
register in the NSF ETAP system and will be tracked after the program in order
to determine their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Student research will
focus on the role of organismal resilience and robustness in response to biotic
and abiotic stress, emphasizing how these responses shape biological processes.
Research projects range from how organisms respond to the environmental stress
of climate change to how plants and animals respond to the biotic stress of
pathogens The sponsoring scientists are faculty in the departments of
Integrative Biology, Molecular and Cell Biology, and Plant and Microbial
Biology. The students also receive training in scientific ethics and the
responsible conduct of research and effective scientific communication. The
program is assessed using the online SALG URSSA tool and by entry and exit
surveys. Students apply to the REU using a UC Berkeley portal and provide
demographic information, an unofficial transcript, two letters of reference, and
a statement of purpose. Students are selected based on their enthusiasm for
science and their ability to express themselves scientifically. Students from
groups underrepresented in science, from economically disadvantaged backgrounds,
and from schools with limited research resources are encouraged to apply. More
information about the program is available by visiting
https://mcb.berkeley.edu/nsfreu/, or by contacting the PI (Dr. Gian Garriga at
garriga@berkeley.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Tyrone Hayes at
tyrone@berkeley.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.