* 2244597
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research Experience for Women in Machine Learning-based Cybersecurity
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Younghee Park, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jill Denner
* 03/31/2026
* USD 373,981.00

This project will establish a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) Site
at San Jose State University, a Hispanic-serving institute that provides machine
learning-based cybersecurity research experience for women. Cybersecurity is of
fundamental importance to the economic strength and national security of the
United States in order to form a safe and innovative foundation in cyberspace.
This project contributes to the future cybersecurity workforce development while
the REU site focuses on diversity and quality of cybersecurity workforce
education through training female students in newly emerging cybersecurity
topics under close mentorships. This REU program will improve their
cybersecurity research skills through well-defined project problem sets based on
machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL)-based cybersecurity techniques.
This program will have the following societal impacts. (1) The research in the
REU site will train minority students to improve their cybersecurity skills
through intensive research training in ML/DL-based cybersecurity techniques. (2)
The hands-on lab exercises to understand each research topic will help forge the
path for students to pursue careers in cybersecurity. (3) This program can drive
the broad participation of women in cybersecurity and reduce the gender gap in
cybersecurity fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU research projects include
various important research topics in ML/DL-based cybersecurity techniques in the
different research areas. In particular, the REU site focuses on training women
in ML/DL-based cybersecurity research areas according to the following ultimate
goals: (1) engaging female students with the real-world security challenges in
emerging cybersecurity topics in malware analysis, network data analysis, and
social engineering data analysis, (2) initiating and supporting discussions and
collaborations with academic mentors to improve awareness, education, and
research in the ML/DL-based cybersecurity problems, (3) enhancing cybersecurity
skillsets through well-defined cybersecurity research projects in important
topics, and (4) developing their professional career with experts from academia
and industry that can cover data science techniques and cybersecurity areas. The
research projects aim (1) to train students in new important cybersecurity
problems in the new areas through our faculty research outcomes for their skill
improvements and (2) to build up research capabilities in cybersecurity fields
through hands-on exercises with our existing labs that each faculty mentor has.
Related software and research materials will be made available on the project
website.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.