* 2244514
* REU Site: Research Experiences and Mentorship in Urban Systems (REMUS)
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Sandra Clinton, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 08/31/2026
* USD 426,730.00

The population of urban areas in the United States and around the world is
steadily increasing. This growth poses challenges to our food, housing, energy,
and water resources. A skilled and diverse group of interdisciplinary scientists
that focus on urban systems is needed to address these issues and develop
sustainable solutions. The Research Experiences and Mentorship in Urban Systems
(REMUS) Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site offers a unique
opportunity for students to engage in urban science research and gain valuable
skills for future careers and graduate studies. REMUS is based in Charlotte, NC,
a thriving and growing metropolitan area, where undergraduate students will
collaborate with scientists at the University of North Carolina Charlotte who
have diverse backgrounds and training. These teams will explore various topics
related to biodiversity, conservation, ecosystem restoration, environmental
justice, forest health, GIS science and technology, meteorology and
microclimates, stormwater management, and wastewater surveillance. Students will
also receive training on best practices to conduct research and present their
findings. The program’s mission is to prepare the next generation of urban
scientists who will contribute to solving the challenges of our changing
planet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REMUS program is an innovative REU site
designed to immerse students in the study of urban systems. Over the course of
three years, each cohort will contribute to advancing our understanding of urban
systems through structured one-on-one mentored research projects that encompass
a social, ecological, and technological framework. Students will collaborate
with mentors from diverse backgrounds to address real-world research questions
within a rapidly growing metropolitan area (Charlotte, NC). Central to the
program are workshops that prioritize the development of measurable student
competencies and career readiness. These workshops will cover essential skills
such as science communication, data management and analysis, and professional
networking. The ultimate goal is to engage students in place-based discovery of
familiar, yet often poorly understood urban systems within their surroundings.
By participating in this program, students will acquire valuable skills relevant
to career readiness including critical thinking, data analysis, and effective
writing. Throughout the program, students will have numerous opportunities to
enhance their science communication abilities through interactions during
multiple workshops and conferences. Students will also participate in two
intensive data workshops using R and GitHub. These workshops will equip students
with the skills to effectively manage and analyze the data they collect. To
ensure the relevance of their training, our data-focused workshops will employ
publicly available data from federal, state, and local agencies, enabling
students to work with real-world data that tackles pertinent and contemporary
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.