* 2244297
* REU Site: Multidisciplinary Physics at Purdue University
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Sergei Savikhin, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 03/31/2026
* USD 153,801.00

This award supports the renewal of the Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) and Research Experiences for Teachers (RET) site in Physics at Purdue
University. For the past 23 years, the program has provided first-hand research
experience to 300 undergraduate students and 42 teachers. During the new funding
period, each summer the program will provide 12 undergraduate physics majors
from across the country with individual ten-week-long research projects
emphasizing one-to-one mentoring with faculty from a wide range of disciplines
within the Purdue University Department of Physics and Astronomy. Interactions
with the community of scientists is emphasized with a unique interdisciplinary
science “pizza seminar” series, two required public talks on their research, an
abstract on the research, tours of Purdue scientific facilities, including the
unique Brick Nanotechnology Center, field trips to national facilities at
Fermilab and Argonne, REU Olympics at Notre Dame University, plus picnics, ball
games, canoe trips and other social activities arranged by this REU program and
the university-wide SROP program. The weekly “pizza seminar” series combines
Physics REU participants with students from other Purdue summer sites (REU &amp;
SURF at Biology, Chemistry, Engineering etc.) to emphasize interdisciplinary
opportunities and interactions among students across many fields. Similar
objectives are designed for two RET participants, whose research activities will
be reflected in their subsequent classroom teaching, inspiring their own
students about careers in research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The participants in
this REU program will collaborate with their mentors and other researchers to
advance the diverse state-of-the-art areas of physics, such as: nanophysics of
electrons in reduced dimensional conductors, the dynamical behavior in proteins,
the quantum mechanisms of photosynthesis, single molecule/protein dynamic
imaging, the use of cosmogenic nuclei as chronometers in geoscience, coherent
imaging of tumor, particle detectors with improved hardness and resolution,
detectors for TeV radiation, investigation of dark matter, novel application of
nuclear detectors for sensing hazardous materials, properties of graphene,
application of biofilms in seismic measurements, the fundamental nature of
nuclear decay, enhanced long-baseline imaging for radio astronomy, seismic
propagation in structures of geologic interest, the quantum nature of bird
magnetoreception, analysis of data collected by at Large Hadron Collider at
CERN, and other current topics of importance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.