* 2244596
* REU Site: Cloud Computing Security and Privacy
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Jyh-haw Yeh, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Jill Denner
* 02/28/2026
* USD 394,645.00

This project will establish a new REU site in Cloud Computing Security and
Privacy at&lt;br/&gt;Boise State University (BSU). Cloud computing is a
relatively new internet computing&lt;br/&gt;paradigm, having been developed and
popularized only in the last decade. With the&lt;br/&gt;widespread applications
deployed in the internet, both the volume and types of
cyberattacks&lt;br/&gt;continue to increase and target every internet user.
National infrastructure,&lt;br/&gt;individuals, businesses, and agencies have
fallen victim to cyber-attacks. Developing a&lt;br/&gt;secure cloud computing
environment requires computer science and cybersecurity&lt;br/&gt;professionals
with interdisciplinary knowledge and skills of software engineering,
network&lt;br/&gt;security, system security, cryptography, risk analysis, ethics
and human behaviors,&lt;br/&gt;security policies and laws, and many other
security practices. To better defend the&lt;br/&gt;valuable digital assets
against cyber-attacks, it is an urgent national priority to make
the&lt;br/&gt;internet/cloud more secure. To answer the call, this REU site will
recruit self-motivated&lt;br/&gt;students and provide them with a variety of
cutting-edge research topics in cloud security&lt;br/&gt;and privacy. This will
also help address the shortage in the cybersecurity workforce for
the&lt;br/&gt;nation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site will offer a nine-week
summer research program for ten undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;students each year to
gain research experience. The objectives of this project are to
(1)&lt;br/&gt;recruit a diverse pool of motivated students from underrepresented
groups and institutions&lt;br/&gt;with limited research opportunities; (2) help
students develop broad research skills by&lt;br/&gt;conducting timely and
important research projects; and (3) promote cybersecurity&lt;br/&gt;education â€“
encourage students to pursue graduate studies and to develop a
career&lt;br/&gt;interest in cybersecurity. In order to provide students a
better research experience and&lt;br/&gt;scaffold their development as a
researcher, in addition to the research training, weekly&lt;br/&gt;seminars, and
professional talks in the field of cloud security and privacy, students will
also&lt;br/&gt;have the chance to attend a variety of activities to enhance
their research skills offered by&lt;br/&gt;the BSU summer research community.
These additional activities include: (1) seminars for&lt;br/&gt;discussing an
array of topics, including responsible and ethical conduct of research,
critical&lt;br/&gt;thinking, library research activity, poster presentation, and
tips to presenting research to a&lt;br/&gt;public audience; and (2) a two-day
Idaho Conference of Undergraduate Research (ICUR)&lt;br/&gt;that brings together
undergraduate students of diverse disciplines to showcase
their&lt;br/&gt;original work in poster presentations to public audience. At the
end of the summer&lt;br/&gt;program, the faculty mentors will continue to work
with students to publish their research&lt;br/&gt;results and advise them with
graduate program applications or career planning as
needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by CISE and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.