* 2244340
* NRT-FW-HTF-HDR: PLATFORMS FOR EXCHANGE AND ALLOCATION OF RESOURCES (PEAR)
* EDU,DGE
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2028
* David Kaeli, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Karen McNeal
* 06/30/2028
* USD 3,000,000.00

The increasing digitization of the economy and resulting growth of digital
platforms like ride-hailing apps and energy trading platforms have dramatically
altered how individuals, organizations and governments exchange and allocate
resources. By 2025 it is estimated over $60 trillion per year (~30 percent of
world revenue) will be mediated by digital platforms. These platforms have
disrupted multiple industries, upended labor economics and practices, and
fundamentally transformed resource management, asset allocation and market
design. While digital platforms have democratized provision and access to
services and products with low entry and transaction costs, the larger impact on
society is not fully understood. It is critical that the developers of new
platform technologies no longer simply be trained as engineers and computer
scientists, and that policy makers and regulators must understand the ecosystems
around digital platforms. This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship
(NRT) award to Northeastern University, University of Houston, and Hampton
University (two of three of which are minority-serving institutions), entitled
Platforms for Exchange and Allocation of Resources (PEAR), will develop
convergent, transdisciplinary training providing students with (1) the capacity
to integrate applicable findings and theories in business, policy and social
science into ethical engineering design and practice and vice versa, (2) the
ability to succeed in emerging and dynamic work environments that are yet to be
regulated, and (3) the understanding of how technological innovations create
value for different stakeholders and impact society at large. This project
anticipates training 80+ MS and PhD students, including 22 stipended fellows,
from a range of doctoral programs at Northeastern University (NU) or University
of Houston (UH), a new Master’s in Engineering Entrepreneurship at Hampton
University (HU) – the university’s first engineering graduate degree – or one of
the two new graduate certificate programs at NU or UH. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PEAR training model is guided by evidence-based best practices in teaching,
mentoring and learning, with an emphasis on best practices for interdisciplinary
learning and engagement of underrepresented populations. Through carefully
curated coursework and experiences, structured mentoring and professional
development, and stakeholder co-designed research opportunities, PEAR Fellows
will be trained to understand and contribute to the future of digital platforms
and their impact on equitable distribution of economic opportunities in society,
sustainable consumption, fair access to goods and services, ethically informed
technology design, and the re-shaping of labor and business practices. These
professionals will be ready to define and contribute to the future of work at
the human technology frontier and to harness the data revolution (two NSF Big
Ideas) in multiple sectors such as energy, health, transportation, logistics,
housing, computing, policy, and beyond. PEAR is a collaboration that combines
each institution’s strengths: NU’s leadership in experiential learning,
Hampton’s in engineering entrepreneurship and teaching, and UH’s engineering
partnerships particularly in the energy sector – to develop three new graduate
programs. Formal external evaluation will document outcomes to contribute to the
body of knowledge on effective models for graduate education in convergent
research areas such as digital platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research
Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM
graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research
areas through comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-
based, and aligned with changing workforce and research
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.