* 2244024
* REU site: Experimental and Computational Methods for Materials Discovery
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Selman Hershfield, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 03/31/2026
* USD 322,660.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Florida (UF), a
top-ranked public university located in a quintessential "college town”, will
host a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site in Experimental and
Computational Methods for Materials Discovery that provides an opportunity for
undergraduate (UG) students to perform cutting-edge research in research topics
which span the fundamental and applied science of materials ranging from
superconductors to biomaterials with an emphasis on the applications of
artificial intelligence (AI) in materials research and discovery. The students
spend 10 weeks performing research for 30 to 40 hours per week and attend
seminars, workshops, and laboratory tours to enhance their professional and
scientific development. The main objectives of the REU site are (i) to introduce
the participants to cutting-edge research topics in materials science and
biophysics at a level accessible to undergraduates, (ii) to introduce the
students to opportunities for further education and careers in science and
engineering, (iii) recruit and retain students from underrepresented groups in
science and engineering fields, and (iv) to provide valuable skills needed to
succeed in science/engineering careers in academia or industry. Faculty mentors
from the Physics, Materials Science and Mechanical Engineering departments with
extensive experience in supervising undergraduate research receive additional
training to develop realistic timelines for data acquisition and publication of
research results with an emphasis on first/second year UG participants. The
integrated research and training program is designed to build the scientific and
technical workforce of tomorrow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The projects of this REU site have been selected to
provide the students with a diverse set of research topics in condensed matter
physics, materials science, and biophysics. Projects are grouped into three
broad categories: (i) Discovery of new materials, (ii) Advanced materials
characterization and exploratory techniques, and (iii) Computer simulations and
modeling. The REU students are integrated into a faculty mentor’s research group
to conduct independent research and are trained in state-of-the-art experimental
techniques, such as thin film growth using pulsed laser deposition and
magnetotransport measurements at low temperatures down to 50 mK in magnetic
fields up to 9 T, and computational techniques, such as writing machine learning
code for use with the UF HiPerGator supercomputer. In addition to spending time
on their research projects, the students participate in weekly activities to
enhance their scientific and professional development. They attend oral and
written scientific communication workshops, participate in field trips to
locations such as the National High Magnetic Field Laboratory (NHMFL) in
Tallahassee, and meet with UF graduate student organizations and UF alumni
working in the industry. The students undertake outreach activities for K-12
students participating in on-campus programs organized by the UF Center for
Precollegiate Education and Training and attend weekly research presentations
followed by visits to UF laboratories such as the nanofabrication facilities. At
the end of the summer the students give talks and prepare written reports of
their research activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.