* 2244553
* REU Site: Summer Undergraduate Research Experience (SURE) at Illinois Tech
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Fred Hickernell, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Stacey Levine
* 04/30/2026
* USD 404,893.00

The Summer Undergraduate Research Experience (SURE) program at Illinois Tech
engages ten undergraduates, three faculty mentors, and three graduate students
for this ten week program for each of 3 years to study research topics in
computational mathematics and machine learning. SURE students are embedded in
existing, active research groups where they acquire both technical as well as
communication and teamwork skills. SURE makes a concerted effort to diversify
the research environment by targeting female and underrepresented minority
students and students from academic institutions with limited research
opportunities. The program is designed to prepare SURE students for graduate
study in mathematics, statistics, or related fields in preparation for research
careers in academia or industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The SURE
program promotes advanced training in STEM disciplines. The student-centered
learning-research modules enhance participantsâ€™ knowledge of mathematics and
statistics and develop their capabilities in conducting independent research.
SURE students explore real-world research challenges and learn to pose
questions, collect preliminary findings, modify their questions as necessary,
and pursue answers. SURE students learn to be effective in communication,
teamwork, professionalism, and responsibility. SURE engages in a wide range of
computational mathematics and machine learning topics, including i) building and
applying energetic variational inference algorithms, ii) developing code for
pattern formation models in physical and biological systems, iii) assessing
models for scoring environment, sustainability, and government risk factors in
finance, and iv) identifying novel sampling methods and stopping criteria for
Monte Carlo simulations. During the summer, SURE participants present their work
bi-weekly and receive feedback from each other and their faculty and graduate
student mentors. The summer program concludes with a poster day where students
present their research to the Illinois Tech community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.