* 2244885
* Partisanship and Innovation: Exploring the Link between Partisanship and the Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Florenta Teodoridis, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Mary Feeney
* 04/30/2026
* USD 450,000.00

This project will study the political orientation of scientists and its role in
shaping the rate and direction of inventive activity. While research has shown
that political orientation influences individual decision-making, we know
relatively little about how the political orientation of scientists may shape
labor market and collaboration choices, two factors which reflect directly on
both the rate and direction of innovation outcomes. The first component of this
project addresses data limitations which have thus far prevented wide-scale and
systematic study of the political orientation of scientists by linking voter
registration records with individual patent inventors and academic researchers.
The second component of this project uses these data to (1) provide
comprehensive descriptive statistics about variation in political orientation of
scientists across knowledge domains, industries, firms, and geographic regions;
(2) evaluate the impact of scientists’ political orientation on mobility in
knowledge space by evaluating changes in collaboration preferences driven by
partisanship and its consequences for innovation outcomes; and (3) evaluate the
impact of scientists’ political orientation on mobility in physical space by
evaluating changes across geographical regions driven by partisanship and the
consequences of such changes for innovation outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
match voter registration records with individual patent inventors and academic
researchers, we use data from multiple sources. We obtain voter registration
records from L2, a commercial data provider who sources voter information
directly from individual states. Data on patent inventors are collected from
PatentsView, a USPTO database which disambiguates patent inventor names, and
information on academic researchers are collected from Dimensions, a database
containing information on more than 106 million academic publications and 1.2
billion citations. To address the primary matching challenge of limited
overlapping information between these databases, we build on recent advancements
in machine learning and statistical record-linking procedures that work by
identifying matches and weighting these matches by the probability of observing
such a match at random. To provide a robust analysis of the role of political
orientation is innovation outcomes, we employ frontier difference-in-differences
statistical techniques that aim to identify causal relationships in field
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.