* 2244119
* REU Site in Advanced Manufacturing and Supply Chain
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Pratik Parikh, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 08/31/2026
* USD 380,458.00

This new three-year REU project entitled REU Site in Advanced Manufacturing and
Supply Chain (AMSC) at the University of Louisville will provide a 10-week
summer experiential training for 8 undergraduate students each year. This site
features research projects covering a broad spectrum of topics, all of which
focus on matters of immediate and pressing issues in current and future
manufacturing and supply chain. AMSC research is an evolving interdisciplinary
domain at the intersection of engineering, business, and science. Today’s
manufacturing and supply chain rely on advanced technology and require intensive
skills that include simulation, automation, and computing. These techniques
provide a platform for students to study and analyze AMSC systems, and in turn,
investigate new research opportunities in science, engineering, and technology
to improve such systems. The goal is to foster the integration of research into
undergraduate education based on project-specific activities within the AMSC
domain and demonstrate to the REU students how research outcomes can be
translated to real-world settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new three-year REU
project entitled REU Site in Advanced Manufacturing and Supply Chain (AMSC) at
the University of Louisville will provide a 10-week summer experiential
training. The AMSC REU site will host 8 students per year who will be recruited
from minority-serving institutions and institutions with limited access to
research facilities. The goal is to foster the integration of research into
undergraduate education based on project-specific activities within the AMSC
domain and demonstrate to the REU students how research outcomes can be
translated to real-world settings. REU students will work closely with faculty
mentors on cutting-edge research projects that are motivated from real world
problems. The participants will work in state-of-the-art labs and research
centers at the University and will also interact with post-doctoral students,
graduate students, and industry advisors. The AMSC REU students will also
participate in professional development opportunities such as workshops,
training sessions, research presentations, and plant tours. Students will be
exposed to high-quality, cutting-edge research and will develop greater
awareness of career opportunities and be prepared for advanced studies in
manufacturing and supply chain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.