* 2244461
* REU Site: Research Experiences for Undergraduates in Discrete and Applied Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Robert Bell, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeremy Tyson
* 08/31/2026
* USD 86,367.00

This project supports a three year Research Experiences for Undergraduates site
at Michigan State University. Eight students per year will participate in an
eight-week summer program. The program emphasizes the participation of
undergraduate students who are at an early stage of their study of mathematics
and who aspire to a career in research in the mathematical sciences. Two primary
goals underpin the programâ€™s structure. First, the program seeks to increase
access to research opportunities, especially for students who are not already
committed to pursuing graduate studies or who do not have access to research
opportunities at their undergraduate institution. Second, the program
contributes to ongoing research in the mathematical sciences through work on
accessible research problems with experimental and theoretical components
suitable for students at an early stage of their studies. Both of these goals
contribute to the national effort to recruit and retain promising and talented
students with a strong interest in the mathematical and physical sciences.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU site supports students who are at an early stage
of their study of mathematics. Students from underrepresented groups, who have
only completed one or two years of study of mathematics, or who are without
access to large research departments are selected as participants. Students
learn to read research articles; formulate conjectures and construct examples;
program simulations; concentrate, listen, and ask questions; generalize and
simplify proofs; and disseminate their discoveries. Students are immersed in an
environment where the mathematical ideas are new and not fully understood.
Students work in small research teams and present their progress on a regular
basis to all REU participants. The program stimulates interest in mathematics
via research on accessible open problems. The students acquire mathematical
sophistication and progress towards a career in the mathematical sciences.
Discoveries contribute to several areas of active research including knot
theory, game theory, optimal transport, random fractals, and topological data
analysis. Results are shared in conference presentations and in research
publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.