* 2244720
* REU Site: Physics/JILA
* MPS,PHY
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Daniel Dessau, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 03/31/2026
* USD 412,428.00

This award supports the renewal of the Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(REU) site at the University of Colorado/JILA. The site will support eight
students per year for ten weeks of summer research. The intellectual focus of
this REU program is physics, and undergraduate students are paired up with
preeminent faculty to do cutting-edge research in many fields of physics,
including atomic, molecular, and optical physics, biophysics, condensed matter
physics, high energy physics, nuclear physics, plasma physics, quantum physics,
quantum information science, and physics education research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While the main emphasis of the summer is centered on each
student's individual research lab, where the students are expected to master at
least a part of a large task, a variety of other activities take place during
the program. These include ethics, electronics, and machining classes, a program
on "Getting Into Grad School," as well as lab tours and a weekly science seminar
series aimed at the students. The program culminates with a day of presentations
given by each of the REU students. Special efforts are made to include
significant participation levels from women and minorities, as well as from
students coming from smaller institutions that do not have as many research
opportunities. This program fits in with the NSF goal of developing a diverse
and internationally competitive scientific and engineering workforce. Active
research experience is one of the most effective ways to attract talented
undergraduates and retain them in careers in science and engineering. This site
is supported by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.