* 2244253
* REU Site: Interdisciplinary Research Experiences in Nanotechnology and Biomedicine
* ENG,EEC
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Jonathan Arnold, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 03/31/2026
* USD 459,856.00

This REU Site: Interdisciplinary Research Experiences in Nanotechnology and
Biomedicine at the University of Georgia (UGA) aims to attract and retain
underrepresented minority and female students from institutions with limited
research opportunities in science and engineering and prepare them for graduate
programs and careers in these fields. Nanobiotechnology research is an emerging
interdisciplinary area at the interface of nanotechnology and biomedicine. This
three-year project provides an interdisciplinary research experience to
undergraduate students, leveraging the diverse interdisciplinary expertise,
resources, and training opportunities. Ten REU students over a 10-week summer
program each year will participate in interdisciplinary research projects that
apply nanotechnology to specific biomedical questions. Each REU student will be
co-mentored by paired faculty from the nanotechnology and biomedical disciplines
on a collaborative research project. This REU experience will recruit students
from diverse backgrounds. Over 60% of participants will come from academic
institutions where research opportunities are limited, over 70% will be
underrepresented minorities, and over 80% will be females. This recruitment is
expected to broaden participation within the next generation of scientists and
engineers in interdisciplinary research endeavors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
three-year REU Site: Interdisciplinary Research Experiences in Nanotechnology
and Biomedicine at the University of Georgia (UGA) aims to attract and retain
underrepresented minority and female students from institutions with limited
research opportunities in science and engineering and prepare them for graduate
programs and careers in these fields. Nanobiotechnology research is an emerging
interdisciplinary area at the interface of nanotechnology and biomedicine. Over
a ten-week summer program, ten REU students each year will engage in an
interdisciplinary research experience in nanobiotechnology, with research
projects co-mentored by faculty in nanotechnology and biomedicine. The existing
world-class programs, facilities, collaborative research culture, and inclusive
environments at the university create a strong setting for this
interdisciplinary site. Students will be recruited nationwide with particular
emphasis on students who are underrepresented/underserved minorities (URM) and
females from STEM limited institutions. Through the program, students will (1)
design hypotheses-driven research experiments to solve biomedical problems with
engineering tools; (2) develop skills for conducting interdisciplinary research;
(3) gain confidence and a sense of self-efficacy to participate in science and
engineering research, (4) develop a greater understanding and appreciation for
the benefits of interdisciplinary research. Research mentors will also gain
expertise in mentoring URM and female students in interdisciplinary
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.