* 2244512
* REU Site: Quantum Algorithms and Optimization (QAO)
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2026
* Rebekah Herrman, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 01/31/2026
* USD 360,196.00

Quantum algorithms have the potential to revolutionize how currently intractable
problems are solved, however more research is required to realize their full
potential. The goal of this Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site is
to encourage student participation in cutting-edge, interdisciplinary quantum
computing research that focuses on solving large-scale optimization problems.
Optimization problems are the focus of this research as they have real-world
applications, such as packaging routing and scheduling. Undergraduates who
participate in this REU site will gain critical research experience by
developing code that implements quantum algorithms, mathematically proving
bounds on algorithm performance, and comparing leading quantum algorithms to the
best classical algorithms. Furthermore, the students will participate in
professional development opportunities that are designed to encourage them to
consider their career plans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed REU site will
host ten students for ten weeks each summer. Participants will perform quantum
algorithms research as applied to solve realistic, large-scale combinatorial
optimization problems. Students will learn fundamental quantum algorithms
research techniques such as how to run quantum algorithms on hardware, use
machine learning and statistical methods to analyze data generated by the
experiments, and provide theoretical or computational performance bounds. The
goals of the program are to broaden student participation in interdisciplinary
quantum computing research, develop the next generation quantum computing
workforce, and develop participants’ research and scientific writing skills. The
projects for this REU site will be designed so that the students’ research will
become more independent as the summer progresses. Pre- and post- program surveys
will be administered and the results will be used to refine the REU site each
year.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.