* 2244969
* RUI: CAS-SC: Promoting Group-Transfer Reactions at Metal/Main-Group Bonds
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Matthew Whited, Carleton College
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 05/31/2026
* USD 355,896.00

With support from the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division,
Matthew T. Whited and his research group of undergraduate students at Carleton
College are developing new applications of metal complexes featuring bonds to
heavy non-metal elements such as silicon. These compounds are designed to
provide synergistic interaction between the main group atom and the metal. This
enables the compound to bring together different groups and enable reactions
between them. The project will develop systems where reactive chemical fragments
are attached to inexpensive and readily abundant substrates to afford products
with applications in both that bulk and fine chemical arenas. This approach also
seeks to replace expensive, rare metals with earth abundant ones in catalysis.
The project will provide a training ground for undergraduate researchers and
enable expanded outreach to high school students in Northfield, MN and
Faribault, MN on topics related to chemical synthesis and X-ray
crystallography.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to develop the
chemistry of late-metal/main-group interactions by exploring metal-silicon
single and multiple bonds as platforms for transfer of reactive nitrene,
carbene, and related groups to organic substrates. Preliminary findings have
shown that these “electronically frustrated” linkages can enable dual-site
catalysis whereby the two sites (metal and main-group element) interact with
different substrates to bring them together, but the generality of this strategy
has not been demonstrated. Such an approach serves to avoid problems of
poisoning present in many catalysts and also provides a distinct approach to
using earth abundant metals such as iron, cobalt, and nickel in group-transfer
catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.