* 2244390
* REU Site for Energy-Efficient Devices and Systems (R-SEEDS)
* ENG,EEC
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2026
* Lina Sawalha, Western Michigan University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 03/31/2026
* USD 405,191.00

The REU Site for Energy-Efficient Devices and Systems (R-SEEDS) at Western
Michigan University (WMU) aims to engage undergraduate students in energy-
efficient technology research, design, and development. The development of
energy-efficient technologies (i.e., technologies that require less energy to
perform the same function) is a very effective approach to combat pollution and
climate change, improve the competitiveness of industries and businesses, and
reduce costs. This three-year program will support the creation of a workforce
capable of conducting interdisciplinary research in energy efficiency. It will
inspire a new generation that is conscious of the effect of energy consumption
on the environment and can research and develop energy-efficient systems and
technologies. The program will also train and educate a diverse workforce of new
researchers, resulting in more technological prosperity in the US. Ten
participants each year will be engaged in 10-week intensive team-based projects,
working on cutting-edge research. This experience will prepare them for graduate
programs and high-demand jobs in energy efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU
Site for Energy-Efficient Devices and Systems (R-SEEDS) at Western Michigan
University (WMU) aims to engage undergraduate students in energy-efficient
technology research, design, and development. The three-year R-SEEDS program
will offer research projects in a broad range of exciting engineering and
computing topics, such as computer architectures and systems, electric grid
component design, autonomous vehicles, nanosatellites, plasma-assisted
combustion, industrial carbon capture, neurobiological engineering, and
microplasma sterilization. Ten students each year will learn the different
challenges imposed by implementing energy-efficient systems and ways to overcome
those challenges. The program will further train students to prepare them for a
career in engineering and science through several workshops and seminars on
energy efficiency, sustainability, research methodologies and tools, research
ethics, research as a career, graduate studies, and presentation and writing
skills. All activities will be supervised by academic advisors from three
engineering departments: Electrical and Computer Engineering, Mechanical and
Aerospace Engineering, and Chemical and Paper Engineering, with support from
industrial partners. The participants will engage with the advisorsâ€™ research
group, and academic and industry collaborators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.