* 2244546
* REU Site: Engineering Materials for a Healthy World
* ENG,EEC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Stephanie Bryant, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 08/31/2026
* USD 456,034.00

The three-year REU Site: Engineering Materials for a Healthy World at the
University of Colorado Boulder will host a 10-week summer research experience
for ten undergraduate students each year to participate in highly innovative
materials research and science policy projects that are at the forefront of
addressing major challenges in energy, health, and infrastructure. Participants
will engage in multidisciplinary projects and conduct hands-on research while
working closely with faculty, graduate student, and post-doc mentors. This REU
Site will run a new mentoring program for undergraduate students from minority
serving institutions where prospective students are paired with a graduate
student mentor. The mentoring program will begin prior to the REU and extend for
two years, with the goal of strengthening the menteeâ€™s REU application,
bolstering self-efficacy, and navigating applications to graduate school.
Participants in the REU program will expand their knowledge of science justice
and science policy through seminar talks by leaders in the field and will learn
how to conduct scientific research, communicate effectively, and network through
professional development activities that prepare students for future careers in
materials science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three-year REU Site:
Engineering Materials for a Healthy World at the University of Colorado Boulder
will host a 10-week summer research experience for ten undergraduate students
each year to participate in highly innovative materials research and science
policy projects. The next generation of scientists and engineers will become
increasingly responsible for developing innovative solutions to address the
energy, health, and infrastructure crises. The REU Site will focus on
diversifying the workforce with underrepresented minority and female science and
engineering students to address these crises. The REU Site will engage
undergraduate students in highly interdisciplinary and innovative research
projects. The REU materials research projects will focus on developing
innovative and creative just technologies for alternative renewable energy
sources, addressing disparities in health and disease through patient-specific
biomaterials, and engineering sustainable infrastructure from cement
alternatives to clean water. The science policy projects will focus on how media
and social networks impact the just transition of these technologies. Students
will contribute to the advancement of fundamental knowledge in materials science
and engineering through materials design, development, processing, and
characterization and environmental science policy in real-world
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.