* 2244497
* REU Site: Summer Research Experience at UT-Permian Basin Focused on the Applications of Science and Technology in Solving Real Energy and Environmental Problems
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Mohamed Zobaa, University of Texas of the Permian Basin
* Standard Grant
* Aisha Morris
* 05/31/2026
* USD 455,414.00

The establishment of a summer Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU)
program at the University of Texas Permian Basin allows for a unique opportunity
for undergraduate students, especially minority and historically
underrepresented, to conduct rigorous research in science and technology
disciplines. This REU Site will expose students to undergraduate research and
provide a first-hand, inquiry-based approach to learning. One-on-one mentorship
in the research setting early in the students’ college career significantly
improves their understanding of the material covered in their courses and equips
them with essential soft and marketable skills such as critical thinking,
teamwork, communication, personal and social responsibility. Additionally, this
project enhances the diversification of the community of STEM professionals by
increasing student engagement from various ethnicities and socioeconomic
backgrounds. Students will be trained on a wide range of scientific equipment
and methods in order to tackle real problems related to energy management and
security as well as environmental protection. Students will present their
findings at regional, national, and international conferences in their
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Permian Basin, the top producing petroleum
province in the country, is also home to ever-increasing large areas of solar
and wind farms. It is a highly dynamic energy hub that provides students and
faculty with unique multidisciplinary research opportunities that align with
economic growth and technological advances in the West Texas area. Energy
production, however, is often associated with a negative impact on the
environment. From induced seismicity and groundwater contamination due to
hydraulic fracturing and enhanced oil recovery techniques to pollution and
reduced air quality as a result of drilling operations and flaring of greenhouse
gases in the atmosphere, among many others. Participating students will study
these problems in state-of-the-art laboratories under guidance from highly
qualified scientists. Results from their projects will enhance our understanding
of the problems’ causes, provide viable solutions, and guide future
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is supported by the Department of
Defense in partnership with the NSF REU program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.