* 2244073
* REU Site: Research Experiences in Physiology and Neurobiology at UCONN
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Joseph Crivello, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 04/30/2026
* USD 282,582.00

This REU site award to the University of Connecticut in Storrs, CT, will support
the training of 10 students for 10 weeks each summer during the summers of 2023
to 2025. Undergraduate students from primarily non-PH.D. schools and those who
are underrepresented minorites, veterans, and diasbled students will be
recruited. Students will learn how research is conducted, and many will present
the results of their work at scientific conferences. Assessment of the program
effectiveness will be determined through the use of the an line tool. Students
will be tracked after participation in the program to determine their career
paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate participants will examine
physiological systems through hands-on research from a molecular to systems
level. The research projects are part of a broader examination of Modeling in
Physiological Systems, undertaken by labs within departments of Physiology &amp;
Neurobiology, Molecular and Cell Biology, and Pharmaceutics. Areas of research
include: neurocircuitry underlying motivational processes; chemosensation in
insects, vascular morphogenesis, and tumorigenesis. Program goals are to improve
the mentoring skills and experience of faculty, deepen institutional
relationships with non-Ph.D. granting institutions, enhance recruitment of
students with limited research experience, and provide students with an
excellent research experience. Participants will learn how to pose research
questions, read, and understand research literature, work as part of a research
team, devise their own research questions and the means to answer them, and be
mentored by faculty, post-doctoral fellows, and graduate and undergraduate
students. Participants will learn about responsible and ethical conduct of
research, graduate program selection and applying. Students present the results
of their work at a poster-session at the end of the summer and regional and
national meetings. Students will be selected by a committee composed of the PI,
co-PI and faculty mentors. Special recruiting focus is on students not typically
chosing research careers, under-represented minorities, disabled students,
veterans, and first-generation students. Participants will be required to
register with the NSF ETAP. More information is available about this program by
visiting https://pnbreu.uconn.edu or by contacting the PI (Dr. Crivello
@joseph.crivello@uconn.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Menuz at
karen.menuz@uconn.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.