* 2244310
* NRT-QL: Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Quantum Materials Science and Engineering
* EDU,DGE
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2028
* Corey OHern, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 06/30/2028
* USD 3,000,000.00

Harnessing and engineering the useful properties of materials has been a
recurrent theme in the history of human advancement from mastering metallurgy in
the Bronze age to creation of semiconductor devices in today’s digital society.
Quantum materials, which are materials where quantum mechanical effects are
critical to their useful properties, have played an important part in this
technological progress, but are poised to do so even more. For example, there is
growing interest and excitement about quantum computers, as well as both
government and industry funding of research and development in the quantum
sciences. This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to
Yale University will create an interdisciplinary Ph.D. program on quantum
materials and prepare trainees for impactful professional careers in the field
of quantum materials science and engineering. Additionally, the program will
strengthen and diversify the US scientific and technical workforce in the
quantum sciences. This program will train 30 Ph.D. students, including 17 funded
trainees, from the disciplines of Applied Physics, Chemistry, Computer Science,
Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science, and Physics. The program will
provide training through education, research, industry and national laboratory
summer internships, and professional development. Trainees will become experts
in creating, using, and understanding quantum materials, while gaining firsthand
knowledge of developing skills in team science, science communication, outreach,
teaching, and mentoring. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research plan of this NRT
program focuses on three related themes: (a) understanding the growth processes
of topological crystalline nanowires at the atomic scale, (b) creation and
engineering of nanowire-based topological interconnects and their electron
transport properties, and (c) topological superconducting nanowires for
potential quantum bit storage. The interdisciplinary and collaborative research
effort will bring together experimental efforts in materials growth,
characterization via electron transport and surface microscopy, and
computational work in electronic structure calculations, machine learning, and
molecular dynamics simulations. For example, for theme (a), first-principles
electronic structure calculations will provide structural and energetic data on
likely materials configurations to train machine learning models to produce high
quality classical potential energy functions. These can be used for large-scale
and long-time molecular dynamics simulations of the material growth process; the
key structural configurations found in the dynamics will then be fed back to the
first principles calculations to recalibrate and refine the machine-learned
potentials in a closed-loop manner. A key feature of the traineeship is a new
flagship course, containing hands-on modules allowing trainees to analyze data
from various NRT program-related research laboratories, that will introduce
quantum materials science and engineering, the NRT trainers, and research
projects to the trainees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship
(NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and implementation of
bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education
training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate
students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through
comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and
aligned with changing workforce and research needs.  &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.