* 2244080
* REU Site:  Genes &amp; the Environment:  Research Experiences for Undergraduates from Rural &amp; Tribal colleges
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Rebecca Simmons, University of North Dakota Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Simcox
* 04/30/2026
* USD 560,868.00

This REU Site award to University of North Dakota (UND), Grand Forks, ND will
support the training of 12 students for 10 weeks during the summers of
2023-2025. Research is conducted either at UND or at participating rural and
tribal colleges through a hybrid-remote research program. It is anticipated that
a total of 36 students, primarily from rural and tribal colleges and from
schools that have limited research opportunities, will be trained in this
program. Students may select from research that represents a wide array of
biological fields including cell biology, developmental biology, genetics,
molecular biology, neuroscience, and systems biology. Students will also
participate in weekly seminars and workshops on topics such as scientific
writing and presentations, responsible and ethical conduct of research,
diversity and inclusion in STEM, mentoring and applying to graduate programs.
Students will present their research during a poster symposium at the end of the
program. Assessment of the program will be done through the online SALG URSSA
tool. The NSF ETAP system will be used to register participants
(https://www.nsfetap.gov/). Students will be tracked after the program to
determine their career paths.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The theme of this REU program
is Genes and the Environment, which broadly explores the intersection of
molecular biology and genetic responses to numerous environmental factors.
Research topics span the depth and breadth of biological sciences, involving the
Departments of Biology and Biomedical Sciences. Students will engage in leading-
edge biological research, as well as gain professional development through
weekly seminars. These seminars will include research talks by involved faculty,
workshops in scientific writing, and training in DEIA+ issues and ethical
conduct of research. This project will also recruit and mentor students that do
not have access to traditional REU programs via the hybrid-remote research
experience. We anticipate that, after the REU, students from these institutions
will share their experiences and that this will strengthen science education and
research in their communities. More information about this program is available
by visiting http://ndinbre.org/NSF-REU/ or by contacting the PI (Dr. Van Doze at
van.doze@und.edu) or the Co-PI (Dr. Rebecca Simmons at rebecca.simmons@und.edu).
This site is supported by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF
REU program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.