* 2244020
* REU/RET Site: Research Experiences in Mathematics for Undergraduates and Teachers
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2027
* Kevin McGown, Chico State Enterprises
* Continuing Grant
* Adriana Salerno
* 06/30/2027
* USD 637.00

This project brings undergraduate students and high school teachers together to
solve contemporary research problems in mathematics. Working together in small
groups over an extended period during the summer, the participants will enhance
their abilities in problem solving, communication, and intellectual perseverance
as they learn the working methods of a research mathematician. The primary goal
of the project is to produce publications in peer-reviewed academic journals
based on the culmination of successful research. Additionally, by introducing
participants to successful research processes, they will be well-prepared for
future success in mathematical disciplines in graduate school and beyond. The
combined cohort of undergraduates and teachers will bolster the mathematical
fluency and dynamism of local secondary mathematics education, leading to
enhanced educational opportunities for future high school students.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This award supports a multi-year Research Experiences for
Undergraduates and Teachers (REUT) program at California State University, Chico
(CSU Chico). During each of the three years funded by the grant, two faculty
members will mentor a group of ten participants as they work on mathematical
research problems over a seven week period during the summer. The participants
are mostly advanced undergraduate students in mathematics from throughout the
U.S.A., joined by high school mathematics teachers recruited from the region
served by CSU Chico in northern California. The research topics are drawn from
the expertise of the faculty advisors and consist of compelling contemporary
problems in number theory, graph theory, commutative algebra, topology, and
statistics. By engaging the students with guided research techniques during the
summer session, and then maintaining regular contact in the following months,
the advisors will help facilitate successful academic publications as a result
of the REUT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.