* 2244594
* REU Site: Gluing Computer Science and Convex Geometry: Research Experiences for Undergraduates from Community Colleges
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2026
* Habib M Ammari, Texas A&M University-Kingsville
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 01/31/2026
* USD 409,903.00

This REU Site aims at providing undergraduate Science, Technology, Engineering,
and Mathematics (STEM) students with a unique combination of research and hands-
on laboratory and deployment experiences in the area of wireless sensor networks
at Texas A&amp;M University-Kingsville. Specifically, this new Site focuses on
strengthening the synergy between computer science and convex geometry through a
truly multidisciplinary environment. This REU Site includes a set of well-
defined and challenging research projects, which are tight to a wide variety of
real-world applications, with an emphasis on the problems of connected
k-coverage, data collection, and geographic forwarding in both two-dimensional
and three-dimensional wireless sensor networks. The major goal of this REU Site
is to help the recruited undergraduate students get exposure to several valuable
research tools and experiences in the above-mentioned research areas so as to
become science and engineering statespersons for their
generation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new REU Site will help recruit
undergraduate students from various U.S. institutions having limited research
opportunities with a more focus on underrepresented ones, including Black,
Hispanic, female, disable, low-income, and first-generation students, who
traditionally have been underrepresented in science and engineering. These are
talented undergraduate students who are interested in research as well as hands-
on laboratory and deployment experiences in the areas of computer science,
convex geometry, and wireless sensor networks for this REU Site. This summer
research experience for these students early in their academic career will
certainly benefit them significantly. Indeed, research for undergraduates can be
viewed as a high-impact educational practice that is capable of producing
positive outcomes for these students, such as student independence and self-
confidence, career interest reinforcement, integration into their selected
field; conducting experiments; analyzing data; communicating results; and
working with others as a team. In addition, this type of research experience
provides interactions between faculty and students, which in turn facilitate
personal connections between them; improves student retention and learning
experience; and enhances the quality of the undergraduate curriculum. The
findings of this REU Site can be disseminated using local, national, and
international conferences, and also published in highly reputed
journals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.