* 2244462
* NRT-QL: Quantum Photonics interdisciplinary training to Advance Quantum Technologies (QPAQT)
* EDU,DGE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Tara Drake, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 06/30/2028
* USD 2,999,976.00

Quantum photonics aims to harness the unique features of quantum mechanical
systems to revolutionize future technologies in computing, communication, and
sensing and deepen the understanding of the universe. It is an interdisciplinary
field that focuses on photons, the elementary packets of light, in all three
pillars of quantum technology- computing, communication, and sensing. While the
quantum photonics field is growing rapidly, graduate trainees in this field are
still educated within the framework of traditional academic departments. This
NSF Research Traineeship award to the University of New Mexico (UNM) will
address the need for cross-disciplinary graduate training in quantum photonics
for students with diverse undergraduate backgrounds. The program will prepare
175 students, including 25 funded trainees, to become generalists in quantum
technologies hardware. The tools and academic training provided will prepare
trainees for a wide variety of careers in semiconductor and quantum
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Quantum Photonics interdisciplinary training
to Advance Quantum Technologies (QPAQT) will be led by a faculty team whose
research interests are at the intersection between photonic science and quantum
technology, with an emphasis on semiconductor and atomic, molecular, and optical
physics device platforms. These research areas include quantum sensing, quantum
networks, nonlinear quantum photonics, integrated photonics, and molecular
qubits. The team will have representation from the Electrical Engineering,
Physics, and Chemistry departments and interdisciplinary units including the
Center for High Technology Materials and Center for Quantum Information &amp;
Control. This project leverages UNM’s connections to national labs and
semiconductor fabrication facilities near the university to prepare the trainees
as the future workforce in semiconductor and quantum technologies. As a flagship
university in a state with a unique demographic profile, this program has a
great potential to broaden participation. QPAQT’s four primary goals are: 1)
professional development: trainees will develop an identity as quantum photonics
researchers and effectively operate within the professional community; 2)
academic achievement: trainees will acquire a broad base of knowledge, perform
original research, and develop the skills needed to find employment in quantum
photonics; 3) recruitment and retention from groups that are historically
underserved: more than 50% of trainees will be women and/or races and
ethnicities that are historically underserved; 4) program sustainability: QPAQT
will operate effectively across departments and colleges and will be widely
disseminated to the academic community. Key training elements will include an
interdisciplinary quantum photonics curriculum, individualized internal and
external trainee mentorship, research rotations, internships at industry and
national lab partners, a weekly professional development seminar, and peer
mentorship in undergraduate outreach programs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF
Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM
graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research
areas through comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-
based, and aligned with changing workforce and research needs.  
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.