* 2244991
* I-Corps: Orthopaedic mortars
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2023
* Tanvir Choudhri, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is based on the
development of a vertebral augmentation system that actively prevents cement
leakage during operations and utilizes photoactivation to control cement curing
and enhance adhesion properties for spine applications. It utilizes ultraviolet
curing technology to control cement hardening which enhances adhesion properties
for spine applications. This system will combine principles from the field of
dentistry that have shown advantageous properties for cement compositions and
controlled curing capabilities facilitated by light administration.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project seeks the development of technology
to improve the treatment of vertebral compression fractures. The technology
represents the first bone cement treatment to prevent intraoperative bone cement
leakage during minimally invasive percutaneous vertebroplasty and kyphoplasty
procedures. Bone cement has various applications outside the field of vertebral
augmentation, including growing hip and knee arthroplasty and reconstructive
orthognathic procedures. The proposed technology will be used for hip and knee
arthroplasty procedures. In addition, this technology may be applicable to the
field of craniofacial reconstruction providing new methods and approaches for
the industry. This technology is adapted with monomers and components that have
been utilized successfully in dental implant surgery or independently validated.
The combined technology may establish a novel treatment approach that reduces
the incidence of cement leakage and secondary fractures at adjacent
levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.