* 2244801
* Complex Methods in Spectral and Scattering Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Alexei Poltoratski, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 05/31/2026
* USD 299,292.00

Applications of complex function theory in spectral and scattering problems for
differential equations present examples of the undisputed relevance of pure
mathematics in the areas of theoretical physics and engineering. One of the
focal points will be the non-linear Fourier transform (NLFT), closely related to
scattering transform for the Dirac system of differential equations. The Dirac
system is the quantum electrodynamical law governing spin ½ particles and should
be thought of as a relativistic generalization of the Schrödinger equation.
Better understanding of NLFT can lead to progress in several areas of
mathematical analysis and non-linear differential equations. Questions of
convergence and maximal estimates for NLFT will be studied. These are considered
by the experts to be among the main problems of non-linear harmonic analysis.
The second part will concern extensions and generalizations of classical results
of spectral theory, which can be obtained via a new approach developed recently
based on the use of so-called Toeplitz operators. Some related questions will be
investigated jointly with graduate students. The materials of the project will
be used in minicourses and a special topics course aiming at junior researchers
and graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A large part of this project
concerns problems of convergence of the scattering data for a Dirac system of
differential equations. Scattering is commonly viewed as a non-linear version of
the classical Fourier transform, which connects this project to the maximal
estimates for NLFT. These connections lead to natural questions of establishing
versions of the classical results of Fourier analysis in the non-linear settings
of scattering. They have been appearing in various forms for most of the last
century and remain an object of active research today. As an example, one can
look at the non-linear version of Parseval's identity, which can be traced as
far back as the work of Verblunski in the 1930s, and a non-linear analog of
Hausdorff-Young inequality, which appears in more recent work of Christ and
Kiselev. Several of such questions will be studied, as well as ones in the areas
of inverse spectral theory and completeness in various spaces of analytic
functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.