* 2244483
* REU Site: Glyco-Tree - Glycomaterial Training, Research and Education Experiences
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Alan Esker, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 03/31/2026
* USD 437,344.00

Non-technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Glycomaterials is a term that broadly
encompasses sugars and larger molecules derived from sugars. Applications of
glycomaterials include structural products such as lumber, textiles, biofuels
(derived from corn and wood), food additives, and nutrition. Glycomaterials also
play important roles in biology including immune response, cell-to-cell
communication and as a fundamental component of DNA. Nonetheless, understanding
these materials has historically been challenging because their chemical
structures are complex and resistant to standard methods of characterization. In
2020, the National Science Foundation funded GlycoMIP, a Materials Innovation
Platform (MIP) at Virginia Tech and partner institutions, to concentrate
expertise in characterization, modeling, and synthesis of glycomaterials with
state-of-the-art facilities and instrumentation. Virginia Tech will host a
Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site that leverages GlycoMIP to
afford undergraduate students with team-based research projects, participation
in GlycoMIP Summer School, a week-long dive into glycomaterial characterization,
modeling and synthesis, and leadership opportunities through Youth Experiencing
Science (YES), a K-12 summer outreach program at Virginia Tech. This REU program
will fill a critical need of growing the next generation of glycoscience leaders
who will deliver future innovations on technologies ubiquitous in our daily
lives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
has four structured team-based research areas for undergraduate students: (1)
Glycan-based polymer blend compatibilizers – Taking advantage of the reducing
end of a polysaccharide chain, block copolymers of glycans will be synthesized
to compatibilize blends of carbohydrate-based and non-carbohydrate-based
thermoplastic and thermosetting polymers with subsequent characterization of the
dispersion by small angle light scattering and determination of mechanical
properties by dynamic mechanical analysis and Instron testing; (2) Mesoscale
modeling of glycopolymers – Solutions and gels of glycopolymers will be
characterized by dilute solution viscometry and rotatory and oscillatory
rheometry to test mesoscale models being developed to explain and predict shear
viscosity and regions of linear viscoelastic behavior; (3) Glycomaterials that
interact with biomolecules – Glycomaterials comprised of synthetic polymer
backbones and defined glycan side chains will be synthesized with modern
polymerization techniques to control molar mass and chain topology through post-
polymerization modification and direct polymerization of macromonomers.
Interactions of the polymers with enzymes and glycan binding proteins will be
probed by surface plasmon resonance and quartz crystal microbalance studies; (4)
Advancing chiroptical methods of glycoanalytics – Vibrational circular dichroism
and Raman optical activity spectroscopy will be used to characterize chiral
glycans in solution. Spectra will be compared to predictions from theoretical
tools being developed that combine results of molecular dynamic simulations and
quantum chemical calculations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is supported by
the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF REU
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.