* 2244712
* Research Infrastructure: Increasing Capacity at the University of Louisiana Lafayette Ecology Center
* BIO,DBI
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2024
* James Nelson, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 04/30/2024
* USD 412,064.00

The tall grass prairie and long leaf pine ecosystems of the southeastern United
States are unique and biologically diverse ecosystems, but have limited
representation in terms of number of active field stations. This project boosts
the capacity, capabilities and profile of a field station at the intersections
of these ecosystems – the Ecology Center at the University of Louisiana at
Lafayette (www.ecology.louisiana.edu) – by providing funds for a new farm
tractor, analytical equipment, and replacement of greenhouse equipment. The
location of the Ecology Center makes it an ideal place to study how these
habitats, including plants, pollinator and wildlife, will respond to changing
climate regimes. The equipment and improved facilities will support research and
education on how climate change effects these native habitats and the species
that use them. The facilities will be used by faculty, students, and community
members. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will purchase a new farm tractor that
will be used to expand the current experimental field space of the Center from 6
ha to 18 ha of usable fields. These experimental fields will be used to conduct
experiments on how changing rainfall regimes will alter the response of the tall
grass prairie and long leaf pine habitat. The greenhouse renovations will be
used to install heating and cooling capabilities as well as a state-of-the-art
watering system that can be used to conduct controlled experiments. The
elemental analyzer, microplate reader, and ultra-low freezer will be used to
analyze and store chemical and genetic samples taken from the field plots and
greenhouse experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.