* 2244106
* REU Site: Synthesis, Assembly and Characterization of Soft Matter Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Jessica Bickel, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 02/28/2026
* USD 367,615.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cleveland State University
(CSU) will host a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU)-site involving
rising sophomore and junior physics and engineering majors, recruited
particularly from underrepresented groups, in interdisciplinary research
projects within soft matter science and engineering. Soft matter is a group of
materials including liquid crystals, colloids, polymers, surfactants, and
biological matter, which structurally reorganize in response to even slight
changes in temperature and other environmental conditions. Scientists and
engineers harness the unique properties of soft matter in applications ranging
from drug delivery to organic solar cells to microfluidic devices. Fundamental
to the REU site is intentional faculty mentoring through meaningful research
experiences, which is shown to improve students’ persistence in STEM careers and
encourage them to pursue graduate studies in physics and engineering. This
promotes the progress of science through the retention of talented scholars in
research careers. REU students, benefitting from CSU’s focus on undergraduate
research and “engaged learning”, are mentored by experienced faculty and
participate in well-established CSU professional development opportunities.
Students’ scientific development is supported by soft matter
science/characterization seminars and weekly cohort events (science colloquia,
regional research centers visits, professional development seminars). Technical
communication skills are developed with student presentations at CSU, a poster
presentation at the regional summer undergraduate research conference, and
scaffolded writing of project reports. The REU also funds student travel to
present their research at a regional/national conference after the REU,
providing further opportunities for scientific communication and networking.
Finally, long-term scientific relationships are developed within REU cohorts
through cohort building activities including outreach at a local school, student
coffee hours, and weekend social activities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific focus of this REU is soft
matter, a subfield of condensed matter that encompasses a large variety of
materials, from polymeric gels that can be used for transport and for directing
assembly of other materials, to polymers that can be used for electronic or
mechanical applications, to biological materials studied to better mimic
nature’s complexity and develop new pathways towards healing. REU participants
conduct original research projects within three main foci: 1) Understanding
fundamental properties and phase transitions of polymers, proteins, gels, and
microemulsions to harness the power of environmentally sensitive nanoparticles
and gels; 2) Driving self-assembly of anisotropic soft matter to exploit its
properties for applications from electronics to biomimetics; and 3) Striving to
better understand and to improve mixing in liquid soft matter systems and use
liquid flow to probe biological and physical phenomena. The REU students
contribute significantly to cutting-edge soft matter research with potential
applications ranging from drug delivery to organic solar cells to microfluidic
devices. The student’s research experience is supported by scientific and
professional development seminars, oral/poster presentations, final report
preparation, and development of a professional network of faculty and peers
through social activities. Ultimately, the soft matter REU experience will help
rising sophomores and juniors, heavily recruited from underrepresented
populations in physics and engineering, to persist and succeed in STEM
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.