* 2244271
* REU SITE: From Formal Computer Science Education to Real World Data Science Research to Policy Decision Making
* CSE,OAC
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Lisa Singh, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 03/31/2026
* USD 443,764.00

When attempting to tackle societal scale issues, computer science students have
limited opportunities to use algorithms, methods, and the tools they are taught
in class with large-scale real world data sets. It is even more unusual to get
the opportunity to understand how to build bridges that connect these algorithms
and methods to policy development and decision making. This program aims not
only to teach students about computer science research, but to also help them
understand how researchers in other disciplines use computer science algorithms
and analytic tools to generate evidence for developing public policy. The
Georgetown REU site connects formal computer science education to real world
data science research to public policy decision making. Students in the program
work on improving mining and learning algorithms for different data science
algorithms. They then connect the outputs of the methods they develop to social
science and public policy questions, improving their understanding of how those
outside of computer science use algorithms and their specifications to generate
scientific evidence for developing public policy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The core
research that the REU students conduct is in data-centric computing. Their goals
are to advance the state-of-the-art methods for emotion detection across
languages (cohort 1), emerging misinformation detection (cohort 2), and opinion
modeling of public policies (cohort 3). All three of these problems have
existing solutions. Each year students extend the existing state of the art
methods to address one specific constraint. Cohort 1 employs multi-lingual
language models to tackle the language constraint. Cohort 2 generates novel
weakly labeled data to address the temporal (emerging) constraint. Cohort 3
focuses on blending auxiliary information to address the limited training data
constraint. For all three tasks, students also consider unsupervised, semi-
supervised, and supervised models and conduct sensitivity analyses that identify
the biases associated with different learning techniques, extending their
understanding of the tradeoffs between interpretability, scalability, and
accuracy. Finally, students use the “best” models to conduct a data science
analysis that informs public policy research with respect to migration movement,
misinformation intervention strategies, and gun culture. The Georgetown REU Site
gives students the opportunity to advance computer science research and
understand how computer science research connects to other disciplines of
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.