* 2244285
* REU Site: Making Waves: Science Communication and Interdisciplinary Ocean Research Experiences at USF, College of Marine Science
* GEO,OCE
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2026
* Ana Arellano, University of South Florida
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 03/31/2026
* USD 179,523.00

The University of South Florida will host a Research Experience for
Undergraduates (REU) program at the College of Marine Science (CMS) campus
located in St Petersburg, FL. The program will bring ten undergraduates to the
CMS campus each summer for three years to participate in a 10-week internship.
REU interns will have the opportunity to conduct research in a range of
interdisciplinary topics, such as carbon cycling, geochemical signatures, marine
biodiversity, marine biomedical research, and maritime navigation. Students will
be recruited from a wide range of Science, Technology, Engineering and Math
(STEM) and non-STEM undergraduate majors, including engineering, computer
science, mathematics, bio-medical, communications and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is designed to better prepare
undergraduates to conduct and communicate research. The REU will create an
immersive ocean science program for 30 students with different academic
backgrounds. It will expose, train, and educate students in the discipline of
oceanographic research and Science Communication. Understanding integrative
science and being able to communicate it is increasingly important in our
society; the program will stress science literacy and communication as an
integral part of the REU with dissemination of research projects through public
channels. Furthermore, this project will recruit under-served and
underrepresented students from a wide range of majors and will encourage them to
consider pursuing graduate school in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.