* 2244331
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research Integrating Computation and Experiment to Create Revolutionary Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Eric Toberer, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 03/31/2026
* USD 439,574.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Colorado School of Mines
will host a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site focused on
training the next generation of scientists and engineers with expertise at the
intersection of materials science and data analytics. With the goal of providing
cutting-edge research to students with limited research opportunities at their
home institutions, students are actively recruited from community colleges and
primarily undergraduate institutions. Training is occurring through formal
instruction, hands-on research, engagement with data-intensive local
laboratories and businesses, and preparing and delivering public presentations
of research results. The research projects focus on developing transformative
materials that enable new technologies and applications ranging from carbon
capture to photovoltaics to batteries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU site addresses the Materials Genome
Initiative within the context energy materials. Students are gaining experience
in the generation, curation, and analysis of large materials science datasets.
Across the structural and electronic materials space research projects are quite
diverse, ranging from designing porous materials for carbon capture to
thermoelectric material discovery to the combinatorial growth of semiconductor
films. The research projects are inherently interdisciplinary, involving faculty
members from different departments and their affiliated graduate students. Many
of these projects involve strong collaborations with national laboratory and
associated user facilities or industry partners. Beyond technical skills
development, significant effort is devoted to enhancing students’ professional
skills and self-identity as a scientist. Together, these training objectives
culminate in the final week with preparing a poster and associated presentation
for a national conference.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.