* 2244837
* SCC-PG: Intelligent Flood Detection and Warning System to Assist Homeless Communities and Emergency Management Entities
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2024
* Hassan Davani, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Raj Acharya
* 07/31/2024
* USD 149,980.00

Unsheltered homelessness has grown at staggering rates, particularly across West
Coast cities such as San Diego. Unsheltered people are at higher risk than the
general population of experiencing flooding risk, as they are more likely both
to be living in the most flood-vulnerable locations as well as disconnected from
existing flood warning systems. This predicament results in unequal disasters
and environmental impact, burdening the most vulnerable people with the least
information in critical moments. From a technical aspect, the absence of an
intelligent system for flood detection causes inaccuracy in prediction and
delays in responses. This project aims to overcome these challenges by
integrating imagery data into the current state-of-the-art flood data
acquisition and urban infrastructure modeling. The broader impact of the study
involves raising community awareness about the use of new smart technologies and
supporting proactive flood and emergency management by engaging residents,
businesses, and practitioners in the development of the research program.
Involved students will have the opportunity to learn multi-disciplinary research
topics through engaging in collaborative teamwork. The new smart system and
connected decision-making framework will be transferable to other flood-prone
communities across the U.S. West and East Coasts that are confronting more
frequent floods as a result of climate change coinciding with an unprecedented
housing affordability crisis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create a
diverse, multidisciplinary community of researchers, practitioners, and
concerned citizens to develop novel technologies and integrated theories and
methods to improve the time and accuracy of flood data acquisition, detection,
and monitoring. A set of deep learning-based image processing systems will be
developed and trained using large fully segmented flood image datasets to detect
formation and monitor flood events. A flood model will be developed to simulate
and forecast real-time floods and impacts. This project will enhance the
response time and accuracy of flood early warning and monitoring systems to
support the resilience and emergency management of smart and connected coastal
communities. During the planning phase, a Community Advisory Group will be
assembled and convened to advise on the development of the intelligent flood
system and guide the human subject’s data collection activities, including
structured interviews with unsheltered people. This project enhances the
knowledge needed to support smart and connected communities by including 1)
novel data collection techniques from various sources of information, such as
ground-based cameras, 2) artificial intelligence-based flood visual sensing and
analyzing diverse data, and 3) substantive community engagement that centers the
needs of unsheltered people.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.