* 2244721
* Collaborative Research: Unraveling North American Ice-Sheet Dynamics and Regional Sea-Level Change along the U.S. Mid-Atlantic over the Last Glacial Cycle
* GEO,OCE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Christopher Hein, College of William & Mary Virginia Institute of Marine Science
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Carlin
* 08/31/2026
* USD 299,495.00

Rising sea levels impact coastal ecosystems and communities around the world.
One of the most important factors influencing sea level rise locally is the
vertical movement of the land surface. These adjustments can be caused by the
growth and decay of glaciers and ice sheets which are often located thousands of
kilometers away. A better understanding of this ice-land interaction—termed
glacial isostatic adjustment—can improve predictions of future sea-level rise.
This study will map and date shoreline deposits along the Eastern Shore of
Virginia that were formed over the last ~120,000 years. The focus is on times
when sea level was near to, or higher than present. These data will inform
modeling of glacial isostatic adjustment and ice-sheet changes to better
quantify the history of global ice sheet growth and decay. This research will
address questions surrounding past regional sea-level and ice-sheet changes over
the last glacial period. The work may also improve projections of the effect of
glacial isostatic adjustment on regional sea-level rise into the future.
Additionally, this project will support collaboration between the scientists and
the non-profit Barrier Islands Center in Machipongo, Virginia. The collaboration
will combine the geological results from the science team with local community
knowledge of the region. This work will develop museum exhibits focused on the
geology and physical history of the Virginia Eastern Shore.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Global variations in ice volume through the last glacial
cycle are a direct and sensitive measure of ice age climate change. However,
regional (relative) sea level is controlled by a suite of local factors, primary
among which is glacial isostatic adjustment. Significant uncertainty in the
history of sea-level changes during the last glacial cycle—and the role of
glacial isostatic adjustment in those—highlights the need for high-quality and
well-dated sea-level markers across the ice-sheet growth phase (120,000 to
26,000 years ago). Mid-field sea-level observations (along the peripheral bulge
of ice sheets) have the potential to bridge gaps in understanding between global
sea level and local continental ice-sheet behavior, since relative sea level at
these locations is sensitive to changes in the volume and extent in nearby ice
sheets, as well as globally averaged sea-level changes. Focusing on the mid-
field Eastern Shore of Virginia (USA), this study will first analyze high-
resolution topographic and subsurface mapping data, assign indicative meanings
to associated preserved Pleistocene coastal deposits, and develop a
comprehensive geochronology to create a robust local, mid-field sea-level record
over the period of growth of the last ice sheet. We will then perform state-of-
the-art sea-level simulations using a range of possible ice-loading histories,
which span the range of uncertainty on global mean sea level and ice-sheet
geometries in order to gain insight into North American ice-sheet dynamics over
this time period. In doing so, this study will better quantify the history of
global ice sheet growth and decay and improve understanding of linkages between
climate forcings and ice-sheet dynamics, with associated impacts on global
eustatic, and mid-field relative sea level. Furthermore, this work will support
the career development of 2 PhD students and an early-career PI, and mentor two
undergraduate student research projects. The project will enable a collaboration
with the non-profit Barrier Islands Center to engage the local community to
share experiential knowledge to help create a museum
exhibit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.