* 2244092
* REU Site: Sensors in Earth and Space Science: How We Observe Our Planet
* GEO,OCE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Kai Ziervogel, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 06/30/2026
* USD 450,324.00

The University of New Hampshire’s (UNH) Institute for the Study of Earth,
Oceans, and Space (EOS) located in Durham, NH will host a Research Experience
for Undergraduates (REU) Site program. The primary objective of this REU Site is
to provide a positive introduction to scientific research for underserved
student populations. The scientific theme of the program is Earth Science, with
a focus on using sensors and sensor-generated data for observations. The program
aims to inspire and facilitate early undergraduates (rising sophomores) to
choose STEM majors, and associate's degree students to transfer to bachelor's
degree STEM programs. Students recruited from the two organizational partner
institutes, the University of Puerto Rico and the New Hampshire Technology
Institute (NHTI), will come to UNH main campus for 10 weeks for research under
the mentorship of faculty in EOS. Interns will be housed in dormitories and work
in laboratories at the UNH main campus and participate in a research symposium
at the UNH Shoals Marine Laboratory on Appledore Island, ME. Field sites for
student projects are available at the Hampton-Seabrook Estuary and the Great Bay
Estuary in New Hampshire. Both students and mentors will receive professional
development training prior to and during the summer. By using sensors as a
unifying theme across multiple Earth and space science disciplines, the program
will engage students in an interdisciplinary approach to science early in their
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The number of Earth observations is greater today
than ever before, and students must understand where sensor data come from, and
how they are used to evaluate Earth and space as a system. Sensors as an REU
theme opens a range of possible entry points for undergraduate students into
Earth system research, from sensor engineering and design to field deployment
and data analysis. By offering a wide range of research activity options, the
program will provide students with an experience that both matches their
interests and introduces them to new skills. Further, by using sensors as a
unifying theme across multiple Earth and space science disciplines, students
will engage in an interdisciplinary approach to science early in their careers.
Student recruitment will rely on institutional collaborations with the
University of Puerto Rico and the local NHTI community college. Faculty mentors
will be engaged from each of the six EOS research centers: the Center for
Acoustics Research and Education (CARE), the Center for Coastal and Ocean
Mapping (CCOM), the Earth Systems Research Center (ESRC), the Ocean Process
Analysis Laboratory (OPAL), the School of Marine Science and Ocean Engineering
(SMSOE), and the Space Science Center (SSC). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
is jointly funded by the Division of Ocean Sciences, the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the Division of Earth
Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;​&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.