* 2244117
* NRT: Ecosystem science in the face of rapid ocean change: a convergence approach
* EDU,DGE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2028
* Sudarshan Chawathe, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 07/31/2028
* USD 2,991,842.00

NRT: Ecosystem science in the face of rapid ocean change: a convergence
approach&lt;br/&gt;This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT)
award to the University of Maine will leverage the unique resources of the Gulf
of Maine to train the next generation of scientists, managers, and policymakers
in a new, convergent approach to ecosystem science. Researchers, students and
community partners will generate, integrate, and apply transdisciplinary
knowledge to inform responses to rapid ocean change. Program participants will
develop new ways of understanding and creating data, knowledge, and tools that
can be leveraged to enable ecosystem-based approaches. The NRT program
activities will help to address the challenges facing Maine’s coastal
communities, and are relevant to other natural resource dependent rural
communities. This NRT will also benefit society by broadening participation in
marine science through the recruitment of trainees from underrepresented groups
and training a workforce that recognizes the full array of knowledge and tools
available for ecosystem based management (EBM) and climate resilience. Project
participants will contribute science and tools that local, state, tribal and
federal resource managers can use to enable ecosystem-based responses to rapid
ocean change and develop integrative data streams and tools that blend
traditional and local ecological knowledge, existing fisheries and environmental
science approaches, and new and emergent data streams. The capacity of
scientists, environmental professionals, and other coastal community members
will be strengthened as they are more fully prepared to engage in solutions-
oriented science and stewardship. This NRT project anticipates training at least
45 graduate students (22 PhD, 23 MS) over 5 years, including 23 NSF-funded
trainees (11 PhD, 12 MS).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This NRT will encourage scholars
from across the natural and social sciences to advance EBM knowledge and
practice, while empowering community, tribal, and government partners to engage
more deeply in ecosystem science and stewardship. EBM refers to place-based
management of human interactions with marine species and ecosystems that
contributes to the resilience and sustainability of the system; recognizes the
reciprocal and multifaceted connections among people and other elements of the
system, and seeks to achieve multiple societal goals. The NRT will develop and
institutionalize a new curriculum and academic culture through coursework,
community engagement, and collaborative research; build community and government
capacity to contribute to EBM in Maine and beyond, create a novel model for
engaging diverse trainees in place-based, solutions-oriented science, and
develop ways of for integrating and communicating big data from computational
science, ecology, genomics, oceanography, and the social sciences with
traditional and local ecological knowledge to advance ecosystem science and
improve stewardship of ocean systems. Through the convergence of local and
traditional knowledge, fine-scale environmental and social data, and new and
emerging data-driven methods, this NRT program will develop the intellectual
frontier and applications of coastal marine ecosystem science in new ways. The
team will generate and synthesize empirical information and develop and test
theories deeply relevant to ecology, environmental governance, and socio-
environmental systems science. Trainees will generate data, knowledge and tools
directly relevant to the Maine Climate Action Plan’s climate mitigation and
adaptation strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT)
Program is designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.