* 2244499
* REU Site: Developing next generation entrepreneurs in sustainable manufacturing
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Adam Melvin, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2026
* USD 461,459.00

This three-year renewal REU Site at Louisiana State University (LSU) will engage
10 undergraduate students who are traditionally underrepresented in STEM fields
in sustainability-related research with a focus on innovation and
entrepreneurship. The ten-week summer program will provide REU participants each
year with experiences in world-class hands-on energy/sustainability related
research, and will prepare them to pursue graduate science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) degrees. Participants will be trained in the
fundamentals of entrepreneurship and industrial technology development. Weekly
seminars, field trips, and workshops will provide students with opportunities
for professional development in areas such as ethics, patents, and intellectual
property. These excellent training opportunities along with mentoring from
faculty and engineers in the petroleum and chemical industry will inspire more
students to attend graduate school and pursue careers in
innovation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year REU Site at Louisiana State
University (LSU) will engage 10 undergraduate students who are traditionally
underrepresented in STEM fields in sustainability-related research with a focus
on innovation and entrepreneurship. The goal is to expose future scientists and
engineers to the primary channels of research conversion, to basic science to
practice via academic labs, and to industry and technology start-ups. The
research focus of this renewal project will be structured around a common theme
of sustainability with sub-topics including catalysis and sustainable
manufacturing. In addition to technical training, students in the ten-week
summer program will receive training in teamwork and teambuilding, research
ethics, and the importance of diversity, equity, and inclusion. PhD engineers
from top petroleum and chemical companies in the world will mentor the REU
students on the importance of high-quality research in industry and the types of
careers available to those with postgraduate degrees.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.