* 2244201
* REU Site:  Nanomanufacturing of Emerging 2D Materials and Devices
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Suzanne Mohney, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 05/31/2026
* USD 405,000.00

The REU Site entitled Nanomanufacturing of Emerging 2D Materials and Devices
hosted by Pennsylvania State University-University Park provides students with a
ten-week summer research experience to address problems relevant to the
semiconductor industry, a sector in which demand for trained employees in the
United States is expected to grow dramatically. Each year ten undergraduate
students will be part of small research teams that include faculty advisors and
graduate student mentors, all of whom will work together toward a
technologically relevant development goal. Each undergraduate on a team will
have a responsibility that is integral to the teamâ€™s overall objectives. The
program will provide training and coaching for mentees and mentors to encourage
the development of mentoring relationships that extend beyond the conclusion of
the summer experience. REU students will receive training in the responsible
conduct of research and laboratory safety. They will also take part in
professional development opportunities and meet engineers in the semiconductor
industry. The training will ultimately contribute to research and manufacturing
infrastructure for semiconductor chips. These efforts will contribute to human
resource development through mentorship of a significant fraction of students
who are traditionally underrepresented in science and
engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU Site entitled Nanomanufacturing of
Emerging 2D Materials and Devices hosted by Pennsylvania State University-
University Park provides students with a ten-week summer research experience to
address problems relevant to the semiconductor industry, a sector in which
demand for trained employees in the United States is expected to grow
dramatically. Each year this site will train ten undergraduates by giving them
the opportunity to conduct research on two-dimensional semiconductors, a class
of layered van der Waals solids that offer unique performance benefits for
emerging device technologies and the potential to be integrated with silicon
integrated circuits to realize new functionalities. Two-dimensional
semiconductors of special interest include the transition metal dichalcogenides,
such as molybdenum disulfide and tungsten diselenide, which have a direct band
gap in the monolayer limit and exhibit superior transport properties compared to
silicon for aggressively scaled devices. The site will also explore topological
semimetals, which may be used in electrical interconnects on chips or for optics
in the terahertz regime. Researchers will furthermore evaluate the impact of the
use of small interdisciplinary teams in a summer undergraduate research site
compared to the more common model of each student having a standalone project.
The knowledge and experiences that the undergraduate students gain from their
summer internships will motivate and prepare them to pursue graduate studies in
fields involving nanofabrication. Their training will ultimately contribute to
research and manufacturing infrastructure for semiconductor chips and emerging
electronic and photonic devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.