* 2244116
* REU Site: Undergraduate Research Opportunities in Unmanned Systems Foundations and Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Justin Bradley, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Jill Denner
* 02/28/2026
* USD 404,759.00

The "Undergraduate Research Opportunities in Unmanned Systems Foundations and
Applications" Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site at the
University of Nebraska offers an intensive and comprehensive research experience
to ten undergraduate students per year in the context of unmanned systems, a
rapidly growing field of scientific and technological research. A team of
faculty experts from the Nebraska Intelligent MoBile Unmanned Systems Lab
(NIMBUS Lab) provides individual mentoring for ten weeks to instill the
foundations of research methodology and to conduct hands-on research activities
on a variety of unmanned systems applications. The participants engage in
professional development activities to better prepare them for Science,
Technology, Engineering or Mathematics (STEM) careers. Students from computer
science, computer engineering, mechanical engineering, electrical engineering,
and other related majors are considered. Particular attention is given to
students from underrepresented groups and from institutions in the Midwest that
lack research opportunities to support broader educational goals and diversity
in the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each REU participant's research
project focuses on unmanned systems with topics including close interactions of
aerial robots with the environment; proficiency development in operating robotic
systems; vision-based control for collaborative robotic systems; multi-agent
design, control, and applications; and resilient, synergistic communication
systems. Projects build on ongoing faculty research but are crafted for
participants to gain experience in all aspects of research, from conducting a
literature review and prototyping, to understanding the broad potential impact
of the technology being investigated. Participant development will be quantified
by closely assessing their growth through the REU experience and maintaining
mentorship relationships after the summer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This site is
jointly funded by the Department of Defense in partnership with the NSF
Directorate of Computer and Information Science and Engineering REU
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.