* 2244446
* REU Site: Critical Zone Collaborative Network Research Experiences for Undergraduates (CZNet-REU)
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Alan Berkowitz, Consortium of Universities for the Advancement of Hydrologic Sci
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 02/28/2026
* USD 436,416.00

Critical Zone (CZ) science is becoming more important as we try to understand
the Earth’s living skin, from the top of the vegetation canopy to the depths of
the groundwater and all the interactions taking place within that shape our
environment and all life within it. This REU Site award establishes a new
Critical Zone Network Research Experiences for Undergraduates (CZnet-REU)
program to support research opportunities for undergraduate students at the many
CZ Network research sites across the continental US. Students begin the program
at a three-day Kick-off Meeting where they will learn about CZ research, explore
connections between CZ science and society, and meet the team for cohort
building activities. Each REU student will spend the remainder of the ten-week
program at an institution in the CZ Network where they will work closely with a
mentor to design and carry out a project focusing on one of many environmental
problems important to society. During the summer, the cohort of students will
meet virtually 2-3 times each week to stay connected to each other, participate
in science communication and other types of training, work on collaborative team
projects, and explore the connection between science and society. The summer
program ends with a virtual Student Research Symposium and Final Celebration
with all mentors, other CZ Net scientists and educators, friends, and family in
attendance. CZNet-REU students will have the opportunity to present their
research at a national conference, where they will reconnect with their cohort
and network with scientists from CZNet and across the discipline. The
combination of individual research projects and group collaborations, all
carried out as part of a dynamic and supportive network, will prepare students
for their careers and foster the creation of innovative solutions to CZ science
problems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Critical Zone (CZ) science is an emerging
interdisciplinary endeavor to understand the Earth’s living skin, the layer of
the planet from the top of the vegetation canopy to the groundwater depths. The
outcomes of CZNet research will be crucial for informing future decisions about
how humans interact with the environment. CZNet-REU is a ten-week program
involving ten students each summer, recruited nationally and from schools
associated with eight Clusters in the CZ Network (CZNet). The group starts with
a 3-day Kickoff Meeting and ends with a two-day virtual Wrap-up Meeting, with
the core nine weeks spent individually or in pairs at host institutions across
the Network. Each mentor provides individual mentoring to the students and
connects them to their research group, to other students at their institution,
and to others in their Thematic Cluster. During the 9-week research period,
twice-weekly virtual workshops, seminars, discussions, and check-ins provide
professional development and enrichment, sustain group cohesion and address
student concerns. Student research milestones include lightning presentations of
research plans, a formal research proposal, updates during group meetings, a
poster presentation, and a formal research talk at a final Research Symposium.
Students will write a final report and work together on a communication product
highlighting connections between CZ and society. Targeted student outcomes of
the Critical Zone Collaborative Network Research Experiences for Undergraduates
(CZNet-REU) program include: 1) developing research knowledge and skills, as
well as interest and identity in Critical Zone (CZ) science; 2) learning to do
interdisciplinary and collaborative science in a network; and 3) connecting CZ
science to society. CZNet-REU will contribute to the field of CZ science through
student research, by broadening participation to bring new faces and
perspectives into the new discipline and by assessing the efficacy of this
innovative distributed REU model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.