* 2244707
* A dual clumped isotope approach to characterize disequilibrium in terrestrial carbonates
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Miquela Ingalls, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 07/31/2026
* USD 500,249.00

Carbonate minerals (e.g. calcite, calcium carbonate) record information about
the environment in their chemical and isotopic compositions, and are a primary
archive of how Earth’s climate system, ocean and atmospheric chemistry, and
biology have evolved through time. Continental environments experience greater
negative consequences of climate change, such as fire, drought, and floods, than
marine ecosystems, and thus it is critical that we understand how to correctly
map chemical signals in terrestrial sediments to climatic and environmental
parameters (e.g. temperature, water scarcity). Carbonates that form in
terrestrial environments often precipitate rapidly before equilibrium is
achieved between the mineral and water, skewing the chemistry recorded by the
mineral. This research will investigate the role of disequilibrium imparted
during rapid mineral formation on important climate archives through an
investigation of modern and fossil carbonates formed in lakes and wetlands in
the western US and Canada. Understanding how Earth’s surface environments and
water resources have responded to varied climate states, and in particular,
globally warm periods, is crucial in developing viable strategies to mitigate
the effects on human populations. This study will provide new context to stable
isotope-based records of land surface water availability and temperatures. The
research team will also develop in-person and virtual climate science curriculum
and STEM career programming in rural Pennsylvania high schools, and publish
virtual education modules to an open-access repository for K-12
educators.&lt;br/&gt;To understand the response of terrestrial ecosystems to
global or regional hydroclimate perturbations and hyperthermal events, we must
understand how terrestrial sediments archive paleoenvironmental information.
Carbonate minerals often precipitate rapidly—potentially before isotopic
equilibrium is achieved—within lakes, wetlands, and soils due to natural
fluctuations in temperature, water balance, and mineral saturation state.
Interpreting the isotopic compositions of these minerals as a record of
thermodynamic equilibrium can lead to significant error in temperature and
hydroclimate reconstructions. This study will characterize disequilibrium dual
clumped isotope signals (∆47-∆48) in a suite of calcium carbonate facies that
form by different mechanisms in modern (Cariboo Plateau, Canada), Pleistocene
(Mono Lake, California), and Paleogene (Green River Fm, Colorado/Wyoming/Utah)
lakes and wetlands to generate a more robust isotopic framework for interpreting
terrestrial carbonates in the geologic record at different stages of diagenesis.
Sedimentology will be partnered with isotope analyses to discern the ∆47-∆48
“disequilibrium signal”—the magnitude and trend from thermodynamic
equilibrium—for specific modes of terrestrial carbonate production. The
researchers predict that terrestrial carbonate facies that form rapidly will
record ∆47 and ∆48 disequilibrium whereas facies that form more slowly will
record equilibrium, with the facies-specific dependence due to the carbon
cycling mechanisms within each mineral formation micro-
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.