* 2244610
* REU Site:  Educating a New Generation of Astronomers in the Golden Age of Astronomy
* MPS,AST
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* Bahram Mobasher, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* James Higdon
* 05/31/2024
* USD 129,943.00

This award will support a new Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site
in astronomy supporting 8 student interns for 8-weeks at the University of
California, Riverside (UCR) with the goal of helping undergraduate students
acquire skills needed to conduct research using data acquired from the newest
generation of observatories. The participants will choose from a range of
observational, theoretical, computational, and data intensive research programs
addressing the most fundamental questions in modern astronomy. During the
8-weeks students will be instructed Python programming and data visualization
skills, career development, oral presentations, and research ethics, and will be
encouraged to publish their results. Astronomy is entering a "golden age" and
there is a clear need to train a new generation of astronomers to deal with data
from new ground-breaking telescopes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The team has built a
network of local schools, communities, and libraries, and have partnered with
the Riverside Unified School District to extend outreach activities to
minorities and their families. The REU Site program will involve interns in
outreach activities including scientific journalism, and the Python and
visualization courses will be made available to a wider community of students
and educators. The group will further develop online public presentations in
astronomical topics given by researchers in the field. Finally, public science
venues will be developed in Spanish, and aimed towards underrepresented
minorities and their families.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.