* 2244660
* Collaborative Research: Investigating formation of stagnant slabs and implications for subduction dynamics
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Lijun Liu, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 01/31/2026
* USD 333,141.00

Many decades have passed since the establishment of the theory of plate
tectonics. Scientists still debate how tectonic plates recycling into Earthâ€™s
interior evolve over time as they descend. Advances in generating 'seismic
tomographic images' of the Earth (analogous to medical CT scans) provide
increasingly detailed images of these foundered plates (or 'slabs'), many of
which are trapped about 300 to 600 miles below the Earth's surface. These images
represent a present-day snapshot of the convecting mantle, and its evolution
over time may be investigated through numerical modeling of the subduction
process. This collaborative proposal combines recent developments in data-driven
modeling and seismic tomography. Liu, Tromp, and their graduate students will
explore different ways that subducted slabs get trapped in the mid mantle, with
a focus on two competing hypotheses: that the slab is being pulled by one end
which is stuck to a plate at the surface, or (2) that it is dragged along with
horizontal flow of the surrounding mantle. This research will improve our
understanding of how the Earth's mantle flows, and how it has flowed (and how
the Earth's plates have moved) over tens of millions of years. Sophisticated
software for modeling the slabs and imaging the mantle will be significantly
improved and freely shared with other scientists via public
websites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Extensive fast seismic anomalies within the
500-1000 km mantle depth range are called stagnant slabs, and their origin has
implications for continental tectonics and mantle dynamics. A commonly invoked
mechanism is trench retreat, but the observed amount of retreat does not always
match simulations. Another frequently made assumption is that slabs sink
vertically, even though this can violate geological observations. A potential
solution to these problems is to consider lateral mantle flow at mid-mantle
depths, whose effect on slab stagnation remains poorly explored. Another
complication is the inconsistency of tomographic images of the present-day
configuration of stagnant slabs. The PI teams will collaboratively evaluate
dynamic effects of trench retreat and lateral mantle flow on slab stagnation by
designing 3D spherical Earth models through sequential data assimilation (SDA)
and comparing the results with improved tomographic images using full-waveform
inversion (FWI) with source encoding. The SDA modeling approach is appropriate
for testing key controlling parameters for slab stagnation while simultaneously
considering many other natural complexities. The improved FWI method increases
seismic resolution significantly at upper-to-mid mantle depths, where stagnant
slabs reside. Through a set of SDA models that test the available range of
trench motion histories at different geographic locations implemented in both
regional- and global-scale simulations, the team will quantify the respective
contributions of trench retreat and lateral mantle flow on the formation of
observed stagnant slabs. Ultimately, this exercise will generate new insight
into subduction dynamics and the associated tectonic
records.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.