* 2244087
* REU Site: Mechanisms of Evolution
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2026
* Eduardo Robleto, University of Nevada Las Vegas
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 02/28/2026
* USD 365,872.00

This REU Site award to the University of Nevada, Las Vegas, will support the
training of 10 students for nine weeks during the summers of 2023-25. It is
anticipated that a total of 30 students from Historically Excluded Communities
(HEC) and institutions with limited research opportunities will be trained in
the program. This program aims to provide undergraduates with hypothesis-based
projects that investigate mechanisms of evolution and promote careers in
science. The capstone of the nine-week experience is a public poster
presentation at the Summer Research Symposium. Assessment of the program will be
done through the online SALG URSSA tool. Students will be required to register
in the NSF ETAP system (etap.nsf.gov) and tracked after the program to determine
their career paths. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU Site: Mechanisms of Evolution
(MOE) project invites undergraduates to participate in research investigating
evolutionary change in prokaryotic and eukaryotic models. Mentors are faculty
members in the UNLV School of Life Sciences and the Department of Geosciences.
MOE takes a holistic approach to training undergraduates, and the co-curricular
program integrates three modules: Becoming a Scientist, Science Communication,
and STEM Careers. Becoming a Scientist asks the participants to formulate
hypotheses, analyze data, read primary literature, and complete Responsible
Conduct in Research training. The Science Communication module includes
presenting at REU group meetings and composing a research abstract. The STEM
Careers module leverages the workshops offered by the UNLV Office of
Undergraduate Research and presentations by former REU participants and current
graduate students. REU participants and their mentors will initiate an
Individual Development Plan to identify short- and long-term goals. Applications
will be accepted through the NSF ETAP website from January 1 to the first Friday
in March. The PI, co-PI, and the Program Coordinator will score the applications
by ranking the applicant’s stated interest in 1) either a STEM career or
graduate program, 2) the availability of research opportunities at the home
institution, and 3) the letter of recommendation. All REU participants must be
US citizens or permanent residents. More information about the program is
available by visiting https://www.unlv.edu/lifesciences/moereu, or by contacting
the PI (Dr. Regner, kurt.regner@unlv.edu) or the co-PI (Dr. Robleto,
eduardo.robleto@unlv.edu).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.