* 2244342
* NRT-AI: Harnessing AI for Inverse Design Training in Advanced and Sustainable Composites (IDeAS Composites)
* EDU,DGE
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2028
* Feng Luo, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 06/30/2028
* USD 3,000,000.00

Despite the vast design space of composites, there are significant gaps between
the performance, economic, and environmental targets and current design and
manufacturing approaches. Most egregious are the expensive, long development
cycles and the sub-optimal design that waste resources and may adversely affect
the environment and climate change. The fundamental cause of such gaps is the
lack of detailed understanding of the influence of the material architecture,
process methods, and parameters on material microstructure evolution and
subsequently the end product’s physical, economic, and environmental
performance. This National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT),
harnessing artificial intelligence (AI) for Inverse Design Training in Advanced
and Sustainable Composites (IDeAS), will train students through a physics-
informed, AI-based modeling and design platform which will enable the discovery
of new composites materials forms and relevant new manufacturing methodologies.
This NRT award to Clemson University will catalyze a shift in the research and
discovery pathway of the trainees via a transformative AI-age curriculum co-
instructed by academic faculty and industry researchers. The IDeAS Composites
program will train a total of 50 students; of these, 25 will be NRT-funded IDeAS
fellows and the remaining 25 would be identified as IDeAS scholars. The program
will draw trainees from computer science, data science, statistical science,
mechanical engineering, automotive engineering, and materials science and will
empower trainees with an academia–industry co-trained skill set that will ensure
their success in the AI age. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research theme of this
NRT program is focused on discovering and investigating the effectiveness of a
physics-informed, machine-learning-based inverse design platform for developing
new composite material architectures and manufacturing methodologies. The
program will train a cohort of graduate students with deep, specialized
expertise supported by broad, cross-skill knowledge, and equip them with a
unique “DNA-shaped” skill set collaboratively facilitated by both academic and
industry experts. Specifically, the program will (1) catalyze interdisciplinary
research at the intersection of AI and the inverse design of composites and
manufacturing innovation via constructing a “digital life cycle” which is a
suite of high-fidelity models for simulating a composite component’s life cycle,
investigating the application of machine-learning methods for inverse composite
material architecture and manufacturing process design, and developing an
inverse design approach for integrated material and manufacturing design; (2)
explore a combined graduate and undergraduate student training model comprising
a composites inverse design capstone and a research design, development, and
demonstration (RD&amp;D) project centering on research outcomes applied to
industry problems; (3) create a diverse, equitable, and inclusive environment
fostering interdisciplinary collaboration in which trainees are prepared for
careers requiring a unique “DNA-shaped” skill set; and (4) establish an
interdisciplinary education program to (a) prepare next-generation composites
engineering graduates (altogether 50 by year 5) who will have AI-enabled inverse
design expertise and skills necessary to meet the unique challenges of the
coming AI age and to thrive in the composites industry, and (b) train the
current workforce to enhance their knowledge and foster dissemination of AI
methods and principles in the composites engineering
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research Traineeship (NRT) Program is
designed to encourage the development and implementation of bold, new
potentially transformative models for STEM graduate education training. The
program is dedicated to effective training of STEM graduate students in high
priority interdisciplinary or convergent research areas through comprehensive
traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-based, and aligned with
changing workforce and research needs.  &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.