* 2244074
* NRT: Alabama Collaborative for Contemporary Education in Precision Timing (ACCEPT)
* EDU,DGE
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2028
* David Cruz-Uribe, University of Alabama Tuscaloosa
* Standard Grant
* Vinod Lohani
* 06/30/2028
* USD 2,997,970.00

Over one-third of the U.S. economy ($11 Trillion annually) directly depends on
precision timing. Precision timing (PT) is an integral part of our national
security. Incredibly, there is no degree program in the US dedicated to training
young talent in the timekeeping technologies that underpin our society. In
response, the University of Alabama (UA) has created the first MS and PhD
concentrations in precision timing, incorporating courses in physics,
engineering, and mathematics, developed through direct conversation with
corporate and government partners. These conversations made clear that the field
of precision time and frequency requires talent that can apply large-scale
communication and negotiation skills across multiple STEM disciplines while
considering business and national security interests as well. This National
Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award, the Alabama Collaborative
for Contemporary Education in Precision Timing (ACCEPT), will develop an
innovative graduate (MS, PhD) education model responsive to the unique needs for
precision timing workforce development. ACCEPT will provide a comprehensive
training and educational opportunity for one hundred and sixty (160) MS and PhD
students, including twenty-four (24) funded trainees from physics, mathematics,
and electrical and computer engineering. Trainees will combine coursework across
these three departments with professional development in critical areas
identified by precision timing experts (teamwork, leadership, ethics,
communication), and put their training into practice via research experiences
with ACCEPT partners, student-led initiatives, and networking at conferences and
workshops.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Precision timing (PT) is a highly
interdisciplinary field that requires a wide range of academic and processional
skillsets. Integrating them requires significant practical immersion that
includes learning, practice, and growth experiences. The NRT program team will
build a training program for versatile STEM professionals equipped to take on
leadership roles in precision timing based on three pillars: 1) an
interdisciplinary curriculum where foundational STEM courses lead to PT-focused
courses blending hands-on technology immersion and discussion-based PT seminars;
2) holistic workforce development (professional, communication, scientific) with
integrated application from day one, and 3) a sustained professional immersion
experience for students to grow technical and workforce skills in realistic use-
case scenarios. Trainees will build from a strong disciplinary foundation to
successful interdisciplinary work while integrating real-world training and
development. Trainees will learn to run a time service facility; analyze,
investigate, and optimize time signals; and innovate to make clocks more robust,
reliable, and compact. In parallel, they will gain the experience and skills
necessary to communicate with stakeholders in business, government, and defense.
This requires them to understand the importance of PT in our society, the
importance of navigating the extensive interpersonal network that is the PT
field, and to be ethically trained and grounded. The program will boost research
and education infrastructure through the creation of a scalable, transferable
template for interdisciplinary degree programs in PT. Academic departments
nationally will benefit as the program is readily scalable and transferable to
any STEM graduate program, with summative and formative evaluation approaches
informing programmatic stability. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research
Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM
graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research
areas through comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-
based, and aligned with changing workforce and research
needs.  &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.