* 2244586
* REU Site: Summer Program for Interdisciplinary Research and Education-Emerging Interface Technologies
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Eliot Winer, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* William Bainbridge
* 04/30/2026
* USD 364,500.00

SPIRE-EIT (Summer Program for Interdisciplinary Research and Education -
Emerging Interface Technologies) at Iowa State University is a 10-week summer
program for undergraduates that integrates research and education about emerging
interface technologies. Students gain hands-on research experience using
cyberinfrastructure and take brief focused classes in computer programming, 3D
graphics, and human computer interaction. For the remaining time, students
conduct interdisciplinary research projects in groups. The research projects are
presented at an end-of-the summer campus-wide research symposium in the form of
posters, demos, and a five-page research paper. SPIRE-EIT recruits with an
emphasis on underrepresented groups, preparing students for graduate education
in the interdisciplinary area of human computer interaction, an area of
importance to the U.S. economy. By including instruction on ethics and on
research-based evaluation techniques, the SPIRE gives students skills that are
useful lifelong, independent of discipline, and which students might not
otherwise encounter in a traditional engineering or computer science curriculum.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Two major trends are driving research in Emerging
Interface Technologies: a dramatic increase in interface technologies
themselves, and the ubiquitous permeation of technology into everyday lives.
Correspondingly, research questions focus on four broad areas of emerging
technologies: information visualization; mobile/ubiquitous interfaces; extended,
virtual, and augmented reality; and intelligent software agents. These research
questions will be explored through projects such as career pathways through
immersive storytelling in XR, multiagent trajectory representation in XR,
testbed for human-agent teaming behavior understanding, and adaptations to
cybersickness. Research projects are designed so that undergraduates (in teams
of three) can make a meaningful contribution. Faculty in Iowa State University's
Human Computer Interaction graduate program compete to participate in the SPIRE
and cite strong benefits from participation afterwards. Each year, the SPIRE
projects typically result in one-two professional academic conference
presentations with SPIRE students as co-authors, which distributes SPIRE
research results to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.