* 2244050
* REU Site: Nanoscale Science and Engineering at Vanderbilt University
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Janet Macdonald, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 03/31/2026
* USD 516,575.00

NON-TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Vanderbilt Institute for
Nanoscale Science and Engineering (VINSE) will host a Research Experiences for
Undergraduates (REU) site that offers science and engineering undergraduate
students the opportunity to work closely with faculty on forefront research
projects in the field of nanoscale science and engineering. The overarching
theme of the research projects are nanomaterials growth, innovation,
fabrication, and characterization. The projects are designed and chosen to build
a sense of community among the students and the participating faculty and to
expose the REU students broadly to research at the cutting edge of nanoscale
science and engineering. The students are offered training opportunities in the
integration of research with education and outreach through the Vanderbilt
Summer Academy for high school students. Additionally, to facilitate the
continued mentoring of the REU students after the research experience is
completed and enhance the probability of the students continuing in STEM
research, 'home mentors' are invited to visit Vanderbilt to participate in the
capstone events and VINSE REU alumni will be invited to meet and talk with the
students about their experiences and how this led to their careers in STEM
fields. Historical data shows that students have a heightened desire for
graduate studies, with 97% remaining in STEM and 72% entering graduate school at
institutions beyond their undergraduate institution, ensuring students obtain
the richest experience. Long term, the REU site contributes to building a
workforce educated in and motivated towards STEM disciplines and specifically,
interdisciplinary research in nanoscience and nanotechnology. The program places
strong emphasis on recruiting students from underrepresented minority groups and
schools with limited research opportunities; the REU program and the VINSE
faculty have collaborators at several institutions, including nearby HBCU Fisk
University that are committed to helping us identify potential REU students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL DESCRIPTION: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The promise
of nanoscience and nanotechnology to revolutionize our lives in multiple ways
has captured the imagination of scientists, the attention of the media, and the
general public. Nanoscience and nanotechnology are based on the ability to
synthesize, organize, characterize, and manipulate matter systematically and
precisely at the nanoscale, creating uniquely functional materials that can be
inorganic, organic or biological, or a hybrid of any two or more of these. Thus,
nanoscience and nanotechnology pose formidable challenges that cut across
traditionally distinct disciplines; to meet these challenges, interdisciplinary
training of future scientists and engineers in the broad field of nanotechnology
is of paramount importance. This is especially pertinent in light of the recent
passage of the CHIPS and Science Act. To achieve this goal the VINSE summer REU
site offers STEM undergraduates the opportunity to work closely with faculty on
state-of-the-art research projects in the field of nanoscale science and
engineering. VINSE faculty provide REU students with a true interdisciplinary
research experience in an environment where physicists, chemists, biologists,
and engineers of all disciplines collaboratively solve problems and create new
scientific understanding.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.