* 2244979
* I-Corps: Biomaterial in ligament repair
* TIP,TI
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2023
* Alexis Colvin, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a ligament augmentation device that can be implanted during
ligament reconstruction surgery to accelerate healing and protect the repair.
The typical recovery time for an overhead throwing athlete after ulnar
collateral ligament (UCL) reconstruction is one year. The support and healing
properties of this technology may accelerate the recovery process. There is a
high demand for technology that would allow athletes to return to play more
quickly after injury. This technology seeks to decrease recovery time for
athletes, improving quality of life. Ultimately, the opportunity for a faster
recovery from ligament reconstruction surgery could be available to any patient,
for any ligament or tendon. There are many other connective tissues in the body
that could also benefit from advanced biologic materials. Therefore, this
technology may advance research and development for not only elbow UCL repair
but potentially many surgeries involving connective tissue repairs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of a
biological material for connective tissue healing. This material technology
mechanically matches the material properties of a healthy ligament which can
improve healing of the repaired ligament. Additionally, this technology balances
elastic strength with absorbable biomaterials such that over time, increasing
stress can be transferred to the reconstructed ligament. Furthermore, the
porous, bioactive material of the device encourages ligament regrowth within the
graft. Together, these properties may provide the athlete with a better ligament
repair and shorter recovery time following surgery. Current elbow UCL
construction techniques require a palmaris longus tendon autograft. The extra
time required to harvest the palmaris longus tendon is responsible for increased
costs in the operating room. Additionally, the palmaris longus tendon graft
leaves the patient with unnecessary trauma. This product could obviate the need
for autograft, decreasing costs and avoiding trauma to the
patient.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.