* 2244539
* REU Site: Physics at Kansas State University, Interactions of Matter, Light and Learning
* MPS,PHY
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Bret Flanders, Kansas State University
* Standard Grant
* Kathleen McCloud
* 05/31/2026
* USD 495,442.00

This award supports the Research Experience for Undergraduates (REU) site in
Physics at Kansas State University. The site engages twelve students per year in
research projects, which include the interaction of laser light with matter at
atomic and nanoscale as well as investigations of neutrinos and elementary
particle collisions and physics education research. A wide range of projects are
available from faculty mentors that involve the undergraduates in state-of-the-
art research. Previous student have reported being better informed decisions
about careers, graduate work and/or professional school. Whether they choose to
continue in physics or a related technical field, or choose to move to a
different area, bright students making good choices early in their careers is in
the national interest.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Students will do research on how
atoms and molecules behave in intense and ultra-fast optical and x-ray pulses,
how high-performance computation can be used to predict molecular properties and
dynamics, the properties of nanoparticles in solution, and protein self-assembly
with simplified models, and will help build next-generation hardware for high-
energy particle detection, improve measurements of neutrino oscillations, and
help faculty use research-based assessment tools. This experience will be
supplemented by a series of lectures that provide the background these students
need to carry out their projects. The participants will gain experience in
explaining their research work to a variety of colleagues. Social activities,
both organized and spontaneous, will enrich this undergraduate research
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.