* 2244082
* NRT-FW-HTF: Convergent Next-Generation Robotics Training: Leadership, Entrepreneurship, and Adaptive Design amid a Changing World of Work
* EDU,DGE
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2028
* Raymond Hudson, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Denecke
* 06/30/2028
* USD 2,999,998.00

The world of work is undergoing momentous change. By some estimates, nearly half
of all occupations are at risk of being automated within the next two decades.
At the same time, labor shortages within the U.S. have compromised post-pandemic
recovery efforts and are particularly pronounced in occupational environments
with high health and safety risks. Next-generation robots can address these
challenges in industrial settings where the direct involvement of humans is
either extremely hazardous, undesirable, or simply not feasible due to inherent
barriers that limit accessibility. Educational programs are needed to provide
scientists with both the technical knowledge for developing design solutions and
the ethical understanding of issues related to deploying robotic technology
responsibly to complement the skills of future workers. To address this need,
this National Science Foundation Research Traineeship (NRT) award to the
Washington State University (WSU) will establish a multi-disciplinary approach
to training future robotics scientists, practitioners, and entrepreneurs in the
design, implementation, and implications of robotics applications within
agricultural, nuclear, and underwater settings. The project will train 52
graduate students, including 21 NRT-funded trainees in Biological Systems
Engineering, Psychology, Chemistry, Computer Science, Electrical Engineering,
Mechanical Engineering, and Materials Science &amp;
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through convergent problem-based learning in
leadership, entrepreneurship, and applied psychology coupled with a cutting-edge
technical foundation in robotics and autonomous systems, this NRT program will
produce leaders in interdisciplinary research and scholarship who are trained to
evaluate the psychosocial implications of next-generation robotic technology for
future workers. These objectives will be accomplished via: (i) multi-
disciplinary research in the areas of: soft-, micro-, and bio-robots; autonomous
systems; flexible electronics; biomimetic devices; and human-robot
collaboration; (ii) professional skills training in the areas of
entrepreneurship, leadership, supervised teaching, and the psychosocial impacts
of next-generation robotic technology on affected employee populations; (iii)
technical skills training via coursework, cross-disciplinary seminars,
conference attendance, and biweekly research team meetings; and (iv) sustained
community engagement by means of site visits, trainee internships, undergraduate
mentoring, and an annual research workshop and exposition. NRT trainees will
apply their skills beyond the classroom by participating in an immersive field
study examining the user experience or market feasibility of next-generation
robots in the areas of fruit orchard automation, nuclear waste cleanup, and
underwater rescue/repair operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Research
Traineeship (NRT) Program is designed to encourage the development and
implementation of bold, new potentially transformative models for STEM graduate
education training. The program is dedicated to effective training of STEM
graduate students in high priority interdisciplinary or convergent research
areas through comprehensive traineeship models that are innovative, evidence-
based, and aligned with changing workforce and research
needs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.