* 2244976
* CDS&amp;E: Robust Symmetry-Preserving Machine Learning: Theory and Application
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Wei Zhu, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Jodi Mead
* 08/31/2026
* USD 48,605.00

Deep neural networks (DNNs) have been a major driving force behind recent
advances in data science and engineering. An emerging theme in DNN research is
to exploit the intrinsic structure of the learning problems, such as symmetry,
to improve the data-efficiency of DNNs in the small-data regime. Recent work on
symmetry-preserving machine learning typically studies it in the ideal setting
where the symmetry transformations are perfect, whereas in reality, however,
they are usually “contaminated” by various sources of signal deformation. The
aim of this project is to rigorously measure and guarantee the deformation
robustness of general symmetry-preserving DNNs, as well as quantifying their
resulting performance gain. Results of the research are expected to advance
understanding of robust geometric deep learning, with a diverse range of
applications from computer vision to scientific computing with limited data. The
project will provide interdisciplinary training in applied mathematics,
engineering, and data science to undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching theme of
the project is to leverage mathematical tools from differential geometry,
applied harmonic analysis, and applied probability to improve the statistical-
efficiency of machine learning models. Special emphasis has been placed on the
rigorous analysis and promotion of robust symmetry-preservation that is broadly
applicable to arbitrary Lie group representations on general feature fields. In
addition, the project aims to extend the idea of symmetry-preservation to deep
distribution learning, and proposes a unified framework for data-efficient
generation of distributions with intrinsic structures including—but not limited
to—group symmetry; the improved statistical efficiency will be rigorously
quantified through sample complexity analysis. The techniques to be developed in
this project will be widely applicable across different disciplines, providing
fundamental building blocks for the next generation of mathematical tools for
the computational and geometric modeling of Big Data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.