* 2244900
* I-Corps: Data-Driven Risk Assessments for Software Vulnerabilities
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2023,06/30/2023
* Tudor Dumitras, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of technology that addresses inefficiencies in the software update
processes by complementing existing vulnerability assessment tools and allowing
practitioners to update critical vulnerabilities faster in order to reduce the
risk of attacks. The World Economic Forum ranks cyberattacks among the top 10
global risks of the decade. One of the main causes for these incidents are
exploits against software vulnerabilities. A recent survey revealed that 27% of
participating organizations were breached due to unpatched vulnerabilities. The
impact of vulnerability exploits can often be seen through infamous ransomware
campaigns which have affected several critical infrastructure sectors.
Vulnerability exploits have shifted from being primarily a financial concern, to
being a societal issue threatening the environment, national security, and even
human life. As a result, removing software vulnerabilities as a target of cyber
attackers is an urgent necessity. The government and industrial organizations
can mitigate the risk of attacks by remediating vulnerabilities within their
enterprise networks through software updates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on the development of a technology that focuses on mitigating
the impact of vulnerability exploits, which are one of the principal enablers of
cyberattacks, and can be prevented through software updates. This project will
provide novel tools to address the operational challenges involved in managing
software updates by offering automatic, data-driven risk assessments for
vulnerabilities. These tools use machine learning to learn historical
associations between vulnerabilities and attacks. During deployment, the
technology identifies newly disclosed vulnerabilities, collects publicly
available information, and uses the machine learning models to compute various
components related to the risk of exploits and attacks against these
vulnerabilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.