* 2244580
* REU Site: Drivers for Machine Learning and Artificial Intelligence Practices (MAPs)
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Olga Bolden-Tiller, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Vladimir Pavlovic
* 05/31/2026
* USD 405,000.00

Machine learning and artificial intelligence have demonstrated potential to
vastly alter the efficiencies with which we operate across a multitude of
applications. Biological systems that stand to benefit from advanced techniques
in machine learning and artificial intelligence include all areas of digital
agriculture that impact the natural earth, plants, and animals. The Research
Experience for Undergraduates (REU) Site projects represent research that
addresses some of the most pressing challenges to the sustainability of our
world, bringing together some of the most difficult challenges at the
intersection of human behavior, natural systems, and cutting-edge technology.
The project serves to offer highly specialized workforce training to students
with backgrounds in either computation or biological systems and offers training
to work across disciplines. Equipping a generation of students to work across
disciplines reveals the opportunity for addressing grand challenges with robust
problem solving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Machine learning must be able to recognize
and respond to complexities of the system, and biological applications bring a
complex set of challenges. This REU program lies in the cross-disciplinary
requirements to understand and create new advanced machine learning techniques
in complex biological systems. The work carried out by students will focus on
cutting edge techniques and emerging challenges. The REU program will bring
three groups of 10 students together for 10 weeks of research in machine
learning in biological system applications. The students will be recruited from
different academic and cultural backgrounds, with REU program goals to improve
their research skills; increase opportunities for success for underserved
students; and prepare students for graduate school and industry opportunities in
cross-disciplinary teams. We expect that all Drive for MAPs REU students will
increase their competency and fluency with respect to machine learning and
across complex biological applications. The site also strives to build
relationships with the studentâ€™s home universities to continue to expand
collaborative efforts for research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.