* 2244146
* REU Site: Semiconductor Electronics and Photonics at University of Dayton
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Imad Agha, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 03/31/2026
* USD 353,378.00

Non-Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The University of Dayton (UD) will
host a Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site that provides a fully
immersive 10-week experience for undergraduate students to perform research and
receive training in semiconductor materials, electronic and photonic devices,
and manufacturing. Each REU participant receives a stipend, housing, a partial
meal allowance, travel funds, and an allowance for materials and supplies. The
REU includes a workshop on semiconductor manufacturing, which incorporates
hands-on training at and use of the UD Nanofab Lab facility, and participants
present the results of their research at the annual UD Summer STEM Research
Symposium. Faculty mentors receive formalized mentoring training, and
participants receive a focused mentoring experience. This REU is centered on
diversity and inclusion, with recruiting efforts dedicated to recruitment of
students from minority-serving institutions. This program helps to promote
scientific progress in basic and applied scientific research in the field of
semiconductors by providing additional resources for the host institution and
research mentors, and it helps to develop a diverse workforce with the necessary
skills to succeed in the quickly growing semiconductor industry, which is
critical for the nation’s technology advancement and national security.
Additionally, much of the research at UD is performed in collaboration with the
Air Force Research Laboratory, which is located a few miles from campus, and the
REU will help indirectly support Department of Defense-related
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Summary&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The REU
program is focused on research in the field of semiconductors. Participants will
spend 10 weeks at University of Dayton (UD) performing research under UD faculty
members. The departments of Physics, Electro-Optics and Photonics (EOP), and
Chemical and Materials Engineering (CME) at University of Dayton have a long
track record in semiconductor-related research, particularly for applications
using optics and photonics. Research areas pursued by faculty at UD span the
entire spectrum of semiconductor manufacturing, from studying new semiconductor
materials to layout and design to device fabrication and testing to integrated
circuit design. Recent grants and contracts awarded to UD have included research
topics such as development of Si-based lasers and infrared detectors, phase
change materials for reconfigurable devices, development of optical techniques
for nanofabrication and nanomachining, design and testing of photonic integrated
circuits, and laser direct writing of electronic devices. REU participants
perform research under faculty members in these subject areas, often in
cooperation with graduate students from EOP or CME and other undergraduate
students in physics or engineering, which can result in conference presentations
and/or peer-reviewed publications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This Site is supported
in part by funds provided to the National Science Foundation by the
Semiconductor Research Corporation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.