* 2244716
* Comparative Regional Inequality Dynamics: Multiscalar and Multinational Perspectives
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2022,06/30/2023
* Sergio Rey, San Diego State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Tom Evans
* 06/30/2023
* USD 94,199.00

This research project will comparatively analyze the dynamics of regional
inequality in the United States and China using recent developments in
geographic information science. Because the investigators will focus on core-
periphery structure, place mobility, and scalar effects, this project will
significantly improve basic understanding of spatial inequality. This project
will advance knowledge about the dynamics of regional income inequality in a
number of different ways. It will provide a systematic study of the multi-scalar
nature of regional inequality, thereby providing a clearer picture of the
dynamics of regional inequality and its relationship to scale. It will provide
new insights about place mobility and about the core-periphery structure in
regional development, and it will provide new perspectives regarding the role of
geography in regional inequality. Project findings should prove valuable to
domestic and international organizations, such as non-profit organizations and
the U.S. and Chinese governments, giving them improved understanding of
inequality and facilitating the development of more informed policies that
address development issues in equitable ways.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Questions
about spatial inequality lie at the heart of the discipline of geography and are
of major concern to governments. While the geography of inequality has received
new attention from academics and policy makers because of the recent global
financial crisis, existing knowledge about spatial inequality dynamics is
fragmented. Furthermore, few comparative analyses have sought to synthesize the
current state of knowledge. The investigators will analyze regional inequality
across states/provinces, metropolitan areas, and counties using conventional and
spatial approaches. They will decompose overall inequality into interregional
and intraregional components. They will examine regional income mobility using
spatial Markov chain, spatiotemporal models, and decomposition techniques, which
will focus on changing core-peripheral structure and mobility of places up and
down the regional income distribution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.