* 2244180
* REU Site: Aquatic Sciences, Engineering, and Technology (ASET) REU at Clarkson University
* GEO,OCE
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Phillip White-Cree, Clarkson University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Rom
* 02/28/2026
* USD 132,152.00

Clarkson University in Potsdam, New York will host a new Research Experiences
for Undergraduates (REU) program called Aquatic Science, Engineering, and
Technology (ASET). The program will bring ten undergraduates to Clarkson each
summer for a ten-week research experience during the summers of 2023-2025. ASET
will focus on the Great Lakes-St. Lawrence River watershed environmental
research. REU interns will have opportunities to conduct research in a range of
disciplines organized in broad categories of 1) Aquatic Natural Sciences, 2)
Aquatic Sustainability Sciences and 3) Aquatic Resource Engineering. The ASET
Scholars’ research experiences will address high-need and emerging areas in
aquatic natural and sustainability sciences and engineering with an integrative
learning community through training, research, seminars, professional
development, and social activities. The program includes a programmatic emphasis
on Indigenous Traditional Ecological Knowledge of the Great Lakes-St. Lawrence
River. Student recruitment will develop cohorts that are diverse in perspective,
discipline, and demographics. The program goals are to 1) develop a Scholar’s
research experience; 2) develop a diverse, supportive, and inclusive learning
community; 3) strengthen Scholars’ skills to create and evaluate communication
products; 4) foster Scholars’ evaluation of the ethical and legal aspects in
research; 5) validate the Scholars' academic path and facilitate degree
completion in a STEM-related field; and 6) encourage Scholars to choose a career
in STEM in aquatics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ASET will expose students to a broad
spectrum of aquatic sciences, engineering, and technology topics providing
students with exposure to deep disciplinary perspectives in a research
environment, while immersing them in an inclusive interdisciplinary and trans-
disciplinary learning environment. Students will have the opportunity to conduct
research with faculty whose work focuses on topics such as bioanalytical
chemistry, electrochemistry, biosensing and environmental nanotechnology;
mapping landscapes with ground penetrating radar, electrical resistivity and
seismic reflection; the fate and transport of emerging contaminants in the Great
Lakes; ecohydraulics, harmful algae blooms in aquatic systems, as well as other
aquatic science related topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.