* 2244769
* I-Corps: Searchable, Extendible Data Archive for Neuroscience and Physiology Research
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/2022,10/31/2023
* Stephen Van Hooser, Brandeis University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a technology that allows scientists to share data, analyses, and
analysis software programs in neuroscience fields. The creation of a searchable
and accessible archive of neuroscience and physiology data and analyses will
allow academics, industry scientists to examine and re-analyze this data. This
re-examination may lead to meta-analyses and new observations that are not
possible today due to the barriers of reading primary data and analyses from
other labs. Scientists can pilot their analyses and hypotheses on accessible
existing data, and scientists and companies can develop tools that can operate
on data from many studies. Data sets will be available to teachers for creation
of educational material and tutorials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on the development of a software tool that allows an
experimenter or analyst to quickly express the file formats and data
organization type as a set of parameters. Humans and computer programs can then
search and retrieve information from the data at many levels of granularity:
from raw data to analyses and analyses of analyses. This technology may be
extended to a cloud service that allows users to post their published data in a
manner that is easily searchable and usable. Further, the architecture may allow
interested third parties to re-analyze or develop meta-analyses that are also
searchable and extendible. This archive may enable neuroscientists and
physiologists to share data, analyses, and software tools, potentially
unleashing a new era of discovery and robustness in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.