* 2244130
* REU Site: Summer Research in Physics at the University of Arkansas
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Reeta Vyas, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Robert Meulenberg
* 03/31/2026
* USD 404,626.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jointly funded by the Division of
Materials Research, the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR), and the Division of Physics, the University of Arkansas will host a
Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site that provides exciting
research opportunities to students primarily from, but not exclusively to,
undergraduate institutions in the Ozark region and surrounding states with
limited or no infrastructure to support undergraduate research. Each year, a
diverse group of students including women and underrepresented minorities in the
STEM fields are targeted for recruiting by using the resources of the UA
minority recruitment program and a network of faculty and alumni contacts at
HBCU and institutions with significant Native American and Hispanic populations
as well as students who may have not performed well in courses but show
indication of originality and creativity. The selected students participate in
experimental and theoretical research projects in nanoscale materials, condensed
matter, soft matter, biophysics, photonics, lasers, and nonlinear and quantum
optics. They acquire skills and practices essential to scientific problem
solving by working in a collaborative environment through mentoring by
experienced faculty, post-doctoral scholars, and senior graduate students. They
visit high-tech industries, participate in professional development activities
that include weekly seminars, workshops on laboratory safety, library database
searches, graduate school applications, oral and written communications skills,
a participatory scientific ethics course, and social/cultural activities with
other REU groups. The program evaluation process uses both direct measures of
student success and indirect measures (student, mentor, alumni surveys,
publications, presentations) of learning and achievements to provide guidance to
continually improve the REU program and broaden its impact. Many participants in
the REU site continue with graduate studies or find employment directly after
graduation in a STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each REU participant works on a carefully selected
research project from topics of current interest such as properties of nanoscale
materials, atomically thin material quantum devices, solid-state nanopore
fabrication for detection of DNA, novel properties of two-dimensional atomic
materials beyond graphene, structured light beams, quantum correlations in
nonlinear and quantum optics, super-resolution fluorescence microscopy, and
statistical and nonlinear physics of extremophiles and the brain. Through
engagement with their research projects for ten weeks, the participants receive
technical training in using the state-of-the art instruments, and computational
and analytical research techniques. Some students work on stand-alone short term
research projects while others help solve a small piece of a large ongoing
research project. They all contribute significantly by building a device for
data acquisition, writing software for data analysis, calibrating an instrument,
carrying out a proof-of-principle experiment or an experiment verifying a
theoretical prediction. They experience the creative process involved in
scientific research starting from the formulation of a problem to its solution,
the ups and downs, and the eventual thrill of a discovery. They participate in
group seminars, reviews of research, planning, and discussions, and through this
interaction develop a professional network of faculty and peers. At the end of
the summer, students present their research at a REU research symposium and
submit a final report in the format of a Physical Review paper. Many go on to
present the results of their research at national/international scientific
research conferences and publish papers based on their work in scientific
research journals. Each REU participant leaves having acquired scientific and
technical skills for advanced scientific research and softer skills to be a
productive and thoughtful member of the nationâ€™s scientific and technical
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.