* 2244703
* Fully Coupled Modeling of Dynamic Rupture, Wedge Plasticity, and Tsunami for Great Earthquakes in the Japan Trench
* GEO,EAR
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2026
* Shuo Ma, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Hearn
* 01/31/2026
* USD 355,358.00

The 2011 magnitude 9 Tohoku Japan earthquake is probably the world's best
observed great earthquake, but in spite of this we still do not fully understand
how it generated such a large and deadly tsunami. Dr. Ma and his student will
use sophisticated computer models to test the idea that thick deposits of sand
and clay on the seafloor can deform more in an earthquake than solid rock,
leading to more change in elevation of the seafloor and a bigger tsunami. This
could explain the huge tsunami wave along the Sanriku coast, north of where most
of the Tohoku earthquake's energy was unleashed. The computer model will be
tested using data from past tsunami-producing earthquakes in Japan, and will
also be used to understand sound waves that are generated in the ocean when a
tsunami begins. Sound waves travel through the ocean much faster than the
tsunami wave itself, and can be used to improve the accuracy of tsunami
warnings. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Ma and his student will test a hypothesis
that the large 2011 tsunami along the Sanriku coast was caused by inelastic
wedge deformation north of 38.5°N in the Japan Trench due to presence of thick
sediments, by developing a fully-coupled model of dynamic rupture, wedge
plasticity, and tsunami for the 2011 Tohoku earthquake. The fully-coupled model
ensures the most accurate excitations of ocean acoustic waves and tsunami. This
three-year project will include the following activities: (i) developing a self-
consistent dynamic rupture model of the 2011 Tohoku earthquake that can explain
important geodetic, seismic, tsunami, and differential bathymetry observations.
(ii) simulating the 1896 and 1933 Sanriku earthquakes by fully coupling dynamic
rupture and tsunami and investigating the sensitivities of ocean acoustic waves
and tsunami to shallow slip and wedge plasticity in these three earthquakes.
(iii) identifying ocean acoustic waves that can be used for next-generation
tsunami early warning systems due to megathrust and outer-rise normal-faulting
earthquakes in the Japan Trench and worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.