* 2244410
* REU Site: Soft Materials for Applications in Sustainability and Healthcare Engineering
* ENG,EEC
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* William Phillip, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Patricia Simmons
* 04/30/2026
* USD 416,980.00

This new three year REU Site entitled "Soft Materials for Applications in
Sustainability and Healthcare Engineering" hosted by the University of Notre
Dame offers ten students each year a summer research experience and preparation
for potential STEM careers. Recent advances in soft materials are empowering the
research community with the tools needed to address issues that are among the
greatest engineering challenges of the 21st century: creating a sustainable
energy future, providing potable water to the world’s population, and developing
affordable healthcare solutions. This REU site, guided by faculty across the
College of Engineering at the University of Notre Dame, will expose a diverse
cohort of undergraduate participants to state-of-the-art research in the
molecular engineering of soft materials—an interdisciplinary subject that has
historically been ignored in many undergraduate classrooms. Student recruitment
is focused on groups traditionally underrepresented in engineering and from
colleges lacking expansive research opportunities. Key program elements that
will help student researchers become independent, critical thinkers include
technical preparation, hands-on laboratory experience, professional development,
and team activities. In addition to producing impactful technical results, this
REU site will provide participants with an immersive research experience that
will encourage them (1) to enroll in or continue engineering education, (2) to
persist to joining the science and engineering workforce, and (3) to consider
research-based graduate degrees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This new three year REU
Site entitled "Soft Materials for Applications in Sustainability and Healthcare
Engineering" hosted by the University of Notre Dame offers ten students each
year a summer research experience and preparation for potential STEM careers.
The objective of this REU site is to provide a supportive and instructive
research environment for undergraduate students to develop their ability to
advance materials-based solutions for ubiquitous sustainability and healthcare
challenges. Student-centric projects will be framed using two topical areas,
sustainability and healthcare, highlighting the impact of engineering in
everyday lives. The scope of the site will span from the basic science
associated with the molecular design of polymeric materials through the
engineering approaches used to define a solution to a problem of interest. The
primary goals of the program are to 1) help students develop the critical
thinking skills needed to generate, analyze, and report technical data; 2)
educate students on the professionalism needed to succeed in graduate school and
the workforce; 3) expose students to multi-disciplinary approaches to address
grand challenges; and 4) provide students incentives for pursuing careers in
research. Entering students will be prepared for a productive experience through
a short course that complements classroom-based discussions of foundational
concepts with hands-on demonstrations of techniques. Weekly workshops covering
topics, such as science and engineering methods, communication, and careers,
will encourage students to broaden their perspectives. The synergistic
relationship between the research and educational activities will produce
impactful results and train the next cohort of diverse scientists and
engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.