* 2244893
* I-Corps: Diet and Behavior Change Software Application
* TIP,TI
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2024
* Adrian Aguilera, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 01/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a digital health intervention that provides a customizable,
accessible, and affordable approach to diet and physical activity change. The
proposed technology has the potential to reduce users’ risk of chronic illnesses
and may allow them to live longer, healthier lives. Chronic illnesses are the
causes of 71% of all deaths globally. Health care costs associated with treating
chronic illnesses place significant strain on individuals and society.
Modifiable behaviors like unhealthy diet and physical inactivity significantly
increase the risk of chronic illnesses while solutions must include a focus on
modifying health behavior. Many individuals are aware that they are at risk of
chronic illness and receive instructions from their healthcare providers about
the need to eat healthier, increase physical activity, and change other aspects
of their lifestyle, but beyond that, they receive very little tangible support
or actionable guidance. The proposed technology may provide these individuals
with personalized health advice and clear action steps to improve their health
and decrease their risk of incurring illness. A reduction in the prevalence of
chronic illnesses will translate to significant cost savings for individuals and
reduced healthcare expenditures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is
based on the development of a lifestyle and behavior change digital health
intervention including a software application and a conversational agent to
decrease the risk of chronic illness in users. The proposed software will gather
self-reported life data from individuals, including diet history, biochemical
data, and family history of illness to design a tailored diet and activity plan
based on dietitian input. The conversational agent will assess users’ level of
motivation, desire to change, and feasibility of health goals and work with
users to enhance their motivation, problem-solve barriers to plan adherence, and
sustain healthy changes. A working prototype of the conversational agent has
been developed and validated as proof-of-concept. The user design study
associated with the conversational agent revealed that users found the
conversational agent to be satisfactory, useful, and sustainable in helping them
maintain long-term health behavior changes. This technology uses a front-end
text messaging interface for communication and a backend conversational agent
using a cloud-based tool to develop and manage conversational flows. Content for
the conversational agent is grounded in psychotherapeutic techniques and
behavior change theories that have been shown to increase user adherence and
promote long-term change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.