* 2244616
* Collaborative Research: RUI: Density of Modes: A New Way to Forecast Sediment Failure
* GEO,EAR
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Theodore Brzinski, Haverford College
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Keen-Zebert
* 02/28/2026
* USD 129,057.00

Landslides, submarine slides, ground fissures, and liquefaction are geohazards
that occur when near-surface sediments suddenly fail. These geohazards can cause
loss of human life and destroy infrastructure. Unfortunately, the scientific
community has yet to devise a way to forecast these events. This work aims to
determine whether measurements of the density of excited vibrational modes
(DoM), a technique that has successfully provided a precursor signal to failure
in the laboratory context, provide a route forward. To date, this technique has
yet to be tested in natural samples. The researchers will develop the technique
first in beach sands, then possibly in more complex near-surface environments,
including for data already being collected and published by other groups.
Professors on the team will lead a diverse group of STEM students across
disciplinary boundaries, using best practices developed by experts that
emphasize collaborations and mentorship.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The ground
beneath our feet shifts over time, sometimes slowly creeping, sometimes flowing
like a fluid, and sometimes suddenly failing. These shifts cause landslides,
submarine slides, ground fissures, and liquefaction. These geohazards' frequency
and destructive capabilities have increased as global warming worsens, sea
levels rise, and extreme weather events intensify. The current state-of-the-art
lacks a reliable way to forecast these events, largely due to a lack of reliable
methods for incorporating soil-scale information into failure models. This
proposal hypothesizes that measurements of the density of excited vibrational
modes (DoM), a statistical physics quantity that provides well-established
failure precursors signals (broadening and increase in excess of low-frequency
modes) within lab-reconstituted and numerically simulated granular materials,
provides a route forward. The work seeks to answer the following questions: “How
do DoM measurements complement and correspond to bulk geophysical measurements?”
and “Does the DoM provide insight into the evolving state of naturally-deposited
sediments?” These efforts would represent the first application of the DoM
technique in the natural sediments; if successful, the translation of the
technique to Earth settings would provide a new way to identify and monitor
slope stability-related hazards within the near
surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.