* 2244191
* Research Experiences in Computational Sciences and Engineering
* CSE,OAC
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Vassilios Tzouanas, University of Houston - Downtown
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 05/31/2026
* USD 258,681.00

In response to the National Science Foundation's mission to promote the progress
of science; to advance the national health, prosperity and welfare; or to secure
the national defense, this REU Site on Computational Sciences and Engineering
exposes a diverse body of students to different problems in computational
sciences and engineering and solving them through the application of methods
from cybersecurity, data analytics, machine learning, process automation,
structural engineering, and data driven safety management. Students get direct,
hands-on experience in research projects that help address important societal
problems. Such hands-on experiences significantly enhance students’ scientific
problem-solving skills and appreciation of the role of the scientific method for
investigating and solving technical problems. Applying theory to solving real-
world problems helps solidify students’ interest in STEM and is the key to
increasing retention and graduation rates for minority serving institutions and
providing upward mobility opportunities to students from underrepresented
communities. With the program’s research activities, year-long faculty mentoring
and coaching, and continuing engagement through research presentations and
publications, the interest of participating students in STEM education are
significantly increased. The research and educational opportunities offered are
the stepping-stones in educating undergraduate students as scientists and
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This REU aims to increase and solidify the
interest and proficiency in STEM among rising sophomore, junior, and senior
undergraduate students as well as students from community colleges by providing:
a stimulating research environment; active research engagement; pursuit of new
knowledge and solutions to important societal challenges; and follow-up support
of cohorts with eight undergraduates per year for three years. Specifically,
this REU helps to achieve the following objectives by significantly improving
participating students’: 1) desire to pursue STEM careers; 2) confidence to do
well in STEM; 3) desire to pursue computational sciences and engineering related
careers; 4) desire to pursue graduate studies; 5) desire to challenge themselves
for continuous self-improvement; 6) academic performance in STEM courses; 7)
soft skills; and 8) ability and motivation to graduate with STEM degrees for
future research careers. The preceding objectives are achieved through the
implementation of the following three strategic components: i) 8-week summer
research experiences for participating undergraduate students; ii) Year-long
follow-up coaching and mentoring for participating students; and iii)
Dissemination of research results through presentations and/or publications
(locally and nationally).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.