* 2244871
* PurSUiT: Revealing undiscovered diversity and distribution of phytoplasmas through screening of potential host insects in a museum biorepository
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Christopher Dietrich, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Cathie Aime
* 04/30/2026
* USD 1,312,678.00

Phytoplasmas, a group of plant-parasitic bacteria transmitted from plant to
plant by sap sucking insects (Hemiptera, including leafhoppers, planthoppers and
jumping plant lice), were previously known mainly because they cause severe
diseases of cultivated crops. Recent screening of DNA samples from preserved
museum specimens of hemipteran insects indicated that phytoplasmas are
widespread in nature and that natural areas worldwide harbor many previously
undocumented phytoplasma strains. This project aims to uncover the true
diversity of phytoplasmas worldwide, reconstruct their evolutionary
relationships, and document their associations with insects and plants by
screening a large collection of insects preserved in a museum biorepository and
modern DNA sequencing techniques. The new data will help identify hotspots of
phytoplasma diversity worldwide, clarify the extent to which phytoplasmas have
affected the evolution of their host plants and insect vectors, and contribute
to training of a new generation of experts on phytoplasma ecology, epidemiology
and evolution. Emergence of new plant diseases may be driven by environmental
change (including climate change) that triggers the colonization of managed
habitats (e.g., croplands) by previously unknown disease agents from adjacent
natural areas. Improved knowledge on the overall phytoplasma diversity in
natural areas will greatly facilitate efforts to predict and manage new disease
outbreaks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specific goals of the project include: 1) screen
insect specimens for presence of phytoplasmas using next-generation DNA-
sequencing technology; 2) obtain partial phytoplasma genomes and host plant data
for newly detected insect-associated phytoplasmas; 3) reconstruct phylogenetic
relationships among all known phytoplasmas, classify newly discovered strains
and estimate the times of origin of individual lineages; 4) update an existing
online database to include all previously known and newly discovered
phytoplasma-host associations; 5) cultivate new expertise by training and
mentoring students in leading-edge methods for studying a diverse and poorly
known lineage of agriculturally important microbes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.