* 2244259
* REU Site: Beyond Language: Training to Create and Share Vector Embeddings across Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2026
* Junhua Ding, University of North Texas
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 01/31/2026
* USD 403,547.00

This three-year Research Experiences for Undergraduates (REU) site at the
University of North Texas will support 10 students for 10 weeks each summer and
train them to build modern artificial intelligence (AI) systems capable of
communicating their acquired knowledge across domains. State of the art AI
systems for challenging goals such as visual object recognition, speech
recognition, and understanding natural language require extensive training with
much of the learned knowledge locked into the structure of the built AI system.
However, students in this program will focus on creating and leveraging highly-
trained AI systems to re-represent information so the nuanced understanding
learned by these systems is preserved and readily accessible for other
applications. This REU brings together an interdisciplinary team to support
projects that showcase the benefits of AI systems built to provide and receive
inferred knowledge directly. Early in the program each student will identify an
application domain and an external advisor to work with among a number of
presented options. Students will also participate in a long-standing, unique AI
summer research program integrating current university students and external REU
students to facilitate collaboration across departments and student
expertise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically, the training in this REU will
allow students to more efficiently communicate the knowledge acquired by self-
supervised deep learning models. The participating students each year will
create vector representations of common terms or items that appear across
various applications, utilize those embeddings to improve prediction models, and
properly validate and document the benefit of this approach. For the first 5
weeks, the students will be exposed to different embedding strategies and
machine learning applications utilizing them, then transition to demonstrations
and trouble-shooting of their individual research efforts in the last 5 weeks.
This REU will help prepare a workforce of students not only adept at using deep
learning models but extending their functionality. Additionally, this project
will train a diverse range of students from college partners with limited
research resources to engage with diverse students in successful teams with a
Carnegie R1 federally designated Hispanic-serving
institution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.