* 2244112
* REU Site: Solar Physics at the Center for Astrophysics, Harvard &amp; Smithsonian
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Chad Madsen, Smithsonian Institution Astrophysical Observatory
* Continuing Grant
* Manda S. Adams
* 07/31/2026
* USD 193,528.00

This research experience for undergraduate program, at the Center for
Astrophysics, will pair eight undergraduate students with researchers in solar
physics to work on novel research projects for ten weeks in the summer. The
projects will comprise science projects involving data analysis or numerical
modeling, as well as engineering projects supporting ongoing instrumentation
programs. The program will target students that are undergraduates in science,
technology, engineering, and mathematics&lt;br/&gt;(STEM) disciplines with a
preference for students that are traditionally underrepresented in STEM
fields&lt;br/&gt;as well as those from institutions without strong STEM research
opportunities. In addition to the research activities, students will take part
in lectures, training sessions, and group activities intended for academic and
professional development. Students will present the results from their research
project at a professional scientific conference. The research projects will
broadly contribute to our scientific understanding of space weather, a
societally relevant hazard. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objectives of this
REU site are to a) foster participation by women and traditionally
underrepresented groups in scientific research, b) cultivate independence and
creativity in talented and promising students, and promote interest in graduate
study in physics, astronomy, and engineering, c) demonstrate how academic
knowledge acquired in the classroom applies to real-world research problems, d)
strengthen practical skills in data analysis, computer programming, theory,
numerical modeling, and communication, e) prepare students to make sound choices
concerning their near-term and long-term career trajectories, f) provide a high-
quality research experience that will produce novel scientific results, g)
develop competence and confidence in presenting scientific results in a public
forum, and h) increase awareness of solar physics as a field of
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.