* 2244845
* I-Corps:  Non-mechanical scanning for laser ranging
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2023
* Juliet Gopinath, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of an incoherent light detection and ranging (LIDAR) system using
non-mechanical beam steering with adaptive optical elements based on
electrowetting optics. The proposed technology may enable a new generation of
systems that are able to adapt to changing conditions and targets. The team will
investigate applications such as mapping, agriculture, energy and environmental
studies, and more recently, for autonomous navigation and collision avoidance
for self-driving cars, drones, and satellites. These applications are all
crucial to societal function today. For example, surveying the snow pack can be
important for hydroelectric power and drinking water estimates. Other important
applications include mapping coastlines as well as determining the health of
agricultural crops and trees to predict yields as well as fire risks. Unlike
conventional LIDAR systems, the proposed LIDAR design has operational lifetime
orders of magnitude longer due to non-mechanical components.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of an
incoherent light detection and ranging (LIDAR) system using large angle
nonmechanical beam steering with electrowetting optical components. The key
innovation uses adaptive electrowetting optics, in which the shape of a liquid
droplet to be controlled with applied voltage. This phenomenon enables
electrically tunable lenses (variable spot size and divergence), prisms
(variable steering), and custom-designed optical surfaces (variable wavefront).
Two lenses, or a prism, can provide a small amount of steering (few degrees).
When this is followed by a miniature fisheye lens, the result is a beam scanning
system suitable for LIDAR. With a typical prism scan range of 5o, results have
demonstrated nonmechanical beam steering through 180o in two dimensions using a
system design with an adjustable spot size and the ability to make patterned
beams at speeds of up to 200 Hz. In addition, the proposed technology uses a
small ~mm-scale scanner (electrowetting devices and additional optics), low
electrical power consumption (mW typical), good optical quality (comparable to
fixed microlenses), ability to match a changing situation by tuning spot size
and angle, and aberration compensation and adjustable spot size to track an
object.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.