* 2244760
* Deciphering the Drug Synergy in Pharmacological Rejuvenation of Mesenchymal Stromal Cells
* ENG,CBET
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Robert Damoiseaux, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Steven Peretti
* 05/31/2026
* USD 585,874.00

Cell rejuvenation can be achieved, in principle. The process involves
interconnected biological processes. The major challenge is to understand which
drugs can stimulate and coordinate these processes. The mechanisms of
stimulation and regulation must also be discovered and described. Artificial
intelligence (AI) will be utilized to identify effective drug combinations and
understand their working mechanisms. The initial objective is to delay aging in
lab-grown mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs). Specifically, the research team will
decipher the metabolic responses to combinations of rejuvenating drugs. To
promote diversity in engineering, the research team will advise underrepresented
undergraduates both in project-based courses and in research labs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project integrates tissue engineering, drug
screening, and machine learning. The aim is to develop a pharmacological
approach for mitigating the in vitro senescence progression in MSCs. MSCs hold
great promise for treating many currently uncurable diseases, but their
therapeutic function decays rapidly during expansion. Identifying the
appropriate pharmacologic factors that effectively mitigates senescence remains
challenging. A “combination therapy” approach for reducing MSC senescence will
be pursued and evaluated. This will entail deciphering the nonlinear and high-
dimensional relationship between the major senescence signaling pathways (i.e.,
mTOR, EGF, FGF, PDGF, and insulin). The research team will first utilize AI to
identify the combination of pharmacological factors that reduces senescence.
Subsequently, transcriptome analyses of the rejuvenated MSCs will be performed
to identify how the induced transcriptional response mitigates senescence. By
performing a targeted drug screening that perturbs the AI-predicted factor
combination, the research team will identify the underlying drug synergism that
amplifies the efficacy of the “combination therapy”. The outcome sought it to
identify an effective rejuvenation trajectory that can be reproducibly induced
by perturbing the cell culture medium supplements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.