* 2244884
* The Correlation between Tornado Formation, Intensification, and Decay and Ground Features using Rapid-Scan Mobile Radar Observations, Damage Surveys, and GIS
* GEO,AGS
* 08/15/2022,04/30/2024
* Jana Houser, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 04/30/2024
* USD 43,833.00

It has long been theorized that land surface and elevation changes play a role
in tornado formation and intensity changes. However, most studies have either
been idealized modeling efforts or case studies on a particular event. This
award will provide funding to develop a climatology of tornado interactions with
the surface with a goal of answering several pressing questions about how
tornadoes are impacted by surface characteristics. The main societal impact of
the project is the potential for improving tornado warning accuracy, which is a
significant public safety issue. The project also involves outreach and training
activities to improve public understanding of science and develop the next
generation of researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This overarching goal of the
study is to determine if statistical relationships can be retrieved that
correlate tornado formation/decay and intensity to non-atmospheric surface
features such as land cover and topography. The researcher plans to combine a
large database of radar and damage survey data with GIS-based digital elevation
maps and national land cover data sets to answer the following questions: 1)
What is the statistical relationship between topographic characteristics or
changes in topography and tornado intensity? 2) What is the statistical
relationship between land cover characteristics changes in land cover and
changes in tornado intensity? 3) Are relationships in (1) and (2) sensitive to a
tornado's intensity? 4) What is the spatial relationship between
tornadogenesis/decay locations and land cover type or
topography?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.