* 2244981
* UKRI/BBSRC-NSF/BIO: Evolving quantum mechanical tunnelling in enzymes
* BIO,MCB
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2025
* Steven Schwartz, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Engin Serpersu
* 11/30/2025
* USD 647,113.00

Enzymes are the most effective catalysts on the planet. They have the capability
of speeding chemical reactions by a factor of up to 1015 over uncatalyzed
reactions. Amazingly, after decades of research, the way this occurs is still in
many instances a mystery to chemists and biologists. In addition, while
chemistry is governed by the laws of Quantum Mechanics, there is still
controversy over the importance of quantum mechanical effects in enzymatic
reactions. The use of quantum principles would potentially allow many
technological advances such as creating bio-inspired catalysts that were immune
to low temperatures and have broader reactivities. This project explores the way
such quantum effects may be built into enzyme function using the technology
known as directed evolution. A Nobel prize winning technology that allows
scientists to create enzyme functions in the laboratory using evolutionary
principles in months rather than millennia. This project will train pre-and
post-doctoral students in interdisciplinary research and broaden their
experience by exposing them to international research
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The functions of enzymes remain a topic of
hot debate in the scientific community. Two of the most important areas of
controversy are the importance of the coupling of dynamics to enzyme function,
and what that has to do with the importance of quantum effects such as tunneling
on enzyme rate. This project explores such question through the application of
rare event sampling for enzymatic chemistry. The PI has pioneered such studies
in particular the use of Transition Path Sampling coupled with committor
distribution analysis to identify rigorous reaction coordinates. The PI has also
developed methods to include quantum dynamics via path integral simulations.
These will be coupled with directed evolution experiments of with UK
collaborators who in their projects will craft artificial enzymes optimized for
example to transfer deuterons rather than protons. These experiments coupled
with the project described will show if quantum capabilities can be built into
artificial enzymes, and just what those capabilities will allow. This
collaborative US/UK project is supported by the US National Science Foundation
and the UK Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council where NSF
funds the US investigator and BBSRC funds the UK
partner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.