* 2244695
* Collaborative Research: Effect of Vertical Accelerations on the Seismic Performance of Steel Building Components: An Experimental and Numerical Study
* ENG,CMMI
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2025
* Farzin Zareian, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Joy Pauschke
* 01/31/2025
* USD 240,000.00

This award supports research to evaluate the effect of vertical accelerations on
steel buildings during earthquakes using experiments and numerical models.
Experimental studies on the impact of vertical accelerations on building
response rarely have been conducted. Thus, numerical models cannot account for
realistic data to predict the performance of building components. In this study,
a near full-scale ten-story steel building will be instrumented to measure its
vertical accelerations when tested on a shake table. The experimental data will
be used to create numerical models to understand the behavior of beams, columns,
slabs, and other components under vertical and horizontal seismic ground
motions. The numerical models will be modified according to American design
specifications to predict the seismic performance of steel buildings designed
according to these standards and guidelines. Therefore, this research will
improve the performance of steel buildings in seismic regions of the United
States and provide much needed data for investigations on the vibration effects
of beams and slabs on building occupants. The project will also support two
Ph.D. students in the earthquake engineering field. The research outcomes will
be disseminated through reports and journal publications. This project will
contribute to the National Science Foundation (NSF) role in the National
Earthquake Hazards Reduction Program. Data from this project will be archived in
the NSF-supported Natural Hazards Engineering Research Infrastructure Data Depot
(https://www.DesignSafe-ci.org).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study is a
collaboration with the Japanese National Research Institute for Earth Science
and Disaster Resilience (NIED) research team that will test the ten-story steel
building on the 3D Full-Scale Earthquake Testing Facility (E-Defense) six-
degrees-of-freedom shake table operated by NIED and located in Miki, Japan. The
steel building includes moment resisting frames in the transverse direction and
a dual system in the longitudinal direction consisting of interior buckling-
restrained braced frames and exterior moment resisting frames. Non-structural
components will be installed on several floors, as well as curtain walls. The
structure will be subjected to ground motions with monotonically increasing
seismic intensity, and structural components are expected to exhibit nonlinear
inelastic behavior in the final stages of the experiment. The study tasks
consist of i) implementing an instrumentation network in the ten-story steel
building to collect accelerations and deformations on structural components
during three-dimensional seismic shaking, ii) creating subassembly and system
finite element models using research and commercial software platforms,
resulting in validated modeling techniques to capture the impact of three-
dimensional excitations, and iii) assessing the implications of vertical seismic
demands on the structural resiliency of steel buildings designed according to
U.S. practice. The study will produce the most complete and realistic modeling
knowledge to date on the effect of vertical accelerations on steel
buildings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.