* 2245253
* Bethe Salpeter Equation Spectra for Very Large Systems with Thousands of Electrons or More
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Daniel Neuhauser, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 06/30/2026
* USD 165,465.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Daniel Neuhauser of UCLA is developing
methods for determining the optical properties of very large molecular systems.
These properties play a critical role in broad applications of organic and
inorganic energy materials, including semiconducting nanoparticles, organic
supramolecular structures, and organic photovoltaic nanostructures. The ability
to characterize very large systems with thousands of atoms computationally is
critical for the manipulation and control of these new materials and systems,
and for the design of future systems. Toward this end, the Neuhauser group will
develop a stochastic formalism to solve the Bethe-Salpeter Equation (BSE) for
characterizing the absorption spectrum of very large chemical systems. BSE is
known to predict accurately the absorption properties of molecular and solid-
state systems. The use of these proposed stochastic methods is expected to
enable scaling up to very large systems of thousands of atoms with tens of
thousands of electrons. This work will be incorporated into a new code-based
General Chemistry course and outreach activities to underserved
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Typically the BSE is too computationally costly to
consider for molecules larger than few hundred atoms due to the generation and
application of the screened Coulomb exchange, W. The Neuhauser research group
will undertake to develoop three specific methodology advances to the BSE:
linear scaling generation of the action of W, sparse stochastic compression and
sampling for storage of huge W matrices, practically quadratic scaling of the
stochastic application of W within the BSE, a time-dependent Hartree-Fock (TDHF)
with W-based exchange kernels, and stochastic representation of first-order
dynamic corrections. Specifically, the action of the screened Coulomb
interaction will be separated into a convolutional exchange-like portion that is
to be systematically improved to resemble the true effective interaction, and a
small remainder that should easily be stochastically sampled. Together, these
innovations are expected to couple to yield a method for simulating nanoscale
systems of thousands of electrons in active orbitals. If successful, these
modification of the Bethe-Salpeter Equation are expected to have far-reaching
scientific impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.