* 2245627
* CRII: SaTC: Discerning the Upgradeability of Smart Contracts in Blockchains From a Security Perspective
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Binghui Wang, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 02/29/2024
* USD 60,408.00

Smart contracts in blockchains, which store cryptocurrencies and tokens worth
billions of USD, have transformed many important aspects of our lives, such as
finance and gaming. Smart contracts are widely believed to have strong security
guarantees as they are immutable once deployed, not even the owner of the
contract can change its code. However, a new type of smart contract, namely
upgradeable smart contract (USC), allows developers to upgrade the logic of
their smart contracts and practically breaks the security assumption. This
special type of smart contract has become increasingly prominent and has been
adopted by many major companies (e.g., Compound Finance and Opensea.io). Despite
the importance, there exists no comprehensive research that studies the status
quo of USCs in the wild and even worse, the emerging security risks that are
associated with upgradeability. This project conducts a series of novel studies
to discern the upgradeability of smart contracts in the real world.
Specifically, it answers three essential research questions regarding the
importance of USCs in the current market, different design patterns and their
strengths and weaknesses, and more importantly, the real-world security risks
with USCs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To do so, this project pioneers a practical
static analysis-based approach to effectively detect USCs based on intrinsic
characteristics, and perform further automatic behavior and security analyses.
To differentiate USC design patterns, this project develops a complete taxonomy
that can systematically characterize USCs at both syntactic and semantic levels.
Moreover, the investigator conducts the first extensive and large-scale study on
USCs to uncover and report unique designs and security risks in the real world.
Eventually, this project creates the first comprehensive USC dataset that
facilitates future research in this emerging
direction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.