* 2245529
* Equilibrium vs. Kinetic control of the CO2/SO2 ratio in the arc volcanic gases
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Shuo Ding, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 06/30/2025
* USD 309,210.00

Degassing CO2 and S from arc volcanoes is fundamental to global climate,
eruption forecasting, and cycling of volatiles through subduction zones.
Particularly, changes in CO2/SO2 ratio in the volcanic gases could be a
potential precursor to eruptions. Typically, the CO2/SO2 ratios in high-
temperature volcanic gases are used to infer the pressure of degassing due to
the different solubility and partitioning of CO2 and S species in vapor-
saturated magmatic liquid. However, there are significant discrepancies in
predicting S behavior and degassing pressures among different degassing models,
primarily due to the scarcity of high-pressure experiments constraining S
equilibrium degassing. Moreover, such an interpretation of volcanic gases relies
on the conventional assumption that degassing occurs at equilibrium in basaltic
melt. However, concentration gradients of sulfur and carbon dioxides have been
commonly observed in olivine-hosted embayments and matrix glasses, indicating
diffusive degassing of both S and CO2. Once disequilibrium degassing is
accepted, due to potentially different diffusivities of CO2 and S in the
basaltic melt, the interpretation of the CO2/SO2 ratios in high-temperature
volcanic gases also requires a revisit. This project aims at investigating the
equilibrium vs. kinetic control of the CO2/SO2 ratio in the arc volcanic gases
and evaluating the hypothesis that kinetic degassing leads to elevated CO2/SO2
ratios prior to eruptions. The results will significantly improve understanding
of sulfur behavior in basaltic-andesitic volcanic systems, instruct the
interpretation of volcanic gas data and bear significance in constraining the
ascent rates using volatile diffusion and petrological estimates of total S
outgassing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study employs both equilibrium and
decompression experiments with piston cylinder apparatus and internally-heated
pressure vessel to constrain the behavior of three major magmatic volatiles,
CO2, H2O, and S, during equilibrium and kinetic degassing. First, equilibrium
experiments between 1000MPa and 50 MPa with controlled fO2 and a basaltic
andesite will be used to constrain the sulfur behavior during equilibrium
degassing. The results will be used to test and improve existing degassing
models and serve as a baseline to compare to decompression runs. Second,
decompression experiments with buffered fO2 on the same bulk composition from
300MPa to various final pressures with slow and fast decompression rates will be
used to investigate CO2-S in the melt, H2O/CO2, and CO2/SO2 ratio in the co-
existing vapor during kinetic degassing. The experimental results can be used to
test and improve existing kinetic degassing and bubble growth model. With
updated equilibrium and kinetic degassing models, this study will construct
region diagrams demonstrating the control of kinetic vs. equilibrium degassing
on evolution of CO2/S and H2O/CO2 in the melt and in the co-existing vapor as
changing decompression rates.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.