* 2245530
* LEAPS-MPS: Artificial Intelligence Techniques for Automatic NMR Metabolomics Data Processing
* MPS,CHE
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2024
* Bo Wang, Florida Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Anne-Marie Schmoltner
* 10/31/2024
* USD 205,280.00

This award is funded in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of 2021 (Public
Law 117-2). In this project, funded by the Mathematical and Physical Sciences
Directorate and the Chemistry Division, Professor Bo Wang and his students at
North Carolina Agricultural &amp; Technical State University (NCAT) will develop
tools for analysis of chemical data that would be easier to apply for non-
specialists. The data are related to environmental and health studies and will
be obtained using Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) methods. The novel way of
data processing will use artificial intelligence (AI) methods. This research
could have significant impacts on health monitoring by providing fast analysis
of complicated data sets. The research is likely to inspire students at the PI's
institution, which is a Historically Black College or University (HBCU). Prof.
Wang’s plans for broadening participation in STEM by underrepresented minority
(URM) students include introducing students to applied data science and AI
methods, which are very marketable job skills but are not taught regularly at
the undergraduate level. Opportunities for independent interdisciplinary
research projects will be provided and a new course will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The identification of metabolites will be
improved using AI techniques applied to analysis of 1D and 2D NMR data. NMR has
high instrument reliability, but there is a common problem of data overfitting.
This new method will provide improved ways for extracting peaks in complex
spectra. Training data are freely available from published literature and Prof.
Wang’s own studies, and the method will be tested with data recorded by
Professor Wang’s group. Methods developed will help make metabolomics and other
sophisticated NMR-based research accessible to a broader range of scientists.
This research will be integrated with education through course and curriculum
development, and the introduction of an educational website. Summer workshops
will also be conducted. &lt;br/&gt;ucted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.