* 2245920
* CRII: III: Metadata-guided Imbalance-Modeling for Robust Computational Healthcare
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Xiaolei Huang, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Yang
* 07/31/2025
* USD 190,960.00

Imbalance naturally exists in health data from text messages to electronic
health records, which dampens the reliability, robustness, and trustworthiness
of building computational healthcare models. However, existing methods ignore
the imbalance's fundamental causes, metadata, such as demographics (e.g., gender
and age), geolocation, and data sources. For example, given two cancers in a
dataset, lung and breast cancers, while lung cancer is more frequent overall and
in males, breast cancer occurs less frequently than lung cancer and more
frequently in females, demonstrating imbalance patterns vary across metadata
(gender in this case). Metadata includes essential information to describe the
diversity and imbalance natures of health data. However, few studies have
considered the diverse imbalance patterns across metadata factors, which has
posed urgent needs and unique challenges in promoting robust and reliable
imbalance modeling. This project proposes novel learning strategies that guide
imbalance modeling by metadata and incorporate the varied imbalance patterns
(e.g., breast cancer frequency for males and females) into training machine
learning models. The general goal is to create reliable, open-source tools that
other health researchers and practitioners can easily adopt. For example, one
particular project outcome will be improving the machine learning classifiers
for late effect assessments of pediatric cancer treatment at the St. Jude
Children's Research Hospital. Materials (e.g., publications) and education
activities will raise awareness and empower decision-making for health
stakeholders with actional methods of developing and deploying machine learning
on imbalanced healthcare data with rich and diverse metadata, such as
demographics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create a novel metadata-
guided imbalance-learning framework by meta-learning that can achieve reliable
and robust machine learning across different metadata factors. The investigator
will start with individual metadata at a time, develop novel extensions to joint
imbalance learning across multiple metadata factors (e.g., gender and disease
category), and propose a self-adapting weighting mechanism to balance different
metadata and prevent meta-learning overfitting. Finally, the investigator will
propose an unsupervised generative model to infer missing metadata attributes,
which jointly works with the imbalance-learning framework. While the framework
generally aims to promote model robustness, the method can also apply to
demographic fairness due to its goals to achieve balance performance across
demographic groups. This project will examine and evaluate the proposed
framework on a variety of health data by 1) new settings on different metadata
factors and 2) effects and sensitivities of metadata factors for imbalance
learning. Specific deliverables include developing a novel meta-learning toolkit
with broad utility and educational activities to train the next-generation
computational healthcare workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.