* 2245153
* Collaborative Research: CDS&amp;E: An experimentally validated, interactive, data-enabled scientific computing platform for cardiac tissue ablation characterization and monitoring
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Suzanne Shontz, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Stephanie George
* 07/31/2026
* USD 283,686.00

Radiofrequency cardiac ablation therapy – the use of heat delivered to destroy
abnormal heart tissue that causes rhythm disorders (performed using catheters
inserted into veins or arteries) - provides an effective and, compared to heart
surgery, a less invasive treatment option. Unfortunately, as many as 50% of
ablation patients experience the return of disease due to incomplete tissue
ablation. Successful treatment requires continuous ablation lines that induce
permanent thermal damage to the tissue, achieved by sufficient exposure of the
tissue to high enough temperatures to ensure cell death. The investigative
team’s expertise in heat transfer theory, image computing and visualization,
biomedical modeling and simulation, and experimental validation will be
leveraged to better understand the physiological mechanisms that govern the
transfer of heat into biological tissues by modeling and quantifying tissue
responses to thermal energy. This research will help characterize the thermal
injury delivered to the heart tissue during therapy, and will, therefore, have
the potential to evolve into a future tool to better guide and monitor cardiac
ablation therapy. This project also features a synergistically integrated
education and outreach program that will foster research opportunities for
graduate and undergraduate students in computer science, biomedical engineering,
mathematics, and imaging science at Rochester Institute of Technology and the
University of Kansas. The team will also develop innovative hands-on workshops
to inspire and educate K-12 students from underrepresented groups on biomedical
computing and medicine. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful treatment of cardiac
arrhythmia via ablation therapy requires the delivery of continuous ablation
patterns that induce permanent thermal damage to the tissue, achieved by
sufficient exposure to cell death temperatures and above. However, temperature
readings inside the beating heart are invasive and infeasible. Hence, intrinsic
knowledge of the heat transfer mechanisms and their effects on the tissue (e.g.,
temperature distribution, lesion geometry, quantification of induced thermal
damage) is critical to understanding tissue response to thermal energy.
Moreover, to enable intra-operative thermal monitoring, rapid, interactive
characterization and visualization of the thermal lesions is equally critical.
To better understand the physiological mechanisms that govern heat transfer into
biological tissues, this project will capitalize on the investigating team’s
cross-disciplinary expertise spanning fundamental heat transfer theory, image
computing and visualization, biomedical modeling and simulation, scientific
computing, and experimental validation to develop an intelligent computational
framework to model and quantify tissue response to thermal energy. To rapidly
characterize and visualize the ablation lesions, the team will research
computationally-efficient thermal damage reversibility metrics operating in
concert with voxel-derived, high-order meshing methods, which allow for rapid
quantification of tissue temperature and lesion characterization. Previously
developed numerical verification techniques will be utilized to assess the
performance of the developed ablation modeling framework. Lastly, this project
will also leverage the team’s expertise in building experimental test beds
featuring in vitro constructs and ex vivo tissue samples to compare model-
predictions and experimental lesions using infrared imaging, temperature
measurements, and tissue staining. The developed framework will be released to
the scientific computing community for research and educational
use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.