* 2245894
* CRII:SCH:Self-Supervised Contrastive Representation Learning for Medical Time Series
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Xiang Zhang, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Yang
* 05/31/2025
* USD 175,000.00

Medical time series data includes an individual's medical data that are
collected over a period of time. The data can include a variety of physiological
information, such as brain activity, heart rate, and/or blood pressure. By
analyzing medical time series data, researchers and healthcare providers can
gain a better understanding of how a patient's health is changing and make
predictions about future outcomes. Artificial intelligence (AI) models can be
very helpful in uncovering insights from medical data and understanding the
progression of a disease. However, using AI techniques can require a large
number of high-quality professional annotations (notes by healthcare providers),
which can be costly and hard to obtain. For example, while devices in intensive
care units can continuously monitor vital signs, physicians may only have the
time to review and annotate a small portion of the data to note important
events. Moreover, the annotations may not be reliable because doctors may have
different opinions patients or events. To this end, this project will build
innovative technologies to provide insightful understanding of a patientâ€™s
health with minimal expert input. Overall, this project aims to promote the
development of smart healthcare, relieve the burden on physicians, and enhance
the quality of life.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a novel
self-supervised contrastive framework to learn representations from medical time
series data. Specifically, the project will focus on the following tasks: (1)
developing a frequency-aware contrastive framework for unimodal time series
data, which leverages the cohesion between time-based and frequency-based
representations of the same sample; (2) applying the established framework to
analyze Electroencephalography (EEG) signals for the diagnosis of Alzheimer's
Disease (AD); (3) extending the framework to multimodal medical time series data
by constructing a medical graph that models the dependencies among diverse
medical entities and integrates representations through graph message passing;
and (4) applying the resulting model to predict clinical outcomes using
multimodal vital signals, with a focus on improving interpretability through the
learned graph attention weights. The investigator will disseminate the benefits
of self-supervised methods to the medical community, and organize special issues
and workshops to promote research in weakly-supervised methods for healthcare.
This project, thereby, will further lay the groundwork for augmenting the
medical system with advanced AI models, and reduce the burden on physicians by
accelerating the decision-making process. For education in the interdisciplinary
area of AI and healthcare, this project will deliver pioneering knowledge to
students while providing real-world case studies and practical materials to
young scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.