* 2245634
* I-Corps: Developing an eye tracking algorithm that will assess the changes in depression, anxiety and other neurological insults
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2023
* Maarten Lansberg, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 11/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a comprehensive communication-detection solution using eye
tracking for patients with communication loss due to neurological insults like
stroke. Communication loss also can be accompanied by loss of motor control,
followed by decrease in social interaction and depression. Such patients are at
high risk for another stroke or other neurological insults. There is no single
solution available to the speech pathologists who use paper-pencil tests as
standard practice for diagnosis and rehabilitation. There is also no monitoring
or mental health help provided at follow-up despite the fact that these
communication disorders in older adults are a chronic condition and require any
solution to be continuously adapted to their needs. The intended primary
customers are speech pathologists who can remotely access the content and upload
and monitor progress continuously. The goal of the proposed technology is to use
eye tracking to provide a communication platform between caregiver and patient,
increasing social interaction and reducing depression. In addition, the proposed
eye-tracking algorithm may provide mental and physical progress to the provider
as well as detect the next stroke. Future iterations may reduce the $4 billion
healthcare costs per year in this population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps
project is based on the development of an eye tracking algorithm to assess the
changes in depression, anxiety, and other neurological insults. The proposed
technology utilizes existing eye tracking technology available in the Apple® AR
kit to optimize the capture and delivery of standardized stimuli (pictures and
words) digitally to another device, and use the metrics for the detection
algorithm. This proposed method may be optimized for two environmental
scenarios: acute in-patient settings and outpatient/in-home settings. A
prototype is under development to test this method for detection and tracking of
user gaze vectors for object recognition for clinical stimuli generated
individually for each patient. Previously, eye tracking technology has been
tested for detection of traumatic brain injury. The goal is to fuse gaze
information with all other available sources of data (stimuli presented,
information from previous visits including baseline results, self-report and
guided assessments, and expert clinical feedback). Fused features will then be
used to recognize a required “event/state of interest" defined as any event or
condition that is used for prediction in the decision system. Pilot and patient
data using this technology may provide a comprehensive method for speech
pathologists that allows communication, monitoring and
detection.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.