* 2245092
* Collaborative Research: Microneedle-mediated Adaptive Phototherapy (MAP)  for Wound Healing
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2022,11/30/2024
* Albert Kim, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 11/30/2024
* USD 250,000.00

Chronic wounds impact over 6.5 million individuals in the United States
annually, and the costs exceed $25 billion, posing a significant risk in public
healthcare. In healthy conditions, a highly efficient innate host defense system
continually monitors and heals the wounds in an orderly and timely manner.
However, the prevalence of diabetes, obesity, poor circulation, neuropathy,
difficulty in moving, or aging can cause wounds unresolvable for several months.
Further complications such as a particular microbial consortium can cause
destructive inflammation, often resulting in significant morbidity. To
effectively manage the wound, this research develops the next-generation wound
treatment that enables simultaneous wound healing and antimicrobial effects by
exploring a microneedle-mediated, wound state adaptive (via pH level), localized
phototherapy. We henceforth call it a Microneedle-mediated Adaptive Phototherapy
or MAP wound dressing. Combined, the MAP wound dressing that integrates self-
diagnosis and autonomous treatment may lead to a translational solution for
wound healing. This collaborative research will integrate the scientific
findings and discoveries with educational venues for mentoring graduate students
in research, generations (K-12 to lifelong learners), and two institutes (Kansas
State University and Temple University).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Central to this
research project is a new approach of a one-of-a-kind in-situ phototherapy,
Microneedle-mediated Adaptive Phototherapy (MAP) wound dressing that uniquely
enables longitudinal 3D spatial wound sensing and multifunctional pH-sensitive
treatment, aiming at physical tissue healing and pathogenetic bacterial
infections. The central hypothesis is that the MAP can autonomously treat
chronic wounds, controlled by the state of the wound (i.e., pH level), without
the need for any electronics or interaction with medical professionals.
Depending on the regional state of the wound, the MAP wound dressing positions
the microneedles either in the highly bacterial active region or the acute
wounds. Simultaneously, the MAP changes its body color depending on the wound
state and converts the natural light into blue for sanitizing or red light for
accelerating tissue regeneration. The light delivery occurs through microneedles
tips, allowing localized phototherapy. Notably, the MAP wound dressing includes
conduits for 1) the advanced diffraction microlithography technique that
realizes complex 3D structured microneedles, which will act as an optical
waveguide with an innate lens effect; 2) the wound state-driven self-actuation
using pH-sensitive micropatterned hydrogel and adaptive optical filter by
infusing pH dye in the hydrogel; and 3) ex vivo studies to build preclinical
data for chronic wound sensing and treatments. Therefore, a novel wound dressing
aimed at deep light penetrating, the adaptive wavelength converting PBM therapy
could be a superior substitute for conventional wound
dressing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.