* 2245854
* IRES Track 1: International Research Experiences for Students: Phase II: Into the Magmatic Roots: Interactions Between Magmatism, Tectonics, and Sedimentation
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Jennifer Lindline, New Mexico Highlands University
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 04/30/2026
* USD 277,389.00

New Mexico Highlands University (NMHU) plans to engage at least five U.S.
undergraduate/graduate students for 5+ weeks per year over the grant period (15+
students total) in geology field and laboratory work in the Czech Republic and
Poland. The impacted students (majority Hispanic, Native American and female)
are among those targeted by NSF for increasing representation in STEM. This
project will advance the mission of NSF by training and fostering research for
underrepresented students and serve NMHU's mission to provide student research
opportunities. A distinctive scheme of the International Research Experience for
Students (IRES) Phase II is that it involves supporting a Fine Art and/or Media
Arts graduate student each year to travel with the cohort to document the
geologic activities and cultural aspects of the travel. The mixing of these
students into the scope of the project will bring a fresh perspective to fully
realize the scientific aspects and to visually communicate the societal impacts
of IRES Phase II. The work plan balances the needs of scientific inquiry and
student training. It will further the reputation of NMHU â€“ New Mexico's premier
Hispanic serving institution. The research collaboration capitalizes on the
expertise of the PIs and mentors to study earth system process using a diverse
tool set. The proposed activities will explore creative and transformative
concepts advancing our knowledge of the ancient volcanic systems and
understanding how the natural environment is intertwined with the cultural
heritage of the region. The physical and digital media products will be shared
with the general public to detail how and why geologic research is conducted and
document the excitement of geologic discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
objectives of the IRES Phase II research endeavors are to scrutinize the roots
of the magmatic-plutonic system, aspects of the driving tectonics, and resultant
sedimentation. IRES Phase I investigations (2017-2022) provided important
constraints on the growth, evolution, and deformation of the shallow magmatic
systems (&lt;1 km). IRES Phase II focuses on windows of exposure into the deeper
magmatic plumbing and emplacement system (&lt;2-10 km depth) along with clastic,
lacustrine, and fluvial sediments deposited due to the volcanic-tectonic
activity. Our methods include: 1) primary field observations of igneous and
sedimentary fabrics, structural measurements, and sample collection for
petrologic, paleomagnetic, and rock magnetic analysis and 2) geophysical surveys
to map the subsurface structure and inform overall interpretations. Each
mentor's expertise and the laboratory facilities at NMHU, Czech Republic, and
Poland will be accessible to support the U.S. IRES students. The proposed
activities will explore creative and transformative concepts advancing our
knowledge of the magmatic-plutonic system by asking: Do we see vertical or
lateral magma flow in the "deep" part of the magmatic system? Do we see a change
in fabric orientation from magmatic to tectonic and at what structural level(s)?
Questions related to tectonics and sedimentation include: What are the tectonic
and depositional settings of the post Variscan basins during the early
Paleozoic? What is the nature of Neogene sedimentation associated with the Eger
graben in Czech Republic? Do clast compositions indicate a local provenance or a
more regional source rock? Can depositional facies be used as piercing points
for constraining fault offset? IRES Phase II will provide critical data on these
and other research topics. The project will expose students to multidisciplinary
approaches to geologic research, build the next generation of geoscientists
poised with important transferable skills (critical thinking, communication,
multivariate data analysis, and global competency), and involve students in
collaborative research that challenges long-standing models of orogeny, igneous
activity, and select depositional histories in parts of
Bohemia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.