* 2245629
* Collaborative Research: NSFGEO-NERC: The history of the Earth's magnetic field strength over the last five million years: Filling in the southern hemisphere gap
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2025
* Courtney Sprain, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Panero
* 06/30/2025
* USD 127,684.00

Earth's magnetic field, generated in the Earth’s core, plays a vital role in our
daily lives. It not only guides compass needles, but it also acts as a
protective shield, deflecting harmful solar and cosmic particles. However,
fundamental questions about the history and variation of this magnetic field
remain unanswered. One intriguing hypothesis is the presence of a persistent
hemispheric asymmetry, supported by long-term data compilations spanning five
million years. To delve into these mysteries, this project will undertake a
comprehensive research project, employing innovative experimental and analytical
strategies while focusing on the Southern Hemisphere to address significant gaps
in reliable data. This endeavor aims to provide a clearer picture of the ancient
magnetic field and its evolution over time. Apart from unraveling the Earth's
magnetic history, this project has broader significance for both science and
society. Understanding the behavior of the magnetic field holds great potential
for advancing various fields of study, such as geophysics, climate science, and
space weather forecasting. By meticulously collecting and analyzing new samples
from Southern Hemisphere locations, combined with a comprehensive reanalysis of
existing datasets, the research team aims to refine our knowledge of the
magnetic field's strength over the last five million years. These efforts will
enhance our ability to interpret paleomagnetic records and improve the accuracy
of models used in diverse scientific disciplines. Furthermore, this project is
committed to fostering education, diversity, and knowledge dissemination. It
actively supports participation of underrepresented groups and promotes the work
of an early career female scientist. Extensive educational resources, including
teaching curricula and open-source software packages, will be further developed,
allowing Earth Science majors to learn about paleomagnetism and Python
programming. The team is also deeply engaged in the development of the MagIC
database, facilitating open access to valuable paleomagnetic data and
encouraging collaboration within the scientific community. By adhering to the
principles of Findable, Accessible, Interoperable and Reusable (FAIR) data and
Open Code, the project ensures that all data generated, and the code used to
interpret the data, will be readily accessible, enabling further research and
discoveries. This is a collaborative proposal between scientists at the
University of California San Diego, University of Florida, and Liverpool
University, and is therefore co-funded by the National Science Foundation (NSF)
and the United Kingdom’s Natural Environment Research Council
(NERC).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project aims to address the
fundamental questions surrounding the Earth's magnetic field. Specifically, it
focuses on understanding the presence of a persistent hemispheric asymmetry,
which has been supported by long-term data compilations covering a span of five
million years. The project proposes a multi-pronged approach, encompassing
experimental, analytical, and sampling missions targeting the Southern
Hemisphere. The research team will employ an optimized experimental and analysis
strategy, combined with new sampling missions, to address gaps in the global
paleomagnetic database. By collecting samples from Southern Hemisphere
locations, they aim to enhance the representation of this region in the database
and improve the understanding of the magnetic field's behavior. Additionally,
the team will conduct a meticulous analysis of existing datasets to obtain a
more accurate depiction of the ancient magnetic field over time. To ensure the
reliability of the obtained estimates of ancient field strength, the project
incorporates rigorous data analysis and robust experimental protocols.
Furthermore, the researchers will provide precise dates for successful
paleomagnetic intensity estimates, contributing to the overall quality and
accuracy of the data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.