* 2245080
* I-Corps: A digital health diagnostic technology that provides a multilingual, multimodal, and multidimensional pain management tool
* TIP,TI
* 07/15/2022,09/30/2023
* ShinYe Kim, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 8,614.00

The broader impacts/commercial potential of this I-Corps project - CIPDAR
(Culturally Informed Pain Diagnosis and Relief) - are potentially three-fold.
The first benefit is a reduction in health disparities by improving both verbal
and non-verbal communication between Limited English Proficiency (LEP) chronic
pain patients and healthcare providers, resulting in greater diagnostic accuracy
and improved treatment outcomes. The second is savings in time and money as
improved diagnostic accuracy can eliminate unnecessary testing and lead to more
effective treatment plans over shorter timespans. The third benefit is cost-
effective adaptability to other diseases, such as chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease, diabetes, and cancer. CIPDAR will also add significant knowledge to
pain science, as well as health communication, including management and
diagnostic best practices. By including cultural norms and fluency in other
languages, CIPDAR can not only re-engage disenfranchised LEP patients, but
improve their trust in the healthcare system by leveraging culturally and
linguistically informed content and resources. The families of chronic pain LEP
patients can also use CIPDAR to not only help advocate for their loved ones, but
to better understand their needs when a condition has no
cure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project, CIPDAR (Culturally Informed
Pain Diagnosis and Relief), offers more than a simple translation service for
Limited English Proficiency (LEP) chronic pain patients. Using a patient-
centered approach, it incorporates culturally specific terms, phrases, and
relevant questions to improve patient-provider communication. All features are
designed and written by bilingual individuals, ensuring that patients receive
accurate information that is also culturally and linguistically congruent. The
technology integrates biopsychosocial interventions and techniques to better
equip LEP patients with pain management tools, such as online modules that teach
time management, work-family balance, and medication tracking. CIPDAR not only
measures pain via patient self-reporting strategies, but also by analyzing non-
verbal behaviors (e.g., gestures, movements, and facial expressions), providing
multiple data streams for more informed pain assessments. By offering
biopsychosocial interventions along with improved patient-provider
communication, CIPDAR will address the detrimental effects of misdiagnosis,
ineffective treatment, and medication misuse. It will empower LEP patients with
chronic pain to advocate for themselves without having to rely on family members
acting as translators or on simple, culturally-uninformed commercial
translations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.