* 2245344
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Automatic Detection and Repair of Side Channel Vulnerabilities in Software Code
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Ruzica Piskac, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 06/30/2026
* USD 223,051.00

In the field of cryptography, a side-channel refers to any information that can
be obtained from a cryptographic system through means other than the expected
output. Power and electromagnetic side-channel vulnerabilities occur during the
execution of the cryptographic algorithm when the power consumption of the
system varies depending on the secret data being processed, which can
inadvertently reveal sensitive information. Constant-power techniques are used
to prevent the leakage of sensitive information through power side-channels.
However, writing such code is challenging even for expert cryptographers. To
this end, this project helps advance the state-of-the-art in developing code
free of power and electromagnetic side channels. The project’s novelties are in
that it develops automated methods to assist software writers, including non-
experts, in finding potential locations of the power and electromagnetic side-
channel vulnerabilities in their code. Additionally, the research develops
methods to repair the code after a potential problem in the code has been
identified. The project's broader significance and importance lie in the design
and realization of methods and frameworks to protect critical user data and code
from side-channel attacks that could be used to leak valuable or private
data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project creates methods and tools that combine
dynamic analysis with symbolic analysis techniques to identify the most
vulnerable locations in software code. Dynamic analysis techniques involve
dynamic taint tracking and random testing, while symbolic analysis techniques
include relational or differential symbolic execution, satisfiability and
optimization modulo theories, and model counting. The tools and algorithms
developed in the project leverage the Hamming weight and distance leakage
models. These models rely on the fact that power consumption of the system
varies depending on bit flips at registers while sensitive data is being
processed. Therefore, the methods develop new register analysis techniques that
use dynamic and symbolic execution of low-level code, such as binaries or
intermediate representations. In symbolic analysis, the method derives a formal
representation of this phenomenon at each intermediate variable or register that
holds values related to sensitive data being processed. Additionally, this
project develops new methods to repair vulnerable code locations using a syntax-
guided synthesis approach. It also relies on the Hamming weight leakage model
and symbolic analysis of code, as well as test-vector leakage assessment on real
hardware to accept or reject candidate repairs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.