* 2245223
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: Securing Interactions between Driver and Vehicle Using Batteries
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Kang Shin, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 06/30/2026
* USD 211,611.00

The goal of this project is to develop a novel vehicle theft protection called
BVI (Battery-based Vehicle Immobilizer). The project’s novelties lie with the
use of 12/24V automotive batteries as a physical channel to monitor and control
the interactions between drivers and vehicles. BVI is driven by unending vehicle
thefts due mainly to the inability of key- or keyfob-based vehicle immobilizers,
which usually rely on vulnerable external wireless communications and in-vehicle
networks, to prevent thefts. The project’s broader significance and importance
are multi-fold. BVI is to make significant socio-economic impacts by securing
vehicles, and thus benefitting all parties in the transportation ecosystem:
increasing revenue and boosting brand loyalty for car makers; providing
owners/drivers with stronger protection of their vehicles and thus reducing
their financial loss and mental stress due to vehicle thefts; facilitating
personalized insurance coverage to increase social welfare. BVI’s easy
deployability facilitates tech-transitioning, and also offers the project
participants (graduate and undergraduate students, including those from
underrepresented minorities in computing) multi-dimensional training
opportunities and competence. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;BVI consists of three key
research components that are physically isolated from these common cyber-attack
vectors, with the main tasks to design (i) two authentication systems to verify
each legitimate driver using battery voltage/current as the identity carrier,
(ii) an adaptive and thermally-robust power control module to reduce/restore the
battery’s power capacity to dis/enable vehicle access, and (iii) four important
functions to enable BVI as an end-to-end vehicle immobilizer that is compliant
with the IEC 60839-10-1 standard, including estimation of vehicle status,
detection of weak/faulty vehicle batteries, detection of illegitimate vehicle
accesses, and automatic recharging power supplies to relieve drivers from
maintenance burden. BVI is designed as a second-factor authentication solution
that is complementary to car keys or keyfobs, and can also be extended to
replace them, opening a new era of secure and keyless operation of
vehicles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.