* 2245240
* Modeling Energy Dynamics and Thermal Transport in Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* David Leitner, Board of Regents, NSHE, obo University of Nevada, Reno
* Standard Grant
* Ryan Jorn
* 06/30/2026
* USD 465,089.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor David Leitner of the University of
Nevada, Reno is developing computational methods to study heat flow through
molecules and its impact on facilitating chemical reactions on metallic
nanoparticles. Metal nanoparticles can be heated remotely using light, and the
excess heat can in turn facilitate chemical reactions involving molecules that
are attached to their surfaces or are otherwise near the metal nanoparticles.
The reactions that will be studied include formation of larger molecules by
combining smaller ones, as well as enhancement of reactions rates involving
proteins, the molecular machines of the cell, when a nanoparticle is attached.
The research that will be carried out involves materials chemistry and
biophysical chemistry, both areas of great and expanding opportunity for the
graduate and undergraduate students who will participate, with applications to
nanotechnology and medicine. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the Leitner
group will develop computational methods to study thermal transport in molecules
attached to plasmonic nanoparticles in solution. The methods will be applied to
model vibrational population dynamics and the approach to steady state thermal
transport in molecules attached to metal nanoparticles in condensed phase
environments. The information gained from the applications will help explain
mechanisms by which plasmonic nanoparticles catalyze chemical reactions. Other
approaches will be developed to identify pathways for energy transport in
biomolecular complexes, some of which could be activated by metal nanoparticles
placed near the biomolecular complex to enhance enzyme catalysis. Computer
programs developed for this project will be made available for wider use. Dr.
Leitner will continue efforts to promote interactions between researchers in
fields related to those of the proposed work by organizing meetings, and to
develop interactions between researchers in different disciplines at the
University of Nevada, Reno, serving as Director of the universityâ€™s Center for
Advanced Studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.