* 2245484
* CDS&amp;E: Data-driven modeling and analyses of CO2 transport in porous media
* ENG,CBET
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Aaditya Khanal, University of Texas at Tyler
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 03/31/2025
* USD 223,567.00

The geological sequestration of CO2 is considered one of the most effective
strategies to mitigate the adverse effects of climate change due to the CO2
emitted from significant stationary anthropogenic sources. However, successful
implementation of large-scale CO2 sequestration involves operational
uncertainties and risks due to the complex flow behavior of CO2 in subsurface
conditions. This proposed research will develop computationally efficient data-
driven models to accurately predict and analyze the complex flow behavior of CO2
flow in geological formations by analyzing an extensive set of data collected
from experimental and numerical studies. This project connects the fundamental
topics covered in core chemical engineering courses at University of Texas (UT)
Tyler to hypothesis-driven research, which promotes maximum participation of
students equipped with the tools needed to make meaningful contributions to this
work. Furthermore, this project involves outreach activities to recruit and
attract students from under-represented populations, in collaboration with UT
Tyler University Academy and Tyler Junior College, to the critical areas of
climate change and sustainable energy production. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research activities are organized into three focus areas, the results
from which will have a significant influence on the modeling of the diffusive,
reactive, and convective transport of CO2 in porous media saturated with brine
and consisting of geological uncertainties: (1) Quantify and predict the
dissolution and precipitation of minerals such as calcite at different
temperatures, pressures, and initial cation concentrations due to the
interaction with CO2 using experimental data; (2) Evaluate the effect of
porosity and permeability on the flow behavior of CO2 using high-resolution
images of core samples collected from public data portals; (3) Visualize, and
quantify the effect of discrete fractures and uncertain reservoir properties on
channeling and plume migration of CO2 in porous media using images and data from
public repositories. The generated or collected data will be analyzed in each
case using robust statistical models to achieve the project objectives, which
will lead to potentially transformative technologies to improve long-term carbon
storage in deep saline aquifers. Finally, this research project will increase
public awareness and enhance scientific literacy around energy use and CO2
emissions for a diverse audience through public lectures, hands-on
demonstrations, and other outreach programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.