* 2245738
* Organic Chemistry in Harsh Reaction Environments
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Robert McMahon, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2026
* USD 630,000.00

With support of the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanism-B (CSDM-B)
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Robert J. McMahon of the Department
of Chemistry at the University of Wisconsin-Madison will investigate the
behavior of organic compounds under harsh conditions of temperature, pressure,
or radiation. These conditions, which are similar to the conditions found in
flames (combustion) or in space, cause the degradation of organic compounds and
generate a complex mixture of highly reactive products. The proposed research
will explore the chemical properties and chemical reactions of these reactive
molecules. This research provides a foundation for understanding two very
different problems – one involving combustion and another involving the
chemistry of space. Combustion of organic fuels is central to our nation’s
energy supply and national economy. A fundamental understanding of combustion
offers the possibility of enhancing the energy efficiency of fuel combustion and
minimizing pollutants (soot) that arise from incomplete combustion. In
interstellar space, it is now known that hundreds of different organic compounds
exist throughout the galaxy in environments that are harsh because they are so
hot (near stars) or because they are so cold (far from stars). Studying these
environments is a crucial step in understanding the distribution of organic
material in the universe and identifying molecules that could be precursors to
life. The proposed program benefits society by supporting the education of
graduate and undergraduate students in the study of complex chemical problems as
part of an interdisciplinary research team. Training in mechanistic organic
chemistry provides a valuable foundation for subsequent careers in industry or
academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will explore the structure,
reactivity, and spectroscopy of carbon-rich reactive intermediates. The data
obtained in these studies will provide a foundation for understanding the
chemistry of organic matter in harsh environments. These studies impact diverse
areas of chemical and physical science, including astrochemistry, flames and
combustion, and soot formation. The program will address fundamental questions
concerning the chemical nature of what is now recognized to be the dominant
reservoir of organic compounds in the universe. The determination of accurate
equilibrium structures will provide important benchmarks for prototypical
organic molecules, and theory can be further used to establish thermodynamic
parameters that are important for modeling combustion chemistry. Studies of
quantum mechanical tunneling reactions are of fundamental interest in
mechanistic chemistry and are inherently relevant to chemical processes
occurring in cold environments – including interstellar clouds, planets, moons,
small solar system bodies, and comets. The proposed research melds state-of-the-
art techniques in both theory and experiment to address complex
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.