* 2245507
* CAREER: A Peer-to-Peer Approach to Electricity Supply
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Yury Dvorkin, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 03/31/2024
* USD 336,426.00

Owing to recent advances in smart grid technologies, the US power grid is
undergoing a nation-wide modernization. One of the most important objectives of
this modernization is to achieve a high degree of supply autonomy of electricity
consumers from their local electric power utilities, which is motivated by the
need to ensure a higher level of reliability and energy efficiency. In practice,
this supply autonomy is achieved by rolling out customer-end distributed energy
resources (DERs), which include, but not limited&lt;br/&gt;to, photovoltaic
panels, battery energy storage, and demand-side management solutions. If these
DERs are appropriately sized and operated, electricity consumers are shown to
significantly reduce, if not completely eliminate, their dependency on the
electricity supply from their utilities. While this supply autonomy offers
significant reliability and economic benefits, it also reduces revenues streams
of utilities and undermines their financial viability. As a response to these
reductions, utilities in many US regions have already started increasing
electricity tariffs, thus further incentivizing remaining consumers to adopt
DERs. This self-fueling process (colloquially known as the utility's death
spiral) calls for urgent changes to the current US power grid architecture to
integrate DERs in societally acceptable and socially responsible manner. The
goal of this project is to design a peer-to-peer energy exchange platform that
will manage customer-end DERs using the utility's network infrastructure.
Broader impact activities of this project include (a) graduate and undergraduate
curriculum development, (b) summer research opportunities for undergraduate and
high-school minority students via NYU's Applied Research Innovations in Science
and Engineering program, (c) collaborative work with St. Anthony's High School
in Melville, NY on new computer science course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this CAREER proposal is to fundamentally re-think and re-engineer the current US
power grid architecture to accommodate a massive penetration level of customer-
end DERs, while improving the overall reliability, resiliency, and energy
efficiency of the power sector. The proposed solution rests on the following two
ideas. First, we will design a peer-to-peer platform that will manage customer-
end DERs using the utility's network infrastructure and decentralized,
continuous-time control policies, which account for network physics and
operating limits. Second, the proposed peer-to-peer platform will be coupled
with an AC-power-flow-based energy management system typical for US utilities.
This coupling will make it possible to design and compute appropriate network
usage charges that peers will pay for using utilities' infrastructure. These
network charges will generate an additional revenue stream intended to offset
the&lt;br/&gt;drop in the utility's revenue caused by the roll-out of customer-
end DERs. Based on these two key ideas, we will develop a multi-year planning
model that will optimize the nation-wide transition to a peer-centric power grid
architecture and fully harvest techno-economic benefits of smart grid
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.