* 2245506
* Collaborative Research: Modeling Strategic Regulators in Network Infrastructure Planning
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Yury Dvorkin, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Siqian Shen
* 08/31/2023
* USD 159,159.00

Large-scale infrastructure systems (e.g. gas, power, and water networks) often
cross local, regional, and national jurisdiction boundaries. When this is the
case, each jurisdiction oversees a certain part of the entire infrastructure
system and can elect to pursue its own socio-economic objectives using different
policy instruments. Such a jurisdictional divide naturally creates a fertile
environment for regulatory competition. This project will develop mathematical
models that study implications of this competition on the optimal infrastructure
design. As an example, it will focus on electric power networks that are
currently undergoing a rapid transition toward smart grids. If successful, this
project will provide tools for infrastructure operators and planners (e.g. power
utilities and state/federal regulators), as well as citizens, to evaluate the
effects of different regulatory structures on achieving policy objectives.
Project outcomes will be conveyed by means of direct outreach and via
professional workshops, conferences, and peer-reviewed publications.
Furthermore, broader impacts include training of future STEM researchers at
graduate and undergraduate levels via project mentorship, independent research
studies, and research-informed improvements to existing courses, as well as
early-stage research opportunities for local high-school students from
underrepresented groups in STEM (via NYU's Applied Research Innovations in
Science and Engineering program).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop
formal mathematical models for optimizing policy decisions for large-scale,
hierarchical, network-constrained infrastructure systems. This model will
endogenously optimize policy decisions that are currently considered as
exogenous parameters in infrastructure planning tasks and allow for studying
different forms of regulatory competition between multiple jurisdictions. To
represent this competition and account for all aspects of infrastructure
operating and planning tasks, the project will leverage the multi-leader-common-
follower game-theoretic framework. This framework is notoriously known to be
computationally demanding and, therefore, this project will develop scalable
algorithmic solutions, based on the Progressive Hedging algorithm, to implement
the framework for realistically large networks. The algorithmic component of
this project will investigate solution quality, e.g. its optimality and
uniqueness properties. Broader scientific impacts are anticipated in models and
algorithms to solve multi-stage optimization problems under uncertainty. This
project will directly benefit researchers and developers working in the area of
operations research and smart grids/cities, with extensions relevant to public
policy and network economics communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.