* 2245843
* Conference: The Middle Atlantic Bight Physical Oceanography and Meteorology (MABPOM) Meeting 2022
* GEO,OCE
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2023
* Tobias Kukulka, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Baris Uz
* 10/31/2023
* USD 8,304.00

This funding supports the logistics for a conference, the Mid-Atlantic Bight
Physical Oceanography and Meteorology (MABPOM) meeting. This conference features
presentations on diverse topics that span a geographic range from the Gulf of
Maine to south of Cape Hatteras. Presenters include graduate students and early-
career professionals. These presenters have unique opportunities to interact
with senior researchers. The conference seeks to widen the participation of
members of groups that are underrepresented in physical oceanography and
meteorology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The MABPOM meeting deals with the oceanography
and meteorology of the Mid-Atlantic Bight. It also includes studies in the Gulf
of Maine, south of Cape Hatteras, and estuaries on the East Coast of the U.S.A.
The meeting foments student and cross-disciplinary, as well as preliminary and
provocative presentations. The informal setting of the meeting enhances feedback
to presenters, and promotes interactions and exchanges between senior
scientists, mid- and earlier career researchers, postdocs and students. This
meeting also features studies inspired by the NSF-sponsored Pioneer Array. As
Broader Impacts, this meeting allows increased participation of MAB researchers
and stakeholders. Participation of historically black colleges and universities
(HBCUs) is particularly encouraged. Recruitment and support efforts are part of
this funding request. This MABPOM meeting will help coordinate region-specific
discussions on climate change and the blue economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.