* 2245405
* Collaborative Research: RUI: IRES Track I: From fundamental to applied soft matter: research experiences in Mexico
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Ryan McGorty, University of San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 07/31/2026
* USD 275,090.00

We encounter soft materials frequently in our everyday lives from ointments and
lotions to paints and inks. Understanding these soft materials, which often
possess both fluid-like and solid-like properties, and how they flow or deform
is necessary for advancing many technologies, including 3D printing where the
properties of the ink or resin must be finely tuned. To make progress on our
scientific understanding of soft materials, this IRES Track I project will
strengthen collaborations between researchers in Southern California and in
Mexico. Each year over the 3-year duration of this project, 6 students will be
recruited to take part in this international research experience. U.S. students
from historically underrepresented groups and from predominantly undergraduate
colleges and community colleges will be targeted in the recruitment effort.
Those students will conduct research over the summer at either the Center for
Research in Advanced Materials (Centro de Investigaci贸n en Materiales Avanzados,
CIMAV) in Monterrey, Mexico or the University of Guanajuato in Le贸n, Mexico.
Working with research mentors in Mexico and the mentors in Southern California,
students will take various approaches to study the physics and chemistry of soft
materials. Such approaches include using computer simulations to study
fundamental aspects of soft materials and using 3D printers to apply our
scientific understanding of soft materials to the design and use of new inks and
resins. Students taking part in this research and receiving mentorship from U.S.
and Mexican scientists will be prepared to cooperate with diverse teams across
borders and to become leaders of a globally engaged scientific workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IRES project will strengthen collaborations between
researchers in the U.S. and Mexico by supporting the participation of 6
undergraduates per year in mentored summer research experiences. The PIs at the
University of San Diego and California State University Fullerton will recruit
undergraduate students from historically underrepresented groups and from
predominantly undergraduate institutions and community colleges. After receiving
training on basic research skills, selected students will spend approximately 8
weeks at either the Center for Research in Advanced Materials (Centro de
Investigaci贸n en Materiales Avanzados, CIMAV) in Monterrey, Mexico or the
University of Guanajuato in Le贸n, Mexico. Research projects undertaken by
students will advance our understanding of soft matter, particularly in the
areas of colloid science and rheology. Projects will include investigating the
rheology of nanocellulose and cellulose composites for use in 3D printing
applications, quantifying the translational and rotational diffusion of
anisotropic colloids to better understand transport and microrheology in complex
environments, and developing computer simulations of colloidal particles in
external fields. These projects will lead to new analysis techniques in
microrheology and optical microscopy and will advance the development of inks
for 3D printing. The specific objectives of this project are to (1) train and
mentor 18 (6 students per year for 3 years) undergraduate students on soft
matter research in a collaborative and international environment, (2) develop
and foster research collaborations among institutions in the U.S. and Mexico,
(3) characterize and harness the rheological properties of complex fluids and
gels for enhancing our fundamental knowledge of soft matter and for applying
such materials to 3D printing applications, (4) disseminate research outcomes at
scientific conferences and in peer-reviewed journals, and (5) develop a cohort
of scientists from predominantly underrepresented groups who can network and
collaborate effectively with others from various backgrounds and who can draw
upon a diverse set of mentors. IRES participants will advance scientific
knowledge in projects that range from applied to fundamental using experimental
and computational approaches. Students will learn how these diverse approaches
used by an international team can address pressing scientific and engineering
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.