* 2245494
* LEAP-HI: Automated Design for 3D Printing of Microfluidic Devices for Healthcare Applications
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Gregory Nordin, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 06/30/2027
* USD 515,522.00

Microfluidics uses hair-sized channels in credit card sized devices ("biochips")
to analyze fluids for medical tests and drug discovery. Microfluidics has been
shown to improve the accuracy, speed, and cost of medical tests and drug
discovery, but a key problem with microfluidic devices is that every medical
test needs to be custom designed, making microfluidic chips relatively
expensive. 3D Printing (3DP) has the potential to make custom devices quickly
and inexpensively, but today's design methods are slow and expensive. In
electronic microchip design, engineers have developed tools to design chips
automatically. This Leading Engineering for America's Prosperity, Health, and
Infrastructure (LEAP-HI) project will research similar automated design tools
for producing custom microfluidic devices using 3DP. Such software can enable
medical technicians and researchers to design and print their own devices by
converting functional descriptions to designs, testing the automatically
generated designs on a computer, and then printing devices for immediate use.
The researched microfluidic devices could become a critical part of healthcare,
food safety, environmental testing, and biodefense. The research engages
multiple disciplines, including manufacturing, design automation, optimization,
biochemistry, and fluid dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will research
the adaptation of design automation approaches and software already employed by
the integrated circuit industry to improve the efficiency of design, validation,
and manufacturing of microfluidic devices for healthcare applications. It will
focus on algorithms for the efficient design, testing, 3D placement and routing,
and handling of biochips that incorporate physical understanding of the 3DP
manufacturing process to provide design automation tools for quickly producing
microfluidic biochips. In addition, the project will codify best practices for
microfluidic 3D printing, which are currently poorly understood by most
practitioners, in software. For the individual components used in the component
libraries, researchers on the project will generate a deep understanding of how
microfluidic components scale and the physics of combining these components. The
work will also help users to understand the capabilities and limits of additive
manufacturing for use in microfluidics. The approach will be validated by using
the tools to design, optimize, fabricate, and test medical chemistry and DNA/RNA
analysis devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.