* 2245516
* CRII: SHF: Codata: A Logical Fusion of Object-Oriented and Functional Programming
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Paul Downen, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Anindya Banerjee
* 05/31/2025
* USD 190,728.00

The programming language used by software engineers can seriously impact how
easy it is to express ideas in complex systems. Programmers need positive
expressiveness to describe the good things a program should do, as well as
negative expressiveness to prevent the bad things a program should never do.
Both angles of expressiveness are involved when programmers must satisfy several
competing requirements, from low-level needs of managing efficient use of
resources to high-level needs of ensuring critical safety and security
guarantees. Currently, there are two popular methods for organizing programs to
meet these goals --- the object-oriented and functional paradigms --- that use
different techniques with their own strengths and weaknesses. Unfortunately, the
vast majority of programming languages are stuck within just one of the two
paradigms, making it difficult for programmers to harness simultaneously the
expressive benefits of both. The novelties of this project are (i) to use new
connections between computer programming and the mathematical foundations of
logic for the purpose of designing practical, multi-paradigm programming
languages, (ii) to develop user-friendly idioms for programmers to utilize the
new features from formal logic, and (iii) to apply this logical core as a bridge
between high-level and low-level concerns of programs. In contrast to other
multi-paradigm languages --- that are typically designed within one paradigm and
later bolt on some features of the other --- this project aims to put both
paradigms on equal and fair footing by beginning with a logical core where both
naturally arise. The project's impacts are (i) to implement a single programming
language with a unified design that applies state-of-the-art theoretical
research to derive expressive features from both the object-oriented and
functional paradigms, and (ii) to develop new techniques suitable for extending
existing, popular, programming languages with their missing
features.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The language developed by this project is based
on an understanding of duality that highlights the opposing forces in all
computation: inputs versus outputs, call versus response, concrete structures
versus abstract patterns. This understanding is based on timeless ideas from a
classical logic known as the "sequent calculus," using the Curry-Howard
correspondence as a mechanism to transfer ideas from logic to computer science.
In this sense, the novel programming ideas implemented here were already
discovered, tested, and hardened independently in proof theory, and this project
gives them a fresh perspective. The logical foundation of this project is closer
to a low-level machine --- making it easier to talk about performance --- while
also giving increased expressive power for programming --- via novel
organizations of information and control flow, and advanced tools for
understanding behavior. Thus, the project aims to strike a balance between the
conflicting goals of flexibility --- a hallmark of scripting languages which let
programmers modify the fundamentals of the language themselves --- and
predictability --- a necessary resource for compiling efficient and well-behaved
programs. Special attention will be given to address ubiquitous programming
challenges including modularity of compositional components, communication of
complex messages between independent entities, and regulating the state of
resources limited by time or space. As a side benefit, this methodology may open
up a path toward merging the object-oriented paradigm with the proofs-as-
programs approach to formally verifying properties of complex software systems
and mathematical theorems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.