* 2245903
* DMS/NIGMS 1: Data-driven Ricci curvatures and spectral graph for machine learning and adaptive virtual screening
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Chang-Guo Zhan, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 07/31/2026
* USD 351,882.00

Computer-aided drug design (CADD), including structure-based virtual screening
of a large number of available compounds (ligands) for a given drug target, has
become an essential component of modern drug discovery. The actual value of the
virtual screening relies on the accuracy of the target-ligand binding affinity
prediction. It is recognized as a grand challenge for the virtual screening to
accurately predict the target-ligand binding structures (molecular geometries)
and binding affinities associated with diverse and massive datasets. This
project aims to address the grand challenge in development of machine-learning
(ML)-CADD models by introducing new, more effective mathematical representations
of molecular geometries with the ability to track molecular geometry changes via
Ricci curvatures and their associated spectral information. The outcomes of this
project will furnish novel, more reliable computational approaches in essential
areas of computational drug design, biomolecular modeling, data analysis,
dimensionality reduction, and mathematical biology. Moreover, this project will
provide graduate and undergraduate students with training in data analysis,
biological modeling, algorithm development, and computational drug design. The
enhancement of curricula from this project is planned as a continuation of the
investigators' teaching-research practice. The new mathematical framework and
deep learning architectures are directly integrated into computer software
packages to ensure extensive usage by the community of researchers in drug
design, biology, computer science, and mathematics. Additionally, the project
will help train the next generation of researchers in advanced mathematics, data
science, and molecular biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop
novel low-dimensional representations for biomolecular data analysis from
mathematics-based approaches and robustness training data to revolutionize the
current practice in structure-based virtual screening. The main objectives are:
1) to introduce molecular shape guided persistent Ricci curvature and, at the
same time, to provide local geometry and spectral information to reduce the
structural complexity while still maintaining an adequate description of
biomolecular interactions; 2) to develop a target-ligand adaptive deep learning
protocol for post-docking pose selection, binding affinity prediction, ranking,
and estimation of other molecular properties; 3) to extensively validate the
proposed methods on a variety of datasets to optimize the mathematical
representations and learning networks. Specifically, this project will focus on
the development of the proposed models for the virtual screening of
phosphodiesterase-2 (PDE2) inhibitors, providing valuable hits of a promising
therapeutic strategy for the treatment of various human diseases. A close loop
integrating computational-experimental models will further strengthen the
robustness and accuracy of the proposed models.; 4) to develop user-friendly
software packages and web servers using parallel and GPU architectures for
researchers who are not formally trained in advanced mathematics or
sophisticated machine learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.