* 2245850
* DMS/NIGMS 1: Viscoelasticity and Flow of Biological Condensates via Continuum Descriptions - How Droplets Coalesce and Wet Cellular Surfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Sabine Petry, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Pedro Embid
* 06/30/2026
* USD 200,000.00

Standard textbooks in biology, at all levels, illustrate that membranes cover
the distinct compartments inside cells, where all the amazing chemical
processing occurs that makes life possible. However, it is now apparent that the
cell interior has a richer structure that provides for more and membrane-
independent ways to reorganize cellular components and thus enable cellular
functions. In particular, in recent years it has been recognized that a single
aqueous phase of cellular proteins can transition into two distinct phases,
typically a phase of liquid droplets rich in protein suspended in a dilute
solution of proteins, i.e., liquid-liquid phase separation occurs, comparable to
oil droplets in water. Observations of this behavior have been made for animal,
bacterial, and plant cells. Consequently, these so-called membrane-less
compartments, or biomolecular condensates, are important to characterize since
they help explain fundamental cell biology and are starting to be linked to
possible disease states. The physical chemistry of the solution, including the
electrolyte concentration and ion type, pH, and osmotic strength, can dictate
the nature and scale of these changes in solution properties and so influence
cell function, or dysfunction. The research in this project includes both
experiments and theory, used together, to better characterize and understand the
physicochemical features of these biomolecular condensates including how they
interact with nearby surfaces, such as membranes. In addition, this project will
provide support and research opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Liquid-liquid phase separation (LLPS) and related
phase transitions of proteins in the cellular milieu were recognized recently as
a generic mechanism in living cells for the formation of membrane-less
compartments, or biomolecular condensates. Biological condensates flow and age,
which has been suggested to interrelate the chemical and mechanical responses of
the cell. Consequently, recent studies have provided measurements of the
rheology of the protein solutions, including approximate viscosities, surface
tension, because they are immiscible with the cytoplasm, and relaxation times
for the viscoelastic characterization. Salt concentration, because it influences
the polymer conformation, affects the rheological response and surface tension
of the condensates and may also influence how the condensates wet a substrate.
The research in this project will develop continuum viscoelastic models,
familiar from the polymer physics literature, to address questions associated
with flow and wetting of biological condensates, including their behavior on
surfaces (membranes, microtubules, etc.); the approach will recognize the
microstructural variables specific to condensates and address important
mathematical questions of rearrangements of cytoplasmic components. The work
will include electrostatic and electrokinetic effects within the framework of
physicochemical hydrodynamics to account for unique features of condensates that
impact cellular flows. Thus, via three interconnected research themes, we will
provide a mathematical framework for dynamics of biological condensates, from
(1) constitutive modeling of the stress versus strain and strain rate behavior,
to (2) simulations of model flows, and (3) experiments testing these
descriptions. The results will be given both at a level useful to an
experimentalist and biologist and at a mathematical level that consistently
integrates the thermodynamics, mechanics, and physical chemistry of soft
material responses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.