* 2245569
* RUI: Extended Metal Atom Chain Complexes of Fe and Co Supported by a C3 Symmetric, Scaffolded Ligand Platform
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Gary Guillet, Furman University
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2026
* USD 388,051.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Gary Guillet of Furman University and Jefferson E. Bates of Appalachian State
University will study new chemical compounds containing one dimensional chains
of three metal atoms, such as iron and cobalt, where the metal atoms form bonds
with each other due to their proximity. This study will produce new molecules
that control the environment around the chain of metal atoms therefore
influencing the metal-metal interactions. These compounds will shed light on how
exactly metal atoms interact with each other and if the properties, such as the
magnetism, of the individual metals can be predictably controlled. To accomplish
these goals, the Guillet team will design and synthesize a series of new
compounds supported with computational modeling performed by collaborator
Jefferson Bates. Students in the Guillet group will gain hands-on training in a
laboratory setting while learning proper chemical safety, and how to synthesize
and characterize chemical compounds using advanced instrumentation. Students
working in the Bates group will gain experience utilizing computers to predict
the properties of new compounds and how to compare those predictions with the
experimental measureables obtained in the Guillet group. The undergraduate
research experience at both Furman and Appalachian State is often a crucial time
when students truly get to know what a future working in a science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) field entails. The students from both the
Guillet and Bates groups will gain pertinent training and experience for their
fields of interest and are will be better prepared to pursue a future career in
chemical sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of new extended metal
atom chain (EMAC) complexes of iron and cobalt is important for understanding
the nature of metal-metal bonding in varying coordination geometries and the
factors that affect the physical properties of these interesting systems. By
controlling the ligand framework around the central trimetallic core it may be
possible to rationally design EMACs with various high-spin ground state
electronic configurations facilitated by small intermetallic distances. Past
synthetic strategies used three sterically encumbering bridging ligands, such as
2,6-bis(trimethylsilylamino)pyridine, to surround and stabilize the trimetallic
core. However, efforts to synthesize a broad array of high spin trimetallic
EMACs have been hampered by the lack of stability of the isolated complexes
since low coordination number environments are needed to engender high spin.
This proposal tests the hypothesis that ligands built upon a C3-symmetric
scaffold that incorporates all the donor atoms will be better able to support
trimetallic EMACs of Fe and Co and that these complexes will have increased
stability. Utilizing simple amination reactions, 2,6-dibromopyridine will be
functionalized with a primary amine and in a second amination reaction attached
to a scaffolding molecule. Lithiation and transmetallation steps will form
trimetallic EMACs of Fe and Co. In combination with experimental measurements,
the nature of these metal-metal bonds will be explored through the use of
computational methods from density functional theory and multiconfigurational
wavefunction theories. An expanded library of more stable EMACs will help to
build increased understanding of multiple direct metal-metal bonds and the
factors that lead to high-spin magnetic ground states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.