* 2245931
* IRES Track I: Island Invasion Biology - Leveraging the Galapagos and Hawaiian Islands to provide immersive undergraduate research experiences.
* O/D,OISE
* 01/01/2024,12/31/2026
* Curtis Daehler, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 12/31/2026
* USD 298,926.00

The Galapagos and Hawaiian archipelagoes arguably represent two of the most
iconic island ecosystems in the world. Both are extremely geographically
isolated volcanic landmasses that have evolved unique flora and fauna, but their
fragile ecosystems are threatened by a broad range of factors, perhaps the most
consequential being introduced non-native invasive species. While our
understanding of invasive species biology on tropical island systems has been
shaped extensively by research in Hawaiʻi, other intensively studied locations,
such as the Galapagos Islands, have much to offer. This project will host an
immersive, experiential learning, undergraduate student research program on
island invasion biology at the Charles Darwin Foundation (CDF) in the Galapagos
Islands, Ecuador. The program will provide a unique opportunity for University
of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa (UHM) students, who represent one of the most diverse
student bodies in the nation, to immerse themselves in cutting edge
international research in invasion biology at two globally-recognized research
institutions that have spearheaded a wealth of understanding in this field. The
histories that have shaped the two archipelagoes, including similarities and
differences, will allow students and mentors to develop novel research that is
relevant to both island systems, as well as tropical islands more broadly, while
fostering new research collaborations between UHM faculty and foreign
collaborators at CDF. As such, this project will serve as a catalyst for future
research collaborations thereby providing opportunities for student research
experiences for years to come in a field of critical importance to both
locations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Galapagos and Hawaiian archipelagoes
arguably represent two of the most iconic island ecosystems in the world. Both
are extremely isolated, volcanically-originated landmasses that have evolved
unique and endemic biota. In addition, both are threatened by a broad range of
anthropogenic drivers of change, perhaps the most consequential being introduced
invasive species. Importantly, following decades of applied research on the
control and mitigation of invasive species, the two archipelagoes represent
ideal platforms for student learning in a field of research with broad local and
global ramifications. This project will host an immersive, experiential
learning, undergraduate student research program on island invasion biology at
the Charles Darwin Foundation (CDF) in the Galapagos Islands, Ecuador. At least
six U.S. students in each cohort year from the University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa
(UHM) (≥18 students total) will spend one year, including eight weeks in
Galapagos, researching the drivers and consequences of invasive species
introductions, while assessing means to mitigate their spread and impact. In the
semester preceding their field research program, students will take an
accredited UHM course on invasion biology to provide them with a core baseline
understanding of the threats and challenges posed by invasive species in
tropical island systems, using the Hawaiian Islands as a model system. During
this course, students will interact with UHM faculty advisors and foreign
collaborators at CDF, to develop the framework and design for their individual
summer research projects in Galapagos. Each foreign collaborator will oversee 2
students each field season and, along with UHM mentors, will provide pre- and
post-field program support. Upon returning to Hawaiʻi, students will continue to
work with their UHM and CDF mentors to write up project results for submission
to peer-reviewed scientific outlets, and present results to the UHM campus and
the broader applied conservation and scientific
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.