* 2245995
* CUE-P: Ohio Pathways to Undergraduate Computing Success (OPUCS)
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Charles Dull, Baldwin Wallace University
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 04/30/2028
* USD 1,989,847.00

As the demand for computing professionals in the United States continues to
grow, it is critical to develop programs that will increase the number of
students who complete bachelor’s degrees in computational fields. Because the
number of women and students from historically underrepresented groups in
computing is low as compared to the general population, recruitment and
retention of these students into computing majors will help to fill the growing
workforce needs. Over the course of this five-year project, fifteen institutions
of higher education in Ohio will join together to form the Ohio Pathways to
Undergraduate Computing Success (OPUCS) project. This consortium of nine four-
year and six two-year institutions will devise transfer pathways that will
increase the number of students who complete their Bachelor of Science degrees
in computer science with a focus on supporting women students. This project
benefits society by preparing students from diverse backgrounds for high-paying
positions, thus meeting the needs of employers and contributing to social
mobility for graduates and their families. OPUCS will also provide and study the
impact of innovative structural support to women computing students at the
academic institutions involved in the
consortium.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The OPUCS project objectives are to
(1) establish a statewide consortium of nine four-year independent institutions,
six two-year community colleges, and 15 industrial partners; (2) develop clearly
articulated curricular pathways for students from two-year institutions to
computer science bachelor degree completion at a four-year institution; (3)
increase the number of students who transfer from two-year to four-year
institutions and to complete their bachelor degrees within two years of
transfer; (4) increase the number of women transfer students studying computing;
(5) increase the number of women who complete internships with our industrial
partners; and (6) establish an Association for Computing Machinery’s Council on
Women in Computing (ACM-W) chapter at 75% of the consortium institutions. To
complete these objectives, the project team will (1) develop an agreed-upon
curriculum for the first two years of a computer science program among all OPUCS
institutions; (2) use that curriculum as the basis for development of formal
articulation agreements; (3) provide specific, detailed, and ongoing training to
academic advisors so that students have a planned pathway for degree completion
in four years; (4) provide faculty development training to improve the quality
of instruction across the consortium; (5) train admission counselors so they are
prepared to talk with prospective students about opportunities in computer
science; and (6) provide tailored recruitment materials based on proven
strategies from the National Center for Women &amp; Information Technology
(NCWIT). Contributions to knowledge will come from investigation into two
research questions: (1) To what extent does building a clear academic pathway
and offering a familiar social/professional support network among the
institutions involved in that pathway lead to an increase in the number of women
studying and completing post-secondary computing degrees across Ohio? and (2)
Which activities of the OPUCS consortium are perceived as most impactful by
women pursuing computing degrees?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.