* 2245792
* CRII: SHF: A Parallel and Distributed Framework for Graph Mining on GPUs
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Guimu Guo, Rowan University
* Standard Grant
* Damian Dechev
* 05/31/2025
* USD 174,693.00

Mining from a big graph those subgraphs that satisfy certain conditions is
useful in many applications such as community detection and subgraph matching.
Subgraph mining in a big graph increasingly relies on parallel and distributed
computing to scale the data processing volume and velocity. Numerous central
processing unit (CPU)-based systems have been developed to parallelize graph
mining algorithms. However, our nation is replacing CPU supercomputers with
graphics processing unit (GPU) supercomputers faster than ever before, with the
expectation that heterogeneous CPU/GPUs will not only boost performance but also
conserve energy. This trend poses difficulties for large-scale graph processing,
as users must design GPU programs tailored to each individual graph problem. The
project’s novelties are: 1) a new graph parallel and distributed framework will
be developed, which will accelerate graph computations in a GPU-rich
environment; 2) multiple graph mining tasks, including dense subgraph mining and
subgraph matching, will be implemented atop this framework to take advantage of
the massive parallelism of multi-GPUs. The project's impacts are: 1) it serves a
number of cross-disciplinary projects, such as bioinformatics and chem-
informatics 2) this project will be released for public use and will enrich
existing courses related to big data and parallel computing, thereby providing
long-term benefits to the scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project aims to build on the success in scaling graph processing in a multi-CPU
environment and investigate novel task-based techniques to scale fundamental
compute-intensive graph operations in a multi-GPU environment. Existing GPU
algorithms impose a memory restriction because of the restricted size of GPU
memory, which limits the size of input graphs that can be processed. This
project will explore effective representation schemes that encode and compress
the input graph and intermediate subgraph results compactly to minimize the
memory footprint of the GPU. This will enable coalesced global memory access and
enable data reuse in shared memory. GPU-friendly task-based algorithms will be
designed for fundamental graph operations including subgraph matching and dense
subgraph mining, to unleash the massive parallelism enabled by a multi-GPU
environment. All graph mining pruning rules will be carefully re-designed using
the GPU advanced warp-level primitives in association with the new task
schemes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.