* 2245300
* DMS/NIGMS 2: Deep learning for repository-scale analysis of tandem mass spectrometry proteomics data
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2027
* William Noble, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 05/31/2027
* USD 316,440.00

The field of proteomics studies the primary functional molecules in the cell,
identifying and quantifying proteins in complex biological samples with the goal
of understanding their roles in health and disease. Proteomics is also
fundamental to studies of microorganisms in diverse environment, ranging from
soil samples to oceanwater samples. The primary technology driving the rapid
growth of this field is tandem mass spectrometry. In addition to technological
advances in mass spectrometry hardware, accurate and efficient analysis of the
complex data produced by a tandem mass spectrometer requires increasingly
sophisticated algorithmic tools. The project will develop these tools. In
particular, the project team will develop machine learning software that aims to
improve scientists' ability to infer the identities and quantities of thousands
of proteins in a complex sample. Successful adoption by the proteomics research
community of the tools developed by this project will impact a huge range of
studies, including model organism proteomics to understand basic molecular
function, human disease cohort studies, and environmental proteomics analyses.
The tools produced by this project will allow scientists to to detect more
proteins and to more accurately quantify how their abundances change in health
and disease and across different environmental
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The central hypothesis driving this project is
that statistical power in interpreting bottom-up tandem mass spectrometry data
can be increased by using deep neural networks to leverage data in public
repositories. The project addresses a series of project tasks, each of which
uses deep neural networks to solve a different core problem in mass spectrometry
analysis, and each of which can be improved by making use of massive and rapidly
growing repositories of public mass spectrometry data, such as PRIDE and
MassIVE. The four tasks address large-scale clustering of spectra, assigning
peptides to observed spectra in a de novo fashion, imputing missing values in
cohorts of quantitative mass spectrometry data, and de-noising mass spectrometry
measurements. These tasks are important because (1) each one represents a
fundamental analysis challenge, a solution for which has the potential to impact
a wide variety of downstream applications in mass spectrometry proteomics, (2)
each task allows for innovative applications of machine learning from
repository-scale data, and (3) the project team has existing mass spectrometry
collaborations that will directly benefit from solutions to these
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.