* 2245229
* Collaborative Research: MIM: Learning how mucus shapes and maintains microbiomes
* BIO,EF
* 10/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Jessica Mark Welch, The Forsyth Institute
* Standard Grant
* Nitsa Rosenzweig
* 08/31/2026
* USD 667,017.00

Mucus, the slimy gel that lines all wet surfaces in our bodies, is a key
ecological niche for microbiomes: It accommodates an incredible 100 trillion
microbes, somehow selecting for helpful microbes while controlling problematic
pathogens. Moreover, it does so in disparate organisms ranging from the simplest
animals to corals, snails, fish, and frogs. Yet, it is still not known what
enables microbial communities to grow and function so effectively inside mucus.
New evidence suggests that the sugar-coated molecules that form mucus shape
microbiomes through physical, chemical, and nutritive interactions. This
hypothesis will be tested by addressing three questions: What properties of
mucus do microbes care about? How are microbes structured in mucus -- who is
next to whom and why? And, what are the processes by which microbiomes self-
organize in mucus? This work combines the distinct and complementary expertise
of three scientists specializing in mucus biochemistry, microbiome structure and
molecular biology, and the biophysics of microbe-mucus interactions.
Understanding how mucus controls microbiomes could yield new strategies for
protecting humans from infections, as well as for leveraging beneficial microbes
that can help humans and animals thrive in other ways such as by improving food
digestion and salt tolerance. The investigators will also develop new citizen
science initiatives and demonstrations, integrate research and education, and
engage students and teachers to help create a diverse community of researchers
and change the perception of mucus from a slimy waste product to a fascinating
biomaterial with critical biological functions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mucus is a
critically important habitat for microbes. Despite its pivotal importance to
human and animal functioning, however, the mechanisms by which mucus interacts
with microbiomes are not understood. Indeed, mucus interacts with microbes in
two seemingly conflicting ways, maintaining a dense and diverse healthy
microbiome while simultaneously clearing and disarming harmful microbes. This
research team will unravel this puzzle by investigating the mechanisms
underlying this key Rule of Life, with the hypothesis that mucus shapes
microbiomes through physical, chemical, and nutritive interactions. To test this
hypothesis, the investigators will (I) Evaluate how mucin glycans--the chains of
different sugars that decorate mucin proteins-- select for specific microbes in
natural communities, (II) Identify the influence of different mucus components
on the intricate spatial structure of complex microbial communities, and (III)
Determine the mechanisms by which mucus regulates microbial community assembly.
By revealing the biochemical and biophysical mechanisms by which mucins
influences microbial community structure (both taxonomic and spatial), this work
will elucidate the essential role played by mucus as an ecological habitat that
supports the growth of beneficial commensal microbes while also preventing the
outgrowth of pathogens. The results will also benefit society by informing
applications that seek to engineer mucus-inspired materials to control
environmental and organismal microbiomes. This work will also inspire new
educational and outreach efforts for all ages to improve public awareness of the
topic of “mucus and microbiomes”. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was co-
funded by the Division of Materials Research in the Mathematical and Physical
Sciences Directorate, and by the Symbiosis, Infection and Immunity group in the
Division of Integrative Organismal Systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.