* 2245242
* Analysis of Stochastic Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Davar Khoshnevisan, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Wilmer
* 06/30/2026
* USD 105,970.00

This project is chiefly concerned with the development of new mathematical
methods in the rapidly growing field of stochastic partial differential
equations (SPDEs). Special attention is paid to developing novel techniques that
are designed to analyze specific families of SPDEs that arise naturally in
application areas that range from mathematical oceanography and climate models,
stochastic hydrology, geostatistics, classical cosmology, to statistical and
mathematical physics. Although many of the problems studied as part of the
project are centered around noteworthy questions in SPDEs, a successful
resolution of these problems will likely also help study other complex systems.
The developed ideas and techniques are expected to have sufficient novelty to
open new research areas, solve a number of long-standing open problems and
promote further applicability of the theory of SPDEs. The project will involve
graduate students, and the PI will continue organizing conferences and is
planning to co-author a textbook in the area of research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will engage quantitative connections between
SPDEs, random fields, and random fractals in the context of concrete questions
of independent, modern interest. Some of these connections are motivated
directly by questions in applications areas. These include problems that range
from nonlinear statistical inverse problems to the analysis of the blowup
phenomenon for noisy reaction-diffusion equations. Others are aimed at providing
mathematical explanations for physically observed phenomena such as
intermittency and void dynamics. Yet others are related to studying entirely new
phenomena such as macroscopic and microscopic multifractality. This research is
expected to yield novel insights into the structure of SPDEs, blowup phenomena,
physical multifractals, and the related multifractal random
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.