* 2245957
* DMS/NIGMS 2: Regulation of Cellular Stemness during the Epithelial-Mesenchymal Transition (EMT)
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2027
* Herbert Levine, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Jun Zhu
* 05/31/2027
* USD 278,780.00

This research will involve a joint theoretical/experimental approach to address
cell-fate trajectories that occur during induction of the epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT). The EMT transition was originally discovered in the context of
developmental biology and refers to the fact that cells can dramatically change
their phenotypic behavior from a sedentary, strongly-adherent lifestyle
(“epithelial”) to one characterized by motility and weaker cell-cell coupling
(“mesenchymal”). This transition was later shown to be directly relevant for the
onset of metastatic spread of primary tumors. Recent efforts have indicated that
epithelial cells can either undergo direct reprogramming to mesenchymal states
or alternatively become more stem-like and exhibit intermediate, hybrid E/M
properties. These latter states appear to be the most effective at initiating
new tumors and hence the most dangerous. Based on the investigators’ preliminary
investigations, state-of-the-art single cell measurement technology will be used
together with advanced mathematical modeling frameworks to understand how cells
choose specific fates and to quantitatively unravel the genetic and epigenetic
dynamics that leads these cells along their particular trajectories. The
investigators will develop new mathematical concepts such as the role of
frustration in cell fate networks; here frustration refers to the
incompatibility of various genetic interactions and understanding how it enables
the aforementioned intermediate states can help develop ideas to interdict their
effects. The investigators will also study the role of “epigenetic” modifiers,
chemical modifications of proteins that help package the DNA that directly
affect how easy it is to switch between different phenotypes. And, aside for the
direct intellectual merit and possible spillovers into translational
applications, this program will contribute the NSF’s “missing millions” goal by
partnering with an HBCU to introduce this area of research to undergraduates
from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technically, the projected
research will consist of several interwoven areas coupling mathematics to
biology. The investigators will take full advantage of modern single-cell
technology to create datasets that will be used to quantitatively determine the
step-by-step progress of EMT and concomitant stemness properties of cells,
measuring both transcriptional profiles and features of the chromatin-dependent
epigenetics. These data will help formulate new types of dynamical models, both
deterministic and stochastic, coupling transcriptional regulation to a
dynamically modifiable underling epigenetic landscape. These models will be used
to understand the role of frustration, i.e. unsatisfied regulatory interactions
in a given phenotypic state of the network, in the enabling of intermediate
states with enhanced plasticity; this understanding could have direct
translational relevance, as plasticity has been implicate in tumor initiation
and in tumor therapy resistance. The data will also help develop and better
understand the validity of advanced data analysis techniques such as the concept
of optimal transport which allows for trajectory inference. This powerful idea
requires the use of cost functions to relate data at different timepoints and
the investigators will use both synthetic and actual data to explore the idea
that incomplete mechanistic models can be used to create better such cost
functions. All told, this research will greatly improve the understanding of
cell-fate transitions and how they depend on the detailed molecular level
underpinnings of genetic circuits governing transcriptional and translational
processes and the epigenetic landscape to which these circuits are reciprocally
coupled.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.