* 2245422
* Thermal Community Ecology of Disease
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Alexander Strauss, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Porras-Alfaro
* 07/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

Over the next century, many parts of the world will experience accelerated rates
of change in climate and temperature. Among other impacts, altered thermal
environments are likely to affect outbreaks of infectious disease, resulting in
elevated or diminished risk of infection for plants, animals, and people.
Temperature is typically linked to patterns of infectious disease through
temperature-dependent growth rates and other biological traits of disease
vectors (e.g., mosquitos), host species (e.g., humans, crops, or wildlife), and
the parasites or pathogens themselves (e.g., bacteria or fungi). However,
disease is often shaped by other species beyond this trifecta of hosts, vectors,
and parasites. For example, predators often reduce disease severity in
populations of their prey, and species that compete against each other
frequently interfere with the transmission of each other’s parasites. Moreover,
different thermal environments often favor some species over others – for
example, predators over prey or one competitor over another. Thus, changes in
temperature could re-assemble ecological communities in ways that unleash or
inhibit infectious disease. Results of this research will demonstrate, with both
models and experiments, how variation in temperature shapes infectious disease
outcomes through these ecological pathways. This project will also support
outreach events that engage the local community and broaden participation in
science by providing opportunities for undergraduate and graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to understand the
ways in which temperature shapes infectious disease dynamics in ecological
communities that include hosts, parasites, resources, competitors, and
predators. The experiments center on a model system of zooplankton hosts, fungal
parasites, and fish predators. Previous experiments in this study system have
shown that warmer temperature increases the severity of disease outbreaks in
minimalistic communities (just hosts and parasites), but field data from lakes
suggests that warmer temperature might decrease disease severity in more complex
and realistic communities. Thermal performance curves of relevant traits will be
obtained for all species involved and used to parameterize general mechanistic
models. Parameterized models will then be tested with independent multi-
generational mesocosm experiments conducted across thermal gradients. Both
models and mesocosm experiments will be designed to reflect increasingly complex
communities, including: i) only hosts, resources, and parasites, ii) adding a
competitor, iii) adding a predator, and iv) adding both competitor and predator.
The integration of models and experiments will establish robust foundations for
a new field that grapples with effects of temperature on disease dynamics in
ecological communities: the thermal community ecology of
disease.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.