* 2245983
* CRII: SaTC: Towards Understanding and Defending Against New Waves of Online Hate
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2025
* Nishant Vishwamitra, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 02/28/2025
* USD 175,000.00

Rapidly changing world events, such as the COVID-19 pandemic, have been
accompanied by significant changes in discourse on social media platforms.
Online hate has increased and arrives in waves; it is a deeply concerning
problem that is negatively transforming the lives of internet users. Recent
studies have demonstrated how online hate violates social media policies and
describes the ramifications of these violations in the real world. Online hate
is difficult to study scientifically. Sparse and biased samples of hate
communications are available for computational analysis, especially when hate
communications occur and spread suddenly. This project advances the frontiers of
knowledge and our ability to defend against abd mitigate online hate. The
project applies novel approaches to study waves of online hate, using new
computational approaches to detect online hate policy violations and proposing
new methods for moderation on social media platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
achieve these goals, the investigation is discovering and cataloging novel
factors that characterize new waves of online hate. The categorization process
is based on temporal and social measurement analyses of online hate
communications. The project also is formulating new techniques to effectively
discover linkages in social media streams. The key idea is to efficiently sample
online hate datasets such that only samples that characterize new instances or
forms of online hate are used for machine-learning training. The machine
learning paradigm only needs a few samples to effectively learn to detect the
new waves of online hate. The project also uses novel techniques to identify and
track cross-platform transfers of online hate in user communities across
different social media platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.