* 2245631
* RAPID: Model-based methods to understand and mitigate the risks posed by human monkeypox
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2023
* Seth Blumberg, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 11/30/2023
* USD 199,775.00

This research will develop models to understand and predict the spread of
monkeypox virus (MPXV). In 2022, monkeypox virus (MPXV) surprised health
authorities by causing a fast-growing global outbreak, apparently driven by
transmission via sexual contact. Research and intervention efforts have focused
on limiting the impacts of the outbreak via targeted testing, vaccination,
treatment, and public information campaigns. However, there is a parallel need
to understand whether MPXV could spread substantially in the broader population
through other means. Cases have been confirmed in men, women and children,
raising important questions about the potential scope and mechanism of MPXV
spread. What is the risk involved in MPXV spread, and by what means? How can the
risk of a more expansive MPXV epidemic be reduced? Answers to these questions
will support public health planning and decision-making, and help to reduce the
risk of wider impacts from the on-going global outbreak of MPXV, while training
undergraduates, a graduate student, and a post-doctoral
scholar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will address three thematic areas:
(1) It will develop techniques to analyze MPXV surveillance data and
characterize its transmission efficiency when cases arise from both substantial
spread in a core population and limited spread in non-core populations. (2) It
will build and analyze mathematical models to design strategies for disease
control in such core/non-core transmission scenarios, e.g., to compare outcomes
from reducing transmission in the core population versus reducing the risk of
introduction to non-core groups versus reducing onward spread in non-core
communities. (3) It will advance knowledge of orthopoxvirus transmission
biology, including risks arising from different modes of transmission,
implications of vaccine immunity for transmission risk, and risks arising from
new viral strains or species. Across all three themes, the project team will
conduct baseline research to advance methods and address knowledge gaps, and
apply these tools to analyze data from the global MPXV outbreak in response to
on-going developments in the outbreak.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was
funded in collaboration with the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.