* 2245008
* Kinetics of Thin Film Growth on van der Waals Surfaces
* MPS,DMR
* 10/01/2022,05/31/2025
* Suneel Kumar Kodambaka, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 05/31/2025
* USD 417,779.00

Non-technical description: &lt;br/&gt;Coatings with sub-micrometer thicknesses
are commonly used in a wide variety of applications including but not limited
to: automotive, biomedical, catalysis, defense, energy, electronic, and
optoelectronic industries. Properties and life-time performance of materials
used in these coatings are often dictated by the crystallinity of the materials.
Traditionally, improving and/or controlling the crystallinity in coatings
require processing at high-temperatures, use of energetic beams, and/or extended
annealing for long durations. Atomically-thin sheets of materials such as
graphite and hexagonal boron nitride (hBN, also known as white graphite),
referred to as van der Waals (vdW) layers, can aid the synthesis of materials
with better crystallinity. The goal of this project is to understand the
mechanisms leading to enhancing crystallinity on vdW layers. One doctoral
student is trained through this project and the research results are taught to
undergraduate students in engineering and disseminated through conference
presentations and technical publications. By organizing focused workshops at
technical conferences, the principal investigator intends to promote awareness
of (and find viable solutions to) the challenges faced by graduate students with
families.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description:&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this
project is to develop an atomic-scale understanding of the factors controlling
the growth of thin solid films on vdW surfaces. Preliminary results obtained by
the team suggest that thin films sputter-deposited on hBN layers exhibit better
crystallinity than homoepitaxially grown thin films. To understand this
intriguing result, it is hypothesized that adatom mobility on vdW surfaces is
higher than that on conventional 3D solids and that there exist well-defined
crystallographic orientation relations between the substrate, vdW layer, and the
deposit. The project uses in situ variable-temperature scanning tunneling
microscopy experiments to validate this hypothesis and to test the generality of
these observations. Through time-resolved measurements of the thin film growth,
the role of the vdW-layer on surface diffusivities and morphological evolution
kinetics are quantitatively determined. This project is providing new insights
into a potentially technologically important venue for synthesizing high-quality
crystalline thin films for a variety of applications. This approach may be the
most effective way to improve crystallinity of highly refractory compounds and
thermally unstable materials for which increasing temperature has little or
deleterious effect on the microstructure and composition of the
material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.