* 2245187
* I-Corps: Machine Learning Enhanced Automated Circuit Configuration and Evaluation of Power Converters
* TIP,TI
* 11/15/2022,10/31/2023
* Wencong Su, Regents of the University of Michigan - Dearborn
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 10/31/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of power electronics to automate complex circuit design. While
significant progress has been made in advancing modeling simulation and
verifying electrical power converters, the process of designing such devices
remains inefficient in terms of time and cost. The state-of-the-art circuit
design of power converters relies heavily on human experts to select the optimal
topology and search for design parameters with human experience and intuitions.
This process can be very time-consuming, inefficient, and labor-intensive. The
proposed software may help power electronics engineers consider a wide range of
novel concepts more rapidly and cost-effectively before selecting an
engineering-optimal architecture for high-fidelity design and
evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the
development of technology that integrates recent breakthroughs in machine
learning, power electronics, data analytics, simulation software, and
optimization to automate the circuit design of electrical power converters. The
technology may also facilitate the integration of the proposed software tools
into existing power-converter design workflows. The technology seeks to
automatically generate and evaluate power converter designs with physics-based
Reduced Order Models: automatically evolving architecture concepts toward the
optimal system configurations and automatically generating, evaluating and
optimizing architectures within acceptable performance uncertainties while
satisfying the desired outputs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.