* 2245849
* CRII: CNS: Exploring Data and Model Sparsity in Deep Learning Systems using Graphs
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Pradeep Kumar, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2025
* USD 175,000.00

Due to the increase in the size of deep learning models, huge computation and
memory resources are dedicated for their training, and deployment. To this
regard, the proposal treats sparsity as a key primitive to reduce the
requirement on the computational and memory resources without sacrificing the
accuracy of the models. It seeks to investigate the fundamental understanding of
the sparsity in both the data and model at the system-level using graph as a
data-model. The preliminary study gathered a few system-level requirements and
show that blindly adopting the best practices of sparse linear algebra and graph
analytics systems fields, both of which are unrelated to deep learning, lead to
many new system-level overheads for deep learning computation. The research
proposal will lay down a better sparse data representation to improve the data
locality, and will develop theory and systems to solve the workload imbalance
problem in the computation involving sparse data and models. The proposal will
result in reduction of memory consumption and will achieve faster computation.
Both the goals of the proposal will also enable resource-constrained devices to
be a part of the deep learning computation ecosystem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Deep
learning has enabled use-cases that are being used for diverse societal goals
including in the fields of medical science, defense, financial fraud detection,
etc. By enabling such use-cases of more diverse datasets and models, both
sparse, the proposal seeks to create better impact on the society by achieving
faster computation at reduced memory usage, resulting in reduced cost for
training and deployment of various deep learning models. The more immediate
impact will be in the educational activities in the form of incorporating the
developed learning tool(s) for classroom teaching, student projects, outreach to
under-represented, minority and female students. Due to the strong interest from
the industry in this field, students will be exposed to industry standard tools,
as well get trained on end-to-end deep learning systems and data science both--
a key industry requirement that was also identified by the industry partners in
an NSF Workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.