* 2245531
* CRII: SaTC: Reconciling Run-time Attestation Methods and Real-Time Embedded Applications
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2025
* Ivan De Oliveira Nunes, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 02/28/2025
* USD 174,818.00

Embedded devices are increasingly ubiquitous and their importance is hard to
overestimate. While they often support safety-critical system functions, they
are usually implemented under strict cost/energy budgets, using Micro-Controller
Units (MCUs) that lack security mechanisms akin to those available in general-
purpose computers. Unsurprisingly, the insecurity of embedded software has
already led to several attacks, including massive denial of service and large-
scale exploits. Run-time attestation techniques aim to remotely detect Malware
that compromises the execution of software on safety-critical MCUs. However,
existent run-time attestation methods preclude MCUs from processing real-time
events (e.g., physical inputs, arrival of network packets, or expiring timers)
as soon as they occur. On the other hand, real embedded applications are highly
dependent on such time-sensitive event processing. Motivated by this problem,
this project's novelties are the design and implementation of run-time
attestation techniques that can securely co-exist with the real-time needs of
MCU applications. The project's broader significance and importance are to
reconcile run-time attestation techniques with the needs of realistic
applications, bringing run-time attestation closer to practical adoption.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops novel run-time attestation methods
to detect run-time attacks while considering the realistic needs of embedded
applications. Our approach addresses a major shortcoming of all current run-time
attestation techniques: their inability to work in tandem with asynchronous
events via system interrupts. This project bridges this gap by (1)
characterizing the conflict between existing run-time attestation techniques and
embedded applications that must process asynchronous events via interrupts; and
(2) rethinking run-time attestation designs to make them amenable to system
interrupts while retaining all of their security guarantees. The aforementioned
goals are approached from two complementary perspectives: legacy devices that
are already manufactured and in which hardware modifications are unfeasible; and
future devices, in which clean-slate run-time attestation designs (that include
custom hardware changes) are feasible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.