* 2245491
* CRII: OAC: Improved Cyberinfrastructure Usage through High-Fidelity Isogeometric Volumetric Spline Model Generation
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Kendrick Shepherd, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 08/31/2025
* USD 174,996.00

Physics-based scientific and engineering inquiry relies heavily on the use of
computational models, including the finite element method. For particularly
complex models, such as those used in automotive crash or those of national
defense interest. Current techniques to achieve these analyses consume
significant computational resources, approximate the geometries of intended
objects for analysis, and do not leverage modern high-accuracy computational
tools for the finite element method. Even though research has progressed to show
that so-called isogeometric finite element methods are more accurate than
traditional finite element methods for computational analysis, the scientific
and engineering community lacks the tools necessary to generate computational
models suitable for such analyses. This research creates a framework through
which scientists and engineers can convert a computer-aided model or mesh of a
geometry or potential design into a three-dimensional representation that
directly represents the intended domain without approximation and that leverages
spline-based isogeometric tools for more accurate physics-based simulations.
This work supports national security interests by providing access to higher-
fidelity analysis results and by streamlining the process by which engineers
arrive at these results. It also helps develop more accurate models for use by
the automotive industry such as in simulating crash, resulting in safer and more
sustainable vehicles. The developed toolset is made publicly available for use
and continued enhancement. The research helps train and diversify the US
cyberinfrastructure community through mentoring of undergraduate, graduate, and
underrepresented groups in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In particular, this
work defines a technique to create a well-structured hexahedral decomposition of
a computer-aided design geometry or a surface mesh that can be output for use
either using traditional finite element methods or more structured isogeometric
methods. The framework relies on concepts from differential geometry and Morse
theory, and mathematically guarantees a valid volumetric discretization of the
geometry from a surface parameterization. Both the theory and the computational
tools constructed from the theory are validated by reconstructing (a) a vehicle
of interest to the United States Army and (b) a left ventricle of a patient-
specific heart model. Finally, both academic and industrial communities are
provided access to the developed software through a permissive license that
invites use and future development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.