* 2245298
* CDS&amp;E/Collaborative Research: Data-Driven Inverse Design of Additively Manufacturable Aperiodic Architected Cellular Materials
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Jida Huang, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Reha Uzsoy
* 05/31/2026
* USD 249,721.00

Due to their extraordinary properties, engineered metamaterials are the basis
for a wide range of functional products across different industry sectors, such
as materials and energy. This Computational and Data-Enabled Science and
Engineering (CDS&amp;E) collaborative research award will establish a data-
driven approach for manufacturable mechanical metamaterials discovery and
optimization to realize the full potential of advanced architected materials by
harnessing the exploration and extrapolation capability of artificial
intelligence for the co-design of the geometry and properties of aperiodic
cellular materials used in products such as ultra-light energy devices and
shape-morphing soft robotics, helping to revitalizing advanced manufacturing in
the US. Integrating the research findings into educational activities will help
train students in data science, engineering design, and advanced manufacturing,
broadening the participation of underrepresented minorities and first-generation
college students in design and 3D printing research and
education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research bridges the knowledge gap in the
fundamental understanding of the structure-property relation of three-
dimensional aperiodic architected cellular materials (AACM) and achieving the
inverse design of additively manufacturable cellular materials with desired
properties. This project will establish a rational design paradigm for
additively manufacturable cellular materials with specified properties by
leveraging data-driven approaches. It will address the challenges posed by a
very large geometry space, unknown theoretical limits of the property space,
ill-posed inverse problems, and geometric compatibility and manufacturability
constraints. The research activities include: (1) extending the theoretical
limits of mechanical property space of AACM units via a computational discovery
framework; (2) elucidating the geometry-property relation of cellular structures
to derive a computationally efficient data-driven inverse mapping for generating
diverse AACM structures with prescribed properties; (3) respecting the
compatibility and additive manufacturability challenges in the combinatorial
design of aperiodic structural patterns. The enhanced understanding of intrinsic
structure-manufacturing-property relation will advance fundamental research of
novel architected materials design and development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.