* 2245474
* CDS&amp;E: Multiscale Process Intensification of Direct Catalytic Hydrogenation of CO2 to Hydrocarbons via Cooperative Tandem Catalysis
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* M. M. Faruque Hasan, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Raymond Adomaitis
* 06/30/2026
* USD 474,379.00

Significant research efforts are currently underway to develop new chemical
manufacturing technologies that have the potential to decarbonize the energy and
chemical industries, maintaining the prominent role of the U.S. in producing
valuable chemical products and transportation fuels. Key to this continuing
advance is the development of “intensified” chemical processes that combine what
traditionally were multiple processing steps into a single, multifunctional
operation, facilitating energy savings and cost reductions - process
improvements that have broad applicability to energy, chemicals, and other
manufacturing sectors. The catalyst and process design methods proposed in this
research program also facilitate the development of modular manufacturing
processes, increasing the efficiency, flexibility, resilience, and overall
competitiveness of chemical manufacturing supply chains. With the recent
revolution in domestic shale gas production, new routes to using novel catalytic
systems that effectively promote a sequence of reactions (rather than a single
reaction) will open the door to potentially disruptive process intensification
technologies for shale gas conversion and new pathways to creating a hydrogen-
based economy. This research program will support the recruitment of
traditionally underrepresented students both at the graduate and undergraduate
levels. An outreach activity is planned that will teach the importance of
sustainable design to 1st–4th graders. The research findings will be integrated
into a new graduate-level course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
establish the foundation of a new direction in process intensification through
the development of cooperative tandem catalysts, catalysts that promote
sequences of chemical reactions rather than a single reaction. Specifically,
this research will address the following fundamental questions: How do multiple
catalysts interact and affect individual catalytic performances in a tandem
reactive process at the micro-, meso- and macro/process-scales? When is tandem
catalysis desirable? How can the optimal combinations of tandem catalysts be
predicted? How are multi-catalytic systems designed, synthesized, and tuned to
perform a series of reactions while ensuring the desired product quality,
stability, and performance at the process level? As a representative tandem
catalytic system, hydrogenation of CO2 over metal oxides to produce methanol
will be integrated with zeolite frameworks that selectively transform methanol
to C2+ chemical products, specifically C2-C4 olefins and C5-C18 hydrocarbons.
Chemical transformation of CO2 with H2 into fuels, chemicals, or chemical
precursors constitutes a conceptual evolution in achieving sustainable chemical
production and expediting the “green energy” transition. To better understand
the interactions among reaction chemical species and the tandem catalysis, the
research team plans to develop, validate, and analyze mechanistic models at the
density functional theory (DFT) level and translate the results of the DFT
simulations into the rate and equilibrium constants of microkinetic models. To
elucidate how microscopic changes affect the macroscopic properties of a tandem
catalyst system, a unique method based on order parameter analysis (originally
developed in the context of studying phase transitions) will be formulated to
reduce the complexity of the multi-scale reactor models. Understanding how the
properties of catalysts influence the merging of reaction processes will
facilitate the design and control of intensified processes, thereby saving
significant time and investment for new chemical product
discovery.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.