* 2245747
* CRII: CNS: Integrated Sensing and Communication with Optical Wireless: A Retro-reflective Link Design
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2025
* Sihua Shao, New Mexico Institute of Mining and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alhussein Abouzeid
* 09/30/2025
* USD 174,999.00

Integrated sensing and communication with optical wireless (ISAC-OW) is a
potential 6G enabling technology. Leveraging visible light and infrared
spectrums, high-precision sensing and positioning, and high-speed mobile
communication can be realized in a single system, enabling advanced solutions
for future 6G scenarios, such as smart hospitals and industrial automation. The
retro-reflective optical uplink is a promising emerging solution to ISAC-OW that
offers several favorable features including hassle-free alignment, minimal
interference to adjacent links, microwatt power consumption, low hardware
complexity, glaring-free and sniff-proof, and enables simultaneous sensing,
positioning and communication with a compact-size tag under a single luminaire.
However, the potential of retro-reflective link-based ISAC-OW technology is
tempered by basic theoretical and technology development challenges that require
a cross-disciplinary approach. The project will investigate fundamental design
trade-offs in a retro-reflective uplink enabled ISAC-OW system for large-scale
networks. The expected project results advance the state-of-the-art of basic
theory and practical design strategies for ISAC-OW system. The project provides
cross-disciplinary training opportunities for under-represented students
spanning communication theory and signal processing, optical wireless system and
circuit design, and wireless networking.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research develops a new cross-domain framework for integrated design of
efficient and scalable retro-reflective uplink enabled ISAC-OW networks. The
project is anchored on four key research goals: 1) Modeling the retro-reflective
optical link and investigating the hardware design of light reader and retro-
reflective tag to convey as much luminous flux as possible from the emitter to
the receiver; 2) Investigation of MAC protocols to fully exploit the physical
(PHY) layer capabilities and address concurrent transmission challenges; 3)
Development of an efficient and flexible spectrum allocation strategy for joint
sensing and communication; and 4) Integrated system modeling and assessment for
performance-complexity-energy optimization and testbed-based experimental
validation of hardware and protocols. The proposed research features
investigation of several key operational requirements, including analytical
optical models of ISAC-OW, dynamic hardware reconfigurability and scalability,
concurrent transmission mechanism and new spectrum allocation methods for ISAC
in different use cases. The proposed research acts as a catalyst for cross-
disciplinary design and analysis of emerging ISAC-OW system in industry and
academia to meet the connected intelligence and application
requirements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.