* 2245372
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: Compliance as a Service (CaSe): A Reflective Approach to Enforcing User Privacy Regulations
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Sharad Mehrotra, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 06/30/2026
* USD 242,474.00

This project seeks to enable transforming existing data infrastructures to
comply with user data protection legislation and regulations. The project's
novelties are its formal model of data protection policy compliance that helps
system designers to reason about regulations and demonstrate systems’ compliance
with them. The project's broader significance is its potential to address
consumer privacy and data security concerns associated with emerging
technologies, such as the Internet of Things and cloud computing. As recent
events involving corporate use of consumer data have demonstrated, privacy and
data security issues are increasingly connected in the modern information age to
concerns about democracy, equality, national security, and freedom, all of which
carrying implications for both individuals and society. The benefits of this
work include managing cyber threats and addressing data privacy and policy
concerns in applications that utilize personal and sensitive data. The work also
includes educational outreach efforts targeting community college and high
school students, as well as students from underrepresented groups in computing
with the goal to expose them to research with community
benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project consists of four research thrusts.
The first provides a grounding of data protection legislation and regulation to
provide a system design-centric formal model of policy compliance. This involves
studying the implications of developing a formal model in terms of validating
and proving compliance with regulations. The second thrust tackles the
challenges in managing policies of transformed data sent across different system
components, which involves designing data abstractions that express the data and
policy transformation. The third thrust includes methods that allow efficient
and fast adaptation of existing and legacy data systems to policy changes. This
includes designing data structures that are sharded based on policies, enabling
isolation of the data shards impacted by policy changes. The fourth thrust
provides a scalable distributed logging system to cater to the auditing
requirements of data protection regulations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.