* 2245564
* Collaborative Research: Electrocatalytic Synthesis of Heterocycles from Biomass-Derived Furanics via Immobilized 1st-Row Transition Metal Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 11/01/2022,12/31/2024
* De-en Jiang, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 12/31/2024
* USD 131,882.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Yujie Sun from the University of Cincinnati and De-en Jiang from the University
of California-Riverside are studying the electrocatalytic conversion of biomass-
derived compounds to value-added compounds. Biomass is a promising sustainable
raw material and biomass valorization continues to attract increasing attention.
However, most existing methods for the synthesis of value-added chemical
building blocks from biomass are inefficient and not cost-effective compared to
those employed in the petrochemical industry. Following the principles of green
chemistry, Drs. Sun and Jiang will design and develop kinetically viable and
low-cost electrocatalysts for the upgrading of biomass-derived chemicals to
value-enhanced heterocyclic compounds. The synergy between the experimental and
computational efforts of the two principal investigators is notable and offers
potential for improved understanding of the various electrocatalytic processes
under study. Dr. Sun has been actively developing a new course in Green
Chemistry to offer undergraduates a broad background in sustainable chemical
approaches and methods. Dr. Jiang has been developing a Freshman Discovery
Seminar entitled “Frontiers in Chemical Research” to chemistry-oriented
freshmen. Dr. Jiang is also working closely with the Riverside STEM Academy 15,
a Riverside Unified School with a focus on STEM. Both research groups are
actively involved in a variety of other outreach programs, such as UC Community
Day Open House and UC-Chem Summer Camp at the Cincinnati Museum
Center.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program
in the Division of Chemistry, Yujie Sun from the University of Cincinnati and
Professor De-en Jiang from the University of California Riverside are developing
1st-row transition metal-based electrocatalysts to synthetically upgrade
biomass-derived compounds to value-added heterocyclic compounds. Chemical
synthesis from biomass has attracted increasing interest because of its
abundant, sustainable, and carbon-neutral nature. Due to the existence of
multiple functional groups in biomass-derived intermediate compounds, selective
transformations are crucial for the successful upgrading of biomass to targeted
chemical systems. Taking advantages of both homogeneous and heterogeneous
catalytic strategies, Drs. Sun and Jiang will investigate 1st-row transition
metal-based and coordinatively-unsaturated electrocatalysts immobilized on
electrodes for the selective transformation of biomass-derived furan-based
edicts into heterocyclic compounds of interest. Fundamental knowledge of the
electrocatalytic mechanisms involved is expected to evolve out of these studies
given the tight integration of theory/computation and experiment in the
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.