* 2245877
* Developing inclusive, interdisciplinary undergraduate data science curricula in  computing and social science
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Deborah Nolan, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 05/31/2026
* USD 600,000.00

Data science is a rapidly growing field that is having a significant impact on
how we live, work, and interact. The goal of this project is to create a cross-
cutting data science curriculum at the intersection of computer science and
behavioral and social science. This curriculum will provide training in both
core computing and programming concepts as well as core quantitative behavioral
and social science methods. The curriculum will be designed to be
multidisciplinary, culturally relevant, and rigorous. The core proposed course
development activity aims to transform computer science education through a
collaborative approach to curricular creation that involves faculty from diverse
disciplines, diverse institutions, and diverse backgrounds. Tribal colleges,
HBCUs, and California Community Colleges, will be invited to curriculum symposia
events and supported in adopting these materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Classroom
materials will be designed as a scaffolded collection of instructional lecture
videos, computing labs, guided discussions, projects, and concept assessments
that can be adopted partly or wholly at institutions across the nation. The
open-source curriculum will consist of standalone course modules grounded in
modern socio-technical systems and data. Investigators will design and test a
hybrid instructional delivery mechanism to ensure broad accessibility to
instructors nationwide. Continuous assessment and research will inform
investigators on how the project activities will promote further study in
interdisciplinary computing education amongst students from traditionally
underrepresented communities. The project will identify aspects of the
curriculum that build learner confidence in computational thinking and data
science and will contribute best practices for inclusive computer science and
data science education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.