* 2245839
* RUI: Mathematical Modeling of Microglia
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Kamila Larripa, Humboldt State University Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2026
* USD 123,708.00

Microglia are a special type of immune cell found only in the central nervous
system. These multifaceted cells fight infections, repair damage, remove debris,
and are central to maintaining brain health. However, these cells can go rogue
and contribute to neurodegenerative pathologies such as Alzheimer's Disease.
This is linked to a shift in their cellular metabolism, but how and why this
metabolic reprogramming occurs and its impact on disease progression remains
unknown. This project will develop and analyze multi-scale mathematical models
to better understand the role of various molecular mechanisms in microglia
behavior and how this behavior influences and orchestrates further cellular
activity in the brain. This project will incorporate and train undergraduate
students in interdisciplinary research techniques. Additionally, the project
will assess the impact of an undergraduate research experience on students'
science identity and persistence in STEM. This project aims to accomplish three
specific goals: 1) Modeling microglia metabolism in a single healthy cell and
understanding how the metabolism corresponds to phenotype commitment and
behavior through ordinary differential equation modeling and analysis; 2)
Incorporating crosstalk between microglia and other cell types and
mathematically describing a potential lactate shuttle which may occur under
inflammatory conditions through ordinary differential equation modeling and
analysis; and 3) Incorporating a spatial component and cell heterogeneity by
using agent-based models. The primary tools to be used for this project include
numerical simulation, global sensitivity analysis, and parameterizing models by
using data from biological experiments conducted by collaborators in parallel
with the mathematical work. Cross-talk and agent-based models will specifically
consider pathways linked to Alzheimer's Disease. The project will also evaluate
the impact of the undergraduate research experience with a mixed method study to
assess changes in students' sense of belonging, science self-efficacy, and
science identity. This project is jointly funded by the MPS Division of
Mathematical Sciences (DMS) through the Mathematical Biology Program, and the
BIO Division of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences through the System and
Synthetic Biology Cluster. This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.