* 2245816
* DMS/NIGMS 1: Multi-timescale stochastic modeling to investigate epigenetic memory in bacteria
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Andrew Mugler, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 08/31/2026
* USD 194,674.00

When a cell divides, each daughter cell contains an identical copy of its DNA.
The DNA provides the blueprint for the molecules that the cell makes, and thus
constitutes a genetic “memory”. However, the cell also passes a non-genetic, or
“epigenetic”, memory to its daughters. Epigenetic memory consists of the
molecules that the cell has already produced, and the chemical and
conformational state of the DNA, which get inherited directly by the daughter
cells. Even in simple organisms like bacteria, epigenetic memory is still poorly
understood. In this project, the investigators will address basic questions
about epigenetic memory, such as how many generations it lasts, using a new
experimental device and new mathematical models. The research will be combined
with the development of a course for high school teachers in the Pittsburgh area
focused on interdisciplinary science. Because epigenetic memory is a fundamental
property of living cells, and yet a quantitative understanding has remained
elusive, the results are expected to have broad implications, particularly at
the interface of the mathematical and biological sciences.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The project will take advantage of the investigator's novel
microfluidic technology to inform a new theory of cell growth and division
dynamics, which in turn will make predictions for further experiments. The
overarching goal is to accurately quantify epigenetic memory in bacteria,
elucidate its determinants, and measure its sensitivity to stress-inducing
environments. The goal will be achieved via two aims: (1) using discrete-time
stochastic modeling to untangle multigenerational epigenetic memory timescales,
and (2) combining continuous- and discrete-time stochastic modeling to
investigate multigenerational noise propagation. In both aims, experiments and
theory will guide each other quantitatively, leading to a richer understanding
of bacterial epigenetics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.