* 2245202
* CRII: SHF: Graphical User Interface Test Code Adaptation for Developing Voice Assistant Features in Mobile Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Xue Qin, Villanova University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 05/31/2025
* USD 175,000.00

The popularity of Voice Assistant (VA) has skyrocketed in recent years, with
users able to perform tasks faster and more efficiently through simple voice
commands. The success of leading products like Google Assistant and Amazon Alexa
has motivated mobile app developers to integrate voice assistant features into
their applications. However, adding these features can be significantly time-
consuming for developers, as the existing code design primarily focuses on
graphical interactions rather than voice interactions. This project aims to
provide a solution to this issue by utilizing existing test code to design the
voice assistant features. Test code is a series of simulated user interactions
with an application that is used to validate the functionality of the
application. By reusing the test code and mapping it to the corresponding voice
query, the developers can quickly incorporate voice assistant capabilities into
their applications. As a result of this project, developers will be more likely
to redesign their existing code to accommodate such new voice interactions.
Furthermore, this project will bring many training and educational opportunities
for both undergraduate and graduate students. It has the potential to support
thousands of mobile developers in adding voice assistant options to their
applications. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the investigator aims to
answer the question of whether and how existing graphical user interface (GUI)
test code can be adapted to develop voice assistant features in mobile
applications. The investigator will begin by extracting the general
functionality from a specific functionality instance in a GUI test code. The
investigator will study how to differentiate the general code and non-general
code in GUI test code, and develop automated techniques to detect them. The
investigator will also investigate how to convert the general functionality into
a reusable code template for voice assistant feature development. Second, the
investigator will study how to represent the code template using human-
understandable language and create potential voice query templates based on this
language. A map will be created to connect the voice query template with the
code template. Finally, the investigator will develop techniques to facilitate
mobile applications in executing the code template in response to a particular
voice query. This project aims to support developers in adding voice assistant
functionality to existing mobile apps by reusing the test artifacts of the
application. The results of this research will inspire further investigation
into other forms of code reuse and migration for voice assistants or other new
features in mobile applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.