* 2245246
* Strange metals and the phases of quantum materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Subir Sachdev, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Serdar Ogut
* 08/31/2027
* USD 330,000.00

NONTECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical
research which will examine the so-called "strange metal" phase of quantum
matter, which is ubiquitous in systems in which the electron-electron
interaction is very strong. Quantum mechanics was initially developed in the
early twentieth century as a theory of the motion of a single electron around
the nucleus of a hydrogen atom, but it can also describe the motion of a large
number of electrons in metals and semiconductors, and this description was vital
to the electronics revolution. The past few decades have witnessed the discovery
of numerous "quantum materials" in which the role of quantum mechanics is more
profound than previously thought and not well understood. In quantum materials,
it is important to treat the motion of electrons collectively, and account for
the entanglement between the different electrons. Most prominent among these new
materials are the high temperature superconductors found in a series of
compounds which contain copper, oxygen, and numerous other transition metals,
which can conduct electricity without any loss of energy above a relatively high
temperature. In this project, the PI and his team will develop a theory of
electronic motion in such materials focusing especially on a regime of
temperatures and electron density where the motion of electrons is most unlike
those in conventional materials. This regime is often called the "strange metal"
phase, and it is clear that the mutual entanglement of electrons plays an
important role in bringing out the peculiar properties of this phase. This
project will build on the successes of a model previously developed by the PI,
which provides a simple setting in which the entanglement between the electrons
is, in a sense, maximal, and yet the equations of quantum mechanics can be
solved exactly. The PI and his collaborators have recently extended this model
to a more realistic setting which maintains its solvability, and this yields an
encouraging correspondence with observations on strange metals. This project
will extend this understanding of the strange metal to other phases of quantum
materials, including those exhibiting superconductivity at high temperatures and
microstructures that consist of one-atom-thick sheets of carbon atoms stacked in
various configurations on top of each other.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
will also contribute to the development of the scientific workforce by
supporting the training of graduate students and postdoctoral associates in
topics at the forefront of theoretical condensed matter physics. Furthermore,
the PI will continue to pursue an active program of public lectures, interviews,
colloquia, and lectures at schools for advanced graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
supports theoretical research which will examine the "strange metal" phase of
quantum matter, which is ubiquitous in correlated electron systems, especially
those that exhibit higher temperature superconductivity. A complete,
quantitative understanding of the strange metal phase is essential to progress
in the theory of quantum materials. The PI and his team have recently made
progress on a theory of strange metals, which has the attractive features of
being simple, universal, and broadly applicable across the range of correlated
materials. In this project, the team will further develop the Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev
model and related theories and compare the results quantitatively with numerous
experimental probes. For the cuprate superconductors, the strange metal phase
will be related to various neighboring phases, including the pseudogap, the
superconductor, and the charge-ordered phases. Another focus area of this
project is on graphene microstructures and will include studies of nanoscale
graphene flakes and the manner in which they can exhibit signatures of the non-
Fermi liquid of the Sachdev-Ye-Kitaev model. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
will also contribute to the development of the scientific workforce by
supporting the training of graduate students and postdoctoral associates in
topics at the forefront of theoretical condensed matter physics. Furthermore,
the PI will continue to pursue an active program of public lectures, interviews,
colloquia, and lectures at schools for advanced graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.