* 2245765
* CRII: CNS: A Systematic Multi-Task Learning Framework for Improving Deep Learning Efficiency on Edge Platforms
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Tianyun Zhang, Cleveland State University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2025
* USD 174,233.00

Multi-task learning is a subfield of machine learning in which the data is
trained with a shared model to solve different tasks simultaneously. Multi-task
learning highly reduces the number of parameters in the machine learning models
and thus reduces the computational and storage requirements. For example, there
are multiple tasks to be done in real-time in self-driving cars, including
object detection and depth estimation. If these tasks can be trained on a single
model with shared parameters, the model size and the inference time can be
highly reduced. This project aims to further compress the model used for multi-
task learning as the model size of a single deep neural network is still a
critical challenge to many computation systems, especially for edge platforms.
This project proposes an approach to learn the difficulty of every task and
maintain the performance of the most difficult task when compressing a multi-
task learning model. It increases the potential in the compression rate with
acceptable performance for all the tasks as the performance of the most
difficult task needs to be guaranteed to provide a satisfactory user experience.
This project also designs an efficient multi-task federated learning approach
for edge platforms. It improves the convergence rate of multi-task federated
learning and reduces the communication costs in every iteration. Finally, this
project proposes to solve an algorithm-hardware co-design problem to maximize
the implementation efficiency of the compressed multi-task DNN models on edge
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The files of compressed DNN models and the ideas
on efficient DNN training and implementation may be useful to researchers who
focus on improving the computation efficiency of DNN models on edge platforms
and other hardware platforms.This project will involve undergraduate and
graduate students in the research. The research achievements of this project
will be incorporated into a current senior-level undergraduate course, a new
planned advanced-level graduate course, and seminars for both undergraduate and
graduate students. There are also planned research demonstrations during the
workshops and summer camps for the K-12 students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.