* 2245247
* CRII: SaTC: RUI: When Logic Locking Meets Hardware Trojan Mitigation and Fault Tolerance
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2025
* Amin Rezaei, California State University-Long Beach Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 02/28/2025
* USD 173,000.00

The enormous consequences of hardware vulnerabilities, including the costly
prospect of fixing them, have been the subject of dozens of national reports.
This project aims to address these growing issues. Particularly, the projectâ€™s
novelty is conceptualizing hardware security and reliability based on the notion
of reconfigurability under realistic attack models and a unified definition of
different hardware security requirements. The project's broader significance and
importance include helping the national electronics industry safeguard the
underlying hardware for a trustworthy information age and increasing the number
of minorities seeking undergraduate and graduate degrees in science and
engineering, with a focus on cybersecurity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In a fabless
paradigm, integrated circuit design houses must envision not only traditional
fault-tolerance techniques to reduce the cost of replacing defective components,
but also procedures to avoid piracy and overproduction of their designs as well
as mitigate potentially inserted hardware Trojans by untrusted foundries. In
this project, the investigator and his team focus on a comprehensive hardware
security and reliability framework in two phases. First, the research team
investigates secure embedded Field-Programmable Gate Array (eFPGA) redaction
solutions. The structure of eFPGAs can provide opportunities to make the
integrated circuits secure not just against logic locking attacks but also to
mitigate hardware Trojans and tolerate faults at run-time. Second, the research
team propose dynamic key schemes with multi-level activation and functional
stages to offer a high degree of logic locking security, hardware Trojan
mitigation, and fault tolerance without significantly imposing area and power
overheads. The outcomes of this project will be disseminated to well-respected
design automation venues, and an open-source computer program will be released
that receives an efficient digital circuit and outputs a low-overhead and
provably secure netlist considering different hardware security requirements.
This will help the national high-tech industry thrive and contribute to economic
prosperity, innovation, and security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.