* 2245907
* CRII: III: Towards Reasoning Augmented Searching for Domain-Specific Knowledge Screening
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Ping Wang, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 05/31/2025
* USD 174,992.00

In the era of big data, it is increasingly challenging for domain experts, such
as physicians and pharmaceutical scientists, to efficiently retrieve relevant
information from different databases to support their decision-making. Knowledge
screening, including searching and filtering, based on traditional relational
databases may suffer from several problems. For example, keyword-based searching
and rule-based filtering can only handle limited types of questions and lack
flexibility. Over the past few years, modern deep learning methods have
alleviated this problem by automatically translating natural language questions
into structured query languages. However, if different types of data such as
tabular, textual, and heterogeneous graph data are consolidated into a
relational database with many tables, structured queries can become very
complex, which poses new challenges to deep learning models. This project will
tackle these challenges by designing a new paradigm based on non-relational
databases that store data in a more flexible non-tabular form. The new paradigm
can easily incorporate reasoning into question-to-query translation, enabling
deep learning models to handle more complex questions, which will benefit many
domain-specific applications. The project will also promote teaching and
mentoring activities, such as developing new courses and training of next
generation experts in machine learning, natural language processing, data
management, and health informatics. The project outcomes and observations will
be open for public use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will forge a new
research direction for natural language-driven knowledge screening on non-
relational databases. Although there are many well-known, efficient, and
scalable non-relational databases and search engines, little effort has been
devoted to developing natural language querying methods for them and exploiting
their potential. This project aims to fill this gap by designing new underlying
frameworks for natural language-based searching and querying, including data
consolidation in non-relational databases, reasoning integration in both
databases and query templates, and human-in-the-loop model development and
evaluations. Two primary research activities will be undertaken based on a
popular search engine known as ElasticSearch: (1) The investigator will develop
new deep learning models for translating natural language questions into
ElasticSearch queries and create new datasets for training and evaluating the
models. (2) The investigator will propose a unified approach, standard format,
and extensible way to create knowledge “nuggets” to store multi-modal data and
develop new question-generation models to automatically generate questions from
nested knowledge. The project will produce a variety of outcomes, such as data
used for model development, algorithms for model training and inference, and
annotation tools used for creating training data. These products will benefit
data management and screening, and support decision-making in healthcare,
bioinformatics, and scientific research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.