* 2245904
* CUE-P: Establishing Servingness in Computing through Baskin Engineering Excellence Scholars Program
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Kip Tellez, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Allyson Kennedy
* 05/31/2028
* USD 1,939,658.00

Given the importance of technology for U.S. innovation and economic advancement,
there is a national imperative to grow and diversify the computing talent pool.
Minority Serving Institutions (MSI) play a large role in cultivating inclusive
learning environments for students from underrepresented groups through
scholarship, service, and leadership. In this CUE Pathways project, a team of
eight California community colleges will collaborate with the University of
California Santa Cruz (UCSC) to examine and enhance the servingness aspect of
MSIs. The team will study how to move from enrolling racially diverse students
in computing to serving them in ways that more effectively increase persistence,
graduation, and career placement outcomes. The project’s research activities
will focus specifically on the effects of transfer pathways across the two- and
four-year institutions and assess the adoption of servingness activities and
practices along the transfer continuum on students’ graduation and career
success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is a collaboration created between
computing programs at the University of California Santa Cruz (UCSC) and eight
partnering California community colleges (Cañada College, City College of San
Francisco, City College of San Mateo, De Anza College, Foothill College,
Hartnell College, Mission College, and San Jose City College). The project has
three primary aims: 1) adapt, refine, and implement a servingness framework to
identify and remove institutional barriers for Transfer students in Computing,
2) improve servingness in Computing at UCSC by identifying strategies for
adoption that support equitable persistence and graduation for Transfer
students, and 3) assess the effectiveness of UCSC's adoption of a servingness
framework, policies, and practices in advancing equity in graduation, graduate
school, and career placement rates for transfer students in computing. The
proposed servingness framework, as described by Lozano, Franco, and Subbian
(2018), along with Garcia, Núñez, and Sansone (2019), will substantially
contribute to a growing body of evidence showing how policy, instruction,
student support systems, and other culturally relevant praxis can increase
student success in computing. Project activities will yield model action plans,
a theory of action, and recommended appropriate, replicable, and scalable
interventions for institutions facing similar computing persistence and success
challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.