* 2245805
* CRII: III: Self-Supervised Graph Neural Network Meta-Learning for Cancer Multi-Omics and Driver Discovery
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Tianle Ma, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Sorin Draghici
* 04/30/2025
* USD 156,911.00

Cancer is the second leading cause of death worldwide, killing more than 8
million people every year. Cancer is caused by driver mutations, which are
changes in the DNA sequence of genes that lead to the development of abnormal
cells that divide uncontrollably and can infiltrate and destroy normal body
tissue. One main goal of cancer research has been the discovery of all the
driver mutations across cancer types. However, cancer driver discovery is very
challenging as each personâ€™s cancer has a unique combination of mutations, among
which only a few are driver mutations while the vast majority are passenger
mutations that do not promote abnormal cell growth. Existing cancer driver
discovery methods can detect drivers that are common among many tumors but fail
to detect rare drivers that only occur in very few tumor cases. This project
will apply state-of-the-art machine learning approaches to identify the
remaining elusive rare drivers. The identified driver mutations may provide
critical information for planning treatment to stop cancer cells from growing,
including drugs that target a specific driver mutation. The acquired knowledge
and framework from this project will contribute to saving numerous lives by
providing the capability to better manage cancer treatments.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One major barrier for applying advanced machine learning
approaches, such as deep neural network models, to cancer driver discovery is
the lack of large-scale high-quality labeled training data suitable for
supervised learning. To address this challenge, this project will combine Graph
Neural Network (GNN), Self-Supervised Learning, and Meta Learning techniques to
integrate biological domain knowledge with large-scale heterogeneous data
(specifically known as multi-omics data in this community) for cancer driver
discovery. First, a GNN model will be constructed based on a unified knowledge
graph representing biological domain knowledge. Incorporating domain knowledge
into the model as a form of inductive bias will help train the model effectively
with less labeled data. Second, self-supervised learning will be employed to
pre-train the GNN model on multi-omics data, also reducing the need for labeled
data. Meanwhile, the learned node and edge embeddings for the GNN model can be
treated as high-level transferrable features, removing heterogeneity and noise
while facilitating cross-dataset integration and meta learning. Third, meta
learning will be applied to a pan-cancer dataset comprising dozens of cancer
types to increase model generalizability and detect novel drivers across cancer
types. The project will further improve the results of existing pan-cancer
integrative analysis of dozens of cancer types and may lead to a repeatable
process for tackling other difficult biological problems through integrating
heterogeneous data and knowledge sources with machine
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.