* 2245029
* IRES Track I: International Research Experience for Students in Computational Nanoscience
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Kalman Varga, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 04/30/2026
* USD 274,373.00

The vision of this proposal is to motivate students to become part of a new
generation of&lt;br/&gt;computational scientists solving important technological
problems in materials science, physics and&lt;br/&gt;chemistry by computer
simulations. The researchers from Vanderbilt University will train U.S. students
in both theoretical and practical aspects of computer simulations, and enhance
their professional development with research opportunities in computational
projects in an international research environment. The IRES site will be
established at the brand new unique Extreme Light Infrastructure ELI Attosecond
Light Pulse Source (ELI-ALPS) facility in Szeged, Hungary. It is expected that
the ELI-ALPS will have a huge impact on numerous fields of materials sciences,
medicine, and environment protection in the future. The ELI-ALPS is a truly
international laboratory with researchers from dozens of countries from all over
the world. The IRES students working with the Hungarian hosts will join
theoretical-experimental collaborations working on various projects in ELI-
ALPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of the proposal is to immerse U.S.
undergraduate students in challenging and technologically important
computational nanoscience projects in an international collaborative framework.
The students will develop and use computer simulation tools to model the
interaction of light and nanoscale matter. Strongly coupled hybrid light matter
states will be explored with large scale variational calculations and a coupled
Maxwell-quantum approach will be used to describe laser excitations in
nanostructures. The research projects include the study of light-controlled
electron transport, terahertz electronics, electron ratchets, hybrid coupled and
light-matter systems; with direct relevance to quantum plasmonics, information
processing and quantum computations. A new approach, which was developed by the
undergraduate students in the PI’s group, will be used to describe the
interaction of light and matter in optical cavities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.