* 2245469
* IRES Track 1: International Research Experiences for Students in AI-Enabled Decision Analytics for Advancing Air Taxi and Drone Operations
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Prasad Calyam, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 03/31/2026
* USD 300,000.00

Traffic congestion not only leads to accidents, stress, and vehicle operating
cost but is also a major cause of climate change, air pollution, a loss in
economic output, jobs, and revenues for businesses across different sectors. In
an attempt to achieve a cost-efficient, sustainable and faster transportation
alternative, several companies are in the process of exploring beyond ground
transportation and leveraging the aviation industry using advanced air mobility
(AAM) technologies. Therefore, it is necessary to train students in AAM design
and operations in order to prepare the future scientific workforce for
effectively handling next-generation transportation systems. AAM services are
not only gaining popularity in the US but also worldwide. Specifically, since
India is the second most populous country in the world, extensive state-of-the-
art research is being conducted in India to alleviate traffic congestion using
emerging technologies. Hence, the goal of this proposal is to develop an IRES
site with US-India partnership to provide U.S. undergraduate students
(particularly URM, women, and first-generation students) with cross-cultural
training on the development and application of AI-enabled analytic methods
(e.g., machine learning, optimization, simulation) to AAM operations. The
international research as well as industry exposure acquired by the IRES
participants will enhance their professional development, multidisciplinary
communication skills, and ability to conceptualize research questions based on
their interaction with a company’s R&amp;D team.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IRES
program will instigate U.S. students’ research interest in transformative,
state-of-the-art research projects, such as (i) establishing air taxi and drone
hubs in urban areas using unsupervised machine learning methods, (ii) allocation
of AAM vehicles to customers using simulation-based optimization models, (iii)
environmentally aware hybrid truck-drone-robot technology for last-mile delivery
operations. The projects discussed in this proposal will enable the development
of digital three-dimensional airspace technologies for next-generation
transportation and logistics operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.