* 2245435
* Triple Halide Ultrawide Bandgap Metal Halide Perovskites
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2027
* Michael McGehee, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Lane
* 05/31/2027
* USD 479,872.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metal halide perovskites are
solution-processed semiconductors with attractive optical and electronic
properties, which have enabled the fabrication of efficient and low-cost devices
such as solar cells and light-emitting diodes (LEDs). Perovskites used in the
most efficient devices to date absorb light in the red and near-infrared. This
corresponds to a band gap of 1.2 to 1.8 electron volts (eV), with an eV being
the amount of energy needed to move an electron across an electric potential of
one volt. It is desirable to develop high quality materials with higher band
gaps to capture more of the sun’s energy in a solar cell or emit green or blue
light from an LED. The team hypothesizes that perovskites with three different
halide atoms could realize these high-quality materials with increased band
gaps. The team will fabricate triple-halide perovskites and thoroughly
characterize their structure, composition and properties. In doing so the team
will expand the range of viable perovskites for device applications. This work
will be done collaboratively between the University of Colorado Boulder and
Wellesley College. Wellesley College is a diverse women’s undergraduate college,
where a majority of the incoming class identifies as people of color. Wellesley
College undergraduates work closely with researchers at major academic
institutions and national laboratories. This greatly increases their research
opportunities and provides students with exposure to graduate programs. This
project will serve to support that population and expand STEM
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to synthesize high
performance all-inorganic perovskite semiconductors with bandgaps between 1.9
and 2.1 eV. The performance of current wide bandgap perovskites is limited by
non-radiative recombination and environmental instability. Triple halide
perovskites are hypothesized to have desirable properties because there will be
no opportunity for demixing to occur at the A-site, chlorine will passivate
defects, the small lattice parameter will result in strong bonds and there will
be no organic cation that could decompose. The team will investigate a range of
promising triple halide perovskites, leveraging its expertise to characterize
and understand the miscible composition space; map and understand the
instabilities in these materials; and ultimately quantify and optimize the
optoelectronic properties of select triple halide perovskites. The team will
determine how solution chemistry impacts perovskite nucleation, film growth and
performance and resultant optoelectronic properties and stability. The team will
document improvements using cyclic voltammetry, in situ photoluminescence and
absorption spectroscopy, and X-ray diffraction to map defect densities and
barriers to degradation. This project is working towards (1) optimized synthesis
of novel triple halide perovskites; (2) quantification of the stability of wide
bandgap perovskites and optoelectronic performance; and (3) improved interfacial
layers for surface passivation and carrier selection in wide bandgap
perovskites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.