* 2245007
* The birth of longitudinal rivers in orogenic systems
* GEO,EAR
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Sarah George, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Audrey Huerta
* 04/30/2026
* USD 367,678.00

Large river systems in mountain belts exert important controls on erosion,
sediment flux to oceans, as well as the distribution and evolution, of species.
These rivers are highly mobile systems and understanding the processes that
modulate their development and evolution are fundamental questions in earth
surface processes. This proposal will address the timing and factors that caused
the growth of major longitudinal river systems in the northern Andes Mountains
of Colombia by studying the modern and ancient sediment transported by these
rivers. Data from this project will form the foundation for a new course at the
University of Oklahoma. Exercises will be designed to introduce students to
transferable skills including basic coding, plotting, and use of geospatial
software. These exercises will be available online (at no charge) for others to
use or modify in teaching or research. Additionally, this project will support
and train undergraduate and graduate students and a postdoctoral scholar, and
continue to enhance collaborations with international scientists.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, this proposal will address growth of
the Magdalena and Cauca Rivers in the northern Andes Mountains using combination
of modern geomorphology, source characterization, and basin analysis. Geomorphic
indices will be used to identify areas of modern drainage instability, and 10Be
erosion rates will allow for assessment of along-strike variations of erosion
rates over notable knick-points. Unique sediment sources in three sub-parallel
mountain ranges (Western, Central, and Eastern Cordilleras) facilitate the use
of provenance to track shifts in drainage networks through time. These
distinctive sediment source regions will be characterized using provenance
proxies on modern river sands. Provenance records will also be obtained in upper
Miocene-Pliocene strata. Interbedded volcanic and volcaniclastic materials in
the sedimentary intervals of interest will enable development of a robust
chronostratigraphy. The refined chronostratigraphic framework and new provenance
datasets will allow identification of upstream shifts in drainage networks
through time. Integration of modern geomorphic proxies and provenance records
will test the principal hypothesis that structural diversion led to the birth of
longitudinal rivers in the northern Andes. A subset of the samples will be the
basis for a series of teaching modules, which will be publicly available to the
broader geoscience community as teaching tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.