* 2245498
* RAPID: Biogenic Volatile Organic Compounds (BVOC)  Distributions across the Amazon Basin during the Chemistry of the Amazon-Field Experiment (CAFE) Campaign
* GEO,AGS
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2023
* Alex Guenther, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia Edgerton
* 11/30/2023
* USD 87,922.00

This RAPID project is focused on quantifying and improving knowledge about the
processes that control variations in the surface-layer concentrations of gases
emitted from vegetation in the Amazon. American scientists will take advantage
of the January 2023 Brazilian-led Chemistry of the Amazon - Field Experiment in
Brazil (CAFE-BRAZIL) river cruise to collect observations of isoprene and other
biogenic volatile organic compounds (BVOC) along a transect from the central to
northwestern Amazon. As the biosphere is the dominant source of the organic
gases in the atmosphere that interact with anthropogenic pollution to form ozone
and secondary aerosol, the ultimate societal benefit of this project will be an
improved ability to assess the total impact of human activities on climate and
air quality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objectives of this project are to:
1) quantify isoprene and other BVOC diurnal and spatial variations from central
to northwestern Amazon; 2) relate BVOC variations to climate and land cover; and
3) use the results to improve the MEGAN BVOC emission model predictability of
processes controlling BVOC emission and their response to climate change. A
mechanistic understanding of these processes could transform the approaches used
to model isoprene and other BVOC emissions in the Amazon tropical rainforest and
other highly biodiverse ecosystems. The data collected during this project will
increase the understanding of biological processes that control the variations
and distributions of gaseous emissions from vegetation in the Amazon, and
improve model predictions of ecosystem responses to climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.