* 2245056
* Travel: III: Student Travel Support for 2023 ACM International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining (WSDM)
* CSE,IIS
* 01/01/2023,08/31/2023
* Huiping Cao, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Raj Acharya
* 08/31/2023
* USD 20,000.00

The award enables about 20 US students to attend the 2023 Association of
Computing Machinery (ACM) International Conference on Web Search and Data Mining
(WSDM, pronounced "wisdom"), which will be held in Singapore (https://www.wsdm-
conference.org/2023/) from February 27 to March 3, 2022. The aim is to support a
diverse group of students and make it possible for them to attend the conference
and discuss and disseminate their work. The conference also provides an
opportunity for them to interact with international researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The WSDM conference, which was established in 2008, brings
together researchers and industry practitioners into a comprehensive program for
publication, education, and interaction, including research papers, tutorials,
doctoral symposium, and a machine learning competition-style event (WSDM cup).
The program includes publications related to web search and data mining defined
broadly, and particularly encourages publications on practical yet principled
novel models of search and data mining, algorithm design and analysis, economic
implications, and in-depth experimental analysis of accuracy and performance.
The program also includes keynote talks by leaders in academia and industry and
workshops that demand dedicated coverage due to their relevance to the current
research and development in web search and data mining. All these activities
provide a unique opportunity for students to share their knowledge, experience,
and research projects with internationally recognized researchers from both
academia and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.