* 2245525
* A functional link between ethylene biosynthesis and autophagy
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Gyeong Mee Yoon, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Aruna Kilaru
* 06/30/2027
* USD 594,108.00

Ethylene is a plant hormone that plays a vital role in regulating important
agronomic traits such as fruit ripening, senescence, disease resistance, and
stress responses. Autophagy, on the other hand, is a cellular process in which
cells recycle and break down their own components to obtain energy and building
blocks, particularly during stressful conditions. The objective of this project
is to investigate the interaction of these two important cellular pathways and
understand their molecular and physiological consequences during normal plant
development and under stress. By gaining a deeper understanding of how plant
hormones, like ethylene, interact with autophagy, we can optimize crop
performance in diverse agricultural settings. The research project offers
valuable research training opportunities for postdoctoral scientists, graduate
students, and undergraduate students. Additionally, the project includes
outreach activities targeting the general public, with a focus on local high
school students through internships and established summer research programs.
These activities involve engaging students in hands-on laboratory exercises and
research presentations, providing them with direct and immersive experiences in
the field of plant biology research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Plant hormones and
autophagy play crucial roles in regulating plant adaptation to their environment
by modulating growth, physiology, or cellular energy levels. However, the
integration of these pathways in plant biology remains poorly understood despite
extensive research on their individual regulatory mechanisms. This research
project aims to bridge this knowledge gap by investigating how autophagy
regulates ethylene biosynthesis and the signaling role of
1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylic acid (ACC) in autophagy. The first objective is
to uncover the mechanisms by which autophagy regulates ethylene biosynthesis,
focusing on autophagy-mediated ACS protein stability regulation and the
functional implications of ethylene-autophagy crosstalk. Initial findings
suggest the existence of crosstalk between these pathways. The second objective
is to genetically investigate the role of ACC as a signaling molecule in
autophagy and ACS protein turnover. Using interdisciplinary approaches spanning
genetics, cell biology, biochemistry, and physiology, this project aims to
elucidate the functional and structural connections between ethylene and
autophagy. Ultimately, these investigations will provide new insights into the
interplay between plant hormones and autophagy, as well as shed light on the
previously unknown functions of ACC in plant biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.