* 2245371
* Extending the Time and Length Scale of Electronic Structure Methods Through Force Matching
* MPS,CHE
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Feng Wang, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 02/28/2026
* USD 440,500.00

WIth support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Feng Wang of the University of Arkansas
at Fayetteville is developing a new method to connect forces from quantum
mechanics to the understanding chemical properties. While any property, in
principle, can be computed with the fundamental equations of quantum mechanics,
such computations quickly become too complex to be practical. The new method,
adaptive force matching (AFM), maps such first principles calculations to simple
mathematical expressions and thus allow macroscopic properties of materials to
be computed with a tractable computational cost. Specfic systems to be studied
by the Wang research team will involve predictions of solubility, of minerology
processes under cryogenic conditions, and of properties of microporous crystals.
The research is expected to have long range scientific broader impacts in
functional materials, and even potentially drug design and planetary science.
Dr. Feng Wang will also train next generation scientists with a collaboration
between the departments of chemistry and theatre, where students in chemistry
will be mentored by master of fine arts students for engaging presentations of
chemistry concepts. Educational videos will be produced as part of this
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this award, Professor Feng Wang and
his research group are developing methods that will extend the time and length
scale of electronic structure calculations to enable predictive simulations of
ensemble properties and of slow dynamics. The adaptive force matching method
maps potential energy surfaces of electronic structure methods computed in the
condensed phase to simple molecular mechanics energy expressions. The advantage
of this technique is to enable molecular dynamics simulations at larger length
and time scales on a potential energy surface that remains accurate to the
reference electronic structure. In the proposed work, further development of AFM
will incorporate better regularization of parameters through cross validations
and Baysesian inference. A new method to treat polarization is also being
developed. The method will be used to predict solubilities of molecular liquids,
to study mineralogical processes under cryogenic conditions, and to compute
properties of microporous crystals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.