* 2245853
* CRII: SHF: Model-Based Repair of Cyber-Physical Systems for Improving Resiliency
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Luan Nguyen, University of Dayton
* Standard Grant
* Pavithra Prabhakar
* 04/30/2025
* USD 174,985.00

Model-based design offers a promising approach for assisting developers to build
reliable and secure cyber-physical systems (CPS) in a systematic manner.
However, constructing a behavioral model at design time that offers resiliency
for all kinds of attacks and failures is notoriously difficult. There is
currently a shortage of inexpensive, automated software that can effectively
repair an initial design, and a model-based system developer regularly needs to
redesign and reimplement a system from scratch. The project is developing a
methodology, along with an associated framework, to assist a designer in
repairing an original CPS model so that it continues to satisfy the correctness
requirements under modified assumptions. The project’s novelties are as follows.
(1) It provides a fresh approach with an end-to-end design and implementation of
a software to facilitate model-based repair for improving the resiliency of CPS
against unanticipated attacks and failures. (2) It enables a designer to specify
resiliency patterns; the investigator is designing an extensible model
transformation language for CPS models. (3) The methodology utilizes formal
analysis with respect to correctness requirements formalized in signal temporal
logic hyper-properties (HyperSTL) at multiple stages. (4) Software tools are
being applied on proof-of-concept case studies where the CPS models can be
repaired to mitigate practical attacks. The project’s impacts are in (1)
developing new technologies and state-of-the-art software tools to enforce the
safety, reliability, security, and resiliency of CPS and (2) strengthening
mentorship, skill-building, and workforce readiness for CPS engineering in the
Southwest Ohio region and nationally.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
framework involves the design, implementation, evaluation, and integration of
two main tools: a Model Transformation and a Model Analyzer. A Model
Transformation tool consistently incorporates an original state-machine-based
model, a collection of resiliency patterns (or potential edits), and feedback
from analyzers to produce an updated resilient behavioral model. The tool
automatically searches through the extensible library of resiliency patterns,
written as model transformation scripts, to solve the model repair problem. A
Model Analyzer tool analyzes the system correctness requirements at multiple
stages, both at design time and during runtime operation. The complete model
generated by the Model Transformation is falsified using a static falsifier,
while the corresponding implementation is monitored for violations using a
runtime monitor tool. To ensure a rich set of specifications, the investigator
is utilizing objectives and safety constraints specified via HyperSTL. An
additional feature is a counter-example analyzer that produces feedback to a
designer for developing new resiliency patterns. Design and implementation of
the tool-chain requires theoretical advances in terms of rigorous formalization,
computational engines, and heuristics for scalability. The algorithms for model
repair, resiliency patterns, and formal analysis developed in this project are
contributions of significant interest to the research community in design and
analysis of CPS.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.