* 2245171
* FRG: Collaborative Research: New Birational Invariants
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Ludmil Katzarkov, University of Miami
* Continuing Grant
* James Matthew Douglass
* 06/30/2026
* USD 166,666.00

Algebraic varieties are shapes defined by solution sets of systems of polynomial
equations. They appear naturally in different fields of science and engineering,
including physics, cryptography, control theory, robotics, computer vision,
etc,. A fundamental problem in geometry is the classification of algebraic
varieties, as it helps us gain a better understanding of the structures and
relations between them. The first step in classification is called birational
classification, i.e. two algebraic varieties are called birational if they are
equal outside some lower-dimensional loci. In this proposal, the PIs will
investigate new birational invariants. These invariants will shed new light on
the birational classification problem. The Principal Investigators will bring
new ideas from differential equations, category theory, mirror symmetry and
conformal field theory for achieving this goal. This project will provide
research training opportunities for graduate students and early-career
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More concretely, the Principal Investigators
will develop an extended theory of variations of non-commutative Hodge
structures. It will be based on a new singularity theory of Landau-Ginzburg
models and a non-commutative refinement of the notion of spectrum of quantum
multiplication operators. These new non-commutative spectra will provide natural
obstructions to rationality and equivariant rationality of Fano varieties.
Additionally the PIs will investigate the connection between non-commutative
spectra and R-charges of conformal field theories. This will lead to even
stronger birational invariants, as well as to new unexpected bridges between
geometry and other branches of mathematics, including: a new connection between
Steenbrink spectra and the spectra of conformal weights in vertex operator
algebras; a connection between topological invariants of 3-manifolds and non-
commutative spectra of complex surfaces; semicontinuity of non-commutative
spectra of algebraic varieties and the RG-flows on sigma-models with targets on
such varieties; and a relation between the Kaehler-Ricci flow and the RG-
flow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.