* 2245960
* A data analytics certificate for non-computing majors.
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Zahra Shekarkhar, Fayetteville State University
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2027
* USD 201,599.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by creating and testing an
innovative pathway for non-computing majors to stack micro credentials in
technical skills, towards an academic certificate aligned to real-world career
applications and providing students the skills needed for data-driven
investigations in their respective disciplines. The resulting curriculum will
feature a gentle introduction to programming using a no-code to low-code to
high-code approach, to make it appealing to students from a broad-cross section
of disciplines. The curriculum will be situated within the social justice
context, making it appealing to historically marginalized communities in
computing. This project will make data science more widely accessible, more
relevant, and of greater interest to students in fields outside of Computer
Science.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The curriculum will be developed and tested
within a rigorous research design which includes assessing the efficacy of the
approach at raising awareness, access, and interest in data science. Research
activities will inform the emerging data science for social justice certificate
pathway within courses for non-computing majors, measure the efficacy of the
certification innovation and its impacts on participants, and provide a means to
produce fundamental, structural change in the computer science training
landscape. The project team will assess (i) the utility and benefit of such a
certification from practitionersâ€™ perspectives using the Design Based Research
approach (DBR), (ii) the efficacy of the approach in increasing the foundational
knowledge of data science, shaping identities, perceptions, sense of abilities,
and career choices of students, particularly from historically marginalized
communities using the Social Cognitive Career Theory (SCCT) framework, and (iii)
the ability of the proposed innovation to transform undergraduate computing
education by identifying factors and supports that enable replication and
sustainability using system mapping to study system-level
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.