* 2245367
* LEAP-HI: Design, Fabrication, and Multiscale Understanding of Biolubricants Using Synthetic Biology, Glycoengineering, and Biomimetic Synthesis
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* David Putnam, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Bruce Kramer
* 06/30/2028
* USD 500,000.00

Effective lubrication is critical to maintaining the efficient functioning and
slowing the degradation of living systems. Mammalian joints are lubricated with
synovial fluid, oral cavities are lubricated with saliva, and epithelial layers
in the eye, respiratory airway, and gastrointestinal tract are coated with
lubricating mucosal layers. Conversely, inferior lubrication is the cause of
diseases such as arthritis or dry eye and is at the root of failure of medical
devices such as total joint replacements and contact lenses. Beyond biology,
proper lubrication is critical for the function of motors, engines, and
vehicles. Increased friction accounts for up to 15% of fuel consumption in
vehicles and results in 60-70 percent of resistance to motion of large ships.
Thus, in addition to important applications to living systems, biology presents
an excellent template for the design of lubricants that can greatly reduce
energy consumption in a variety of man-made systems. This Leading Engineering
for America's Prosperity, Health, and Infrastructure (LEAP-HI) interdisciplinary
project will design, synthesize, and test new families of lubricants to
understand and treat disease and to serve as templates for lubricating synthetic
systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An array of lubricating behaviors in nature are
mediated by mucins, glycoproteins that achieve efficient lubrication by binding
with tissues via a protein backbone and attracting water to surfaces via sugar
side chains. For example, the articular cartilage surface has friction
coefficients as low as 0.001, lower than ice-on-ice, and is lubricated by
interactions of the specialized mucin lubricin and hyaluronic acid to form a
microscale lubricating layer. The project will investigate the use lubricin and
hyaluronic acid and their interactions as a template for designing, fabricating,
and characterizing recombinant and synthetic lubricants that lubricate and
protect biological systems at multiple length scales. The goal is to: 1) develop
a new generation of biolubricants using synthetic biology, glycoengineering, and
biomimetic synthesis; 2) understand mechanisms of lubrication of these materials
at the nano-, micro-, and macroscales; and 3) evaluate the potential of the new
lubricants to treat medical conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.