* 2245674
* Scalable Computational Methods for Large-Scale Stochastic Optimization under High-Dimensional Uncertainty
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2024
* Peng Chen, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Yuliya Gorb
* 08/31/2024
* USD 235,622.00

Large-scale simulation in computational science and engineering is often carried
out not only to obtain insight about a system, but also as a basis for decision-
making. When the decision variables represent the design or control of an
engineered or natural system, and the system is governed by partial differential
equations (PDEs) with uncertain input due to lack of knowledge or intrinsic
variability, the task of determining the optimal design or control leads to a
PDE-constrained stochastic optimization problem. Such problems abound across all
areas of science and engineering. Examples include optimal control of subsurface
flows, plasma fusion reactors, and chemical and materials processes; optimal
structural design of aerospace, automotive, and civil infrastructure systems;
and shape, layout, or topology optimization of biomedical, electronic, and nano-
structured devices. There are several critical challenges in solving such
problems including high dimensionality stemming from uncertainty and/or
optimization variable spaces, and the need to solve large-scale PDEs with
numerous samples of the uncertain parameters. This project will develop,
analyze, and implement scalable computational methods to make tractable the
solution of large-scale PDE-constrained stochastic optimization problems under
high-dimensional uncertainty. These methods will be applied to subsurface flow
problems with societal impact; software will be developed and disseminated
widely in open source form. Graduate students will be involved and will receive
interdisciplinary training. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project exploits the
intrinsic structure of the stochastic optimization problems--in particular the
intrinsic low dimensionality, smoothness, and geometry of the random parameter-
to-objective map. Specifically, the components of the research include: (1)
Analysis of the rank or spectrum decay of the Hessian of this map to prove
intrinsic low-dimensionality for several classical stochastic PDE-constrained
optimization problems. (2) Extension of local quadratic approximation-based
stochastic optimization to that based on approximation of the Hessian as a
translation invariant operator, higher order Taylor approximation, and multi-
point Taylor approximation with mixture models. (3) Application to a specific
large-scale and challenging problem of optimal flow control in a subsurface
porous medium with a random permeability field. The methods developed in this
project will apply to a wide class of PDE-constrained stochastic optimization
problems. To make the methods accessible to broader communities and allow
stochastic optimization specialists to prototype new algorithms and quickly run
experiments, a Python library, SOUPy (Stochastic Optimization under high-
dimensional Uncertainty in Python), will be implemented and released. Users will
be able to rapidly prototype new PDE models and objective functions, as well as
quickly implement new algorithms, conduct numerical experiments, and solve
challenging problems in new domains in SOUPy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.