* 2245762
* Conference: Transforming Engineering Access for Mercer Students (TEAMS)
* ENG,EEC
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2024
* James Maccariella, Mercer County Community College
* Standard Grant
* Regina Pope-Ford
* 05/31/2024
* USD 87,479.00

Transforming Engineering Access for Mercer Students (TEAMS) will engage the
community by establishing collaborations between three target groups: high
schools, colleges/universities, and the engineering industry. The TEAMS
activities will include four conferences, college engineering tours, engineering
project field trips, and a presentation of findings at a national engineering
conference. The first conference will target area high schools, with a goal of
identifying student barriers to engineering. The second conference will target
colleges and universities, with a goal of identifying effective institutional
interventions. The third conference will target the engineering industry, with a
goal of identifying engineering employer needs. The final conference will be a
summary roundtable discussion, with a goals of creating an engineering readiness
summary and an engineering employee skills summary.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TEAMS
will broaden participation in engineering by establishing engineering mentoring
opportunities, increasing engineering student engagement and motivation, and
creating a partnership with engineering stakeholders. The TEAMS program will
identify barriers to the engineering profession for those traditionally
underserved, and promote participation of diverse students, faculty and
professionals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transforming
Engineering Access for Mercer Students (TEAMS) will engage the community by
establishing collaborations between three target groups: high schools,
colleges/universities, and the engineering industry. The TEAMS activities will
include four conferences, college engineering tours, engineering project field
trips, and a presentation of findings at a national engineering conference.
&lt;br/&gt;Conference 1: Area high schools. Target group: students, parents,
teachers, and counselors. The goal is to identify student barriers to
engineering. &lt;br/&gt;Conference 2: Colleges and universities. Target group:
New Jersey engineering colleges and universities. The goal is to identify
effective indicators for engineering student success in addition to effective
institutional interventions.&lt;br/&gt;Conference 3: Engineering industry.
Target group: engineering consulting firms and professional engineering
societies. The goal is to identify engineering employer needs. &lt;br/&gt;While
the data are assessed from the first three conferences, TEAMS will coordinate:
(1) college engineering tours at area engineering programs, and (2) engineering
project field trips. &lt;br/&gt;Summary Conference. Target group: all
stakeholders. The goal is to create an engineering college readiness summary and
create an engineering employee skills summary.&lt;br/&gt;TEAMS will assess
student attitudes about engineering, knowledge about engineering careers,
confidence, presence of engineering mentors, motivation, goals, and support. The
goal is to identify student barriers to engineering, particularly for
underrepresented groups. In addition, TEAMS will identify effective indicators
for engineering student success and effective institutional interventions.
Finally, TEAMS will identify engineering employer needs. In sum, TEAMS will
develop (1) an engineering college readiness summary, and (2) an engineering
employee skills summary. These summaries will be used to support
institutionalization of lessons learned and will be disseminated to the broader
community via a summary report. TEAMS will broaden participation in engineering
by establishing engineering mentoring opportunities, increasing engineering
student engagement and motivation, and creating a partnership with engineering
stakeholders. &lt;br/&gt;The TEAMS program will increase the number of low-
income, URM, and veteran STEM students who enroll in STEM disciplines, transfer
to four-year institutions, and eventually meet local and regional workforce
demand. The TEAMS program will identify barriers to the engineering profession
for those traditionally underserved, and promote participation of diverse
students, faculty, and professionals. Many low-income and nontraditional
students begin their college careers at community colleges, and there is a
national need to increase transfer success in these populations. The project
team will broadly and strategically disseminate the TEAMS findings to promote
institutional change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.