* 2245950
* CRII: SHF: A Flexible, Learning-Enabled, and Multi-layer Interconnection Architecture for Optimized On-Chip Communications
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Ke Wang, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Danella Zhao
* 04/30/2025
* USD 174,734.00

The rapid scaling of technology has led to the growth of parallel systems that
integrate an increased number of cores per chip. For contemporary computer
systems, this trend has signified a paradigm shift from computation-centric to
communication-centric design methodologies. Consequently, enhancing security,
reliability, performance, and energy efficiency of Network-on-Chips (NoCs)
architectures is proving to be one of the most critical design challenges to
realizing the performance potential of future parallel systems. Despite existing
NoC research having made significant progress addressing individual design
objectives, relatively few efforts to date have targeted all four challenges in
a holistic manner due to the existence of design trade-offs and the complexity
of dynamic interactions among various NoC hardware. For example, deploying per-
router error correction circuit can lead to excessive delays and increased power
consumption while recovering from the fault. Additionally, utilizing regional
routing methods for security purposes may result in network hotspots and
congestion that greatly hinder performance and lead to faults. Therefore, there
is an imminent need for an optimized NoC design that manages the dynamic
interactions and handles design trade-offs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
devotes to developing a holistic design methodology that addresses the security
and reliability of the entire NoC, while maximizing performance and energy
efficiency. To achieve this, the project first carries out a thorough study of
NoC fault mechanisms and security vulnerabilities. A variety of security-
enhancing and fault-tolerant techniques are developed and investigated in order
to assess their performance and overheads. Second, it develops a comprehensive
and flexible NoC design framework that integrates multiple reconfigurable
hardware with embedded NoC enhancement techniques to protect the NoC from
transient and permanent faults and security vulnerabilities while meeting power
and performance requirements. The designed framework incorporates a learning-
enabled controller that deploys machine learning algorithms, such as supervised
learning and reinforcement learning, to accurately capture the runtime behaviors
of NoCs, model dynamic interactions, and handle trade-offs by automatically
deploying the most suitable configurations of the dynamic hardware with the goal
of maximizing system-level security, reliability, power, and performance.
Finally, the project develops a cycle-accurate simulation tool and an FPGA
prototype to evaluate the designed NoC framework. The holistic design approach,
covering the NoC architecture designs and the machine learning techniques, will
benefit future multicore architectures with improvements in security,
dependability, energy efficiency, and performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.