* 2245573
* CRII: SaTC: Design Space Modeling for Logic Obfuscation to Enable System-Wide Security during IC Manufacture and Test
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2025
* Michael Zuzak, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 02/28/2025
* USD 174,705.00

Due to the rising cost of semiconductor manufacturing, computer chip designers
are increasingly reliant on offshore manufacturers. These manufacturers are
generally considered to be untrusted, driving concerns of intellectual property
(IP) piracy and theft. Logic obfuscation, also called logic locking, was
developed to mitigate these threats, however, its effectiveness varies widely
based on how obfuscation resources are allocated throughout a system. This
project studies how to model, automate, and evaluate the high-level
configuration of logic obfuscation in a system to maximize security with minimal
design overhead. The project's novelties are the system-wide view of the
obfuscation resource allocation problem and the framework to generate
mathematical models for this allocation problem. The purpose of these models is
to automatically identify effective distributions of budgeted obfuscation
resources in varied computer chips and provide intuition on how obfuscation
secures a complex system. The project's broader significance and importance are
in lowering the barrier to developing secure computer chips for high-trust
applications (e.g., healthcare, defense, finance, and automotive) through
automation. The integration of education and research is a key objective. This
includes research opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students as well
as open-source course modules to train next-generation security experts for the
workforce.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project bridges the knowledge gap between
combinational, gate-level logic obfuscation schemes and their security impact in
the larger integrated circuit they protect. Specifically, the project develops a
design space modeling framework for logic obfuscation system configuration in
order to budget obfuscation resources, allocate resources to design regions, and
specify obfuscation schemes in these regions. Given a fixed budget of various
obfuscation resources, these models automatically identify obfuscation
configurations that fulfill system-wide security goals with minimal design
overhead. The research artifacts are 1) quantifiable system security metrics for
obfuscation, 2) an open-source design space modeling framework for obfuscation,
and 3) a verification of generated models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.