* 2245442
* CRII: SaTC: Robust Explainable Provenance-based Intrusion Detection
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2023,02/28/2025
* Xueyuan Vanbastelaer, Wake Forest University
* Standard Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 02/28/2025
* USD 174,999.00

Modern intrusion detection systems detect ongoing cyberattacks based on the
knowledge of a computer system’s activity history, also known as data
provenance. However, deploying them in the real world is challenging. The
project’s novelties are the development of a next generation intrusion detection
system that not only accurately identifies an intrusion but precisely diagnoses
its root cause and method of attack, even in the presence of an attacker who
actively tries to evade detection. The project’s broader significance and
importance are (1) delivering timely solutions to real-world cybersecurity
threats increasingly faced by both the U.S. government and large corporations
that affect the security and privacy of millions, (2) fostering a collaborative
security community by organizing a workshop on building and disseminating
reproducible intrusion detection experiments, and (3) training first-generation
and LGBTQ students to improve the representation of members from
underrepresented groups in the security workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project addresses three challenges that imperil the efficacy and practical
adoption of provenance-based intrusion detection systems. First, they cannot
explain precisely the cause and progression of an attack. Second, they are
ineffective when an attacker purposefully tries to evade them. Third, they
require an abundance of provenance data that is difficult to obtain. To address
these problems, this project designs a novel intrusion detection system that
leverages machine learning to highlight anomalous computer activity indicating
an intrusion. The machine learning algorithm focuses on making sense of the
attack to reduce manual effort to triage intrusion alerts. To expose the
shortcomings of existing intrusion detection systems, the project first studies
new intrusion strategies that simultaneously attack a host computer system and
evade detection. A counter measure technique that introduces randomness and
strengthens robustness in learning is then incorporated into the machine
learning pipeline to mitigate such attacks. Finally, the project leverages
software engineering and program analysis techniques to synthesize benign
provenance data to train the intrusion detection system and integrates these
techniques into an automated framework to facilitate data generation. A
successful project will advance state-of-the-art endpoint intrusion detection
and response solutions, improve analyst experience, and enhance the security of
cyberinfrastructure critical to the government and other
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.