* 2245933
* CRII: CNS: Secure Decentralized AI in Heterogeneous IoT Networks: Foundation and Application
* CSE,CNS
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2025
* Qianlong Wang, Towson University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2025
* USD 174,162.00

Under the emergence of the Internet of Things (IoT), tremendous amounts of data
have been generated in a distributed manner from IoT devices, e.g., smart
sensors, smartphones, cameras, etc. To effectively learn the patterns among such
distributed data, distributed learning/federated learning frameworks have been
explored to effectively utilize the distributed/decentralized data resource.
However, the current distributed learning systems over IoT face inevitable
challenges, mainly categorized into security, privacy, compatibility, and
efficiency. For instance, first, the success of most existing learning systems
relies heavily on a central server to coordinate the learning process. Second,
traditional distributed learning requires the data on different devices to be in
the same type/dimension. Third, the learning efficiency of the existing
frameworks is another major concern. This work aims to systematically design a
secure and fully decentralized learning method over IoT devices that enables the
system to learn patterns from heterogenous data, i.e., data in different
types/dimensions. This work will also deploy the developed method on a
decentralized platform, i.e., blockchain, and design corresponding system
protocols to eliminate the need to use a central server as in traditional
distributed learning. On the other hand, the proposed system aims to exploit
potential system vulnerabilities, develop attack and defense mechanisms, and
theoretically analyze the system's reliability. Moreover, this work lays the
groundwork for system research in dense IoT applications supported by
decentralized learning. It generates preliminary experimental data necessary to
develop an independent and competitive research agenda.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This work will extend the traditional distributed/federated learning
into a more general and practical scenario under IoT, where various types of
data and IoT devices exist in the system. This work will also enhance the
reliability of learning performance when a certain portion of the data in the
network is attacked/malicious. Additionally, this work is potentially
transformative as it may help generate innovative and secure decentralized deep
learning techniques for numerous applications, e.g., smart cities, smart homes,
and mobile health, since the proposed system can effectively utilize
heterogeneous resources. It could also have significant impacts on research in
transforming the existing centralized or distributed smart applications into a
fully decentralized manner with security and performance guarantees. To address
the education and social aspects, this project aims to provide students with
resources to pursue advanced degrees and careers in STEM. This work plans to
engage students from underrepresented groups as a part of a continuous effort to
broaden participation in computing and develop advanced graduate-level courses
to introduce new trends and cybersecurity challenges in future decentralized
artificial intelligence over IoT.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.