* 2245055
* CHS: Smal: AI-Human Collaboration in Autonomous Vehicles for Safety and Security
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Jing Chen, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Todd Leen
* 09/30/2024
* USD 350,961.00

Autonomous vehicles (AVs) are promising to increase transportation safety and
security, but the state-of-the-art artificial intelligence (AI) technologies
used in AVs are still not sufficient, as evident in fatal crashes involving AVs.
In the foreseeable future, human inputs and interventions will still be
necessary, at least as a monitor or supervisor in AVs. Monitoring to correctly
detect rare but potentially deadly events in AVs requires high levels of
vigilance. The required vigilance taxes human supervisors in AVs. This project
aims to overcome these challenges through novel collaboration between the AI
system and the human driver. This project will result in algorithms and design
principles that help reduce road accidents and are broadly applicable to other
related intelligent systems in critical areas such as cybersecurity, national
defense, and healthcare. Moreover, this project will support multi-disciplinary
training of graduate and undergraduate students across disciplines, the
development of course modules that provide students interdisciplinary experience
critical to shaping the regional and national workforce, and involvement of
underrepresented students in STEM fields at the graduate, undergraduate, and
pre-K through 12 levels. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses safety-
critical challenges by developing a cognizant human-in-the-loop secure AI
mechanism. The project focuses on autonomous driving incorporating three
thrusts: (1) Investigate how to maintain human drivers' vigilance through
secondary task assignments that incorporate the level of uncertainty in the AI
decisions, (2) Develop a fault-tolerant, adversary-aware AI engine that outputs
uncertainty levels in its decision as a basis for requesting human inputs. (3)
Develop a vigilance-based adaptive task-allocation scheme to calibrate human
vigilance online based on a quantitative vigilance model constructed from human-
subject data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.