* 2245248
* Collaborative Research: Assessing the role of polyphosphate production and cycling in marine ecosystem functioning.
* GEO,OCE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Julia Diaz, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Standard Grant
* Daniel J. Thornhill
* 03/31/2026
* USD 378,208.00

Phosphorus (P) is a vital nutrient required by all forms of life. In the ocean,
which sustains half of global photosynthesis and oxygen supply, P can be scarce
enough to constrain biological productivity, carbon dioxide uptake, and
therefore climate. Human activity is accelerating the delivery of nutrients like
P to the ocean, but rates of nitrogen inputs are even greater. This imbalance
may increase levels of P stress in marine ecosystems, placing ocean productivity
more and more under the control of P supply. Given the critical role of P in
sustaining ocean health and ecosystem services now and into the future, a
comprehensive understanding of its utilization and fate in the marine
environment is necessary. In this project, the research team investigates marine
polyphosphate (polyP), a ubiquitous yet poorly understood form of P made by all
living organisms. To close major knowledge gaps on marine polyP, the
investigators are overcoming major technical barriers to produce the first
quantitative measurements of polyP in marine microorganisms. These measurements
are being conducted on laboratory microbial cultures, as well as field samples
from environments with high P supply, such as the California Current Ecosystem,
or very low P supply, such as the Mediterranean Sea. In addition, the research
team is resolving the cellular function of marine polyP across these different
organisms and environments in order to clarify its role in biological P
nutrition. This work helps advance polyP research across disciplines, including
terrestrial science and even cancer research, and has broad application to P
bioremediation. This project supports a postdoctoral researcher, a graduate
student, and several undergraduate students in the labs of two female
scientists. New educational tools to teach the public about marine polyP are
being produced and disseminated through this project. A K12 teacher is
participating in the work and communicating the findings to their classrooms and
to broad audiences online.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PolyP is ubiquitous in marine
systems, where it plays critical roles in microbial P nutrition and P mineral
formation and sequestration. In these ways, polyP has the potential to shape
long- and short-term marine P cycling, primary productivity, microbial ecology,
and global climate. However, major knowledge gaps still exist. Due to technical
limitations, the scientific community currently lacks a quantitative
understanding of marine polyP pools, their chain lengths, and biological
origins. Furthermore, given the view of polyP as a P storage molecule, recent
observations pointing to the preferential retention of particulate polyP in low
phosphate (Pi) environments raise new questions about its ecophysiological
functions. To close these knowledge gaps, two research questions are addressed:
Q1: What is the total content and chain length distribution of polyP across
different microbial groups and environmental conditions? Q2: How do the
production of particulate polyP contribute to microbial P demand and
stoichiometry across a broad range in Pi availability? The following hypotheses
are tested: H1 (Q1): Functionally and environmentally diverse plankton produce a
broad range of polyP chain lengths and concentrations. H2 (Q2): The preferential
retention of polyP in low Pi environments can be reconciled with its role as a P
storage molecule by a combination of taxonomic and physiological factors. These
hypotheses are tested in the laboratory using representative cultures of marine
plankton and in the field using observational approaches along natural Pi
gradients in the Pacific Ocean and Mediterranean Sea. Applying a new P-targeted
method using mass spectrometry, the team is resolving an unprecedented level of
detail in marine polyP content and speciation. By combining cell sorting with
elemental, biochemical, and radiotracer analyses, the team is gaining a
mechanistic understanding of polyP physiology and its cycling in the
ocean.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by the Biological
Oceanography and Chemical Oceanography Programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.