* 2245402
* Collaborative Research: CDS&amp;E: Theory-infused Neural Network (TinNet) for Nonadiabatic Molecular Simulations
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Hongliang Xin, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 06/30/2026
* USD 326,416.00

Photoinduced electron-stimulated reactions are ubiquitous in nature, as
exemplified by photosynthesis, which is driven by hot electrons excited by solar
radiation. Solar-driven reactions also hold great potential for transforming
critical chemical reactions related to sustainable energy, environmental
pollution control, and low-carbon chemicals and fuels manufacturing,
particularly when aided by catalysis. To this end, the project harnesses the
combined power of quantum chemistry, machine learning, and ultrafast pump-probe
experimental techniques to reveal insights that will improve the efficiency of
photocatalyzed reactions, enabling the development of technologies that support
clean energy and a cleaner environment. The project includes educational and
outreach activities, such as STEM-related activities for K-12 students to
encourage their curiosity, critical thinking, and synthesis of clues with domain
knowledge of surface physics, materials chemistry, and mathematics.
Additionally, the data from this project will be integrated into college-level
courses that provide next-generation training to students in the fundamentals of
computational and data-enabled science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project explores a computational and data science approach to modeling
nonadiabatic reaction dynamics on metal surfaces co-driven by electronic
excitations. The study advances knowledge of selective bond activation for
rational design of heterogeneous catalytic systems beyond Sabatier volcano
limitations. The approach builds on recent advances in molecular simulations
enhanced by machine learning (ML) potentials for rapid sampling of adiabatic
ground states. In many adsorbate-substrate systems, however, electronic
transitions play an important role in channeling energy from excited charge
carriers to chemical bonds of key reaction intermediates, the process of which
is nonadiabatic in nature. A data-efficient and interpretable modeling framework
with explicit considerations of electron-phonon interactions will be developed
for understanding nonadiabatic surface reactions, aiming to maximize quantum
efficiency and bond selectivity of energy transfer processes. With the
development of ML-enabled nonadiabatic molecular simulations, fundamental
questions regarding how the structure/composition of electronically-excited
nanoparticles, e.g., plasmonic metals, and physical characteristics of light
stimuli that impact the efficiency and selectivity of bond activation can be
tackled.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is co-funded by the Catalysis program
in the Chemical, Bioengineering, Environmental and Transport Processes (CBET)
Division and the Chemical Theory, Models, and Computational Methods (CTMC)
program in the Chemistry (CHE) Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.