* 2245729
* CRII: CNS: OCEAN: A Once-for-All Edge Collaboration System for Medical Imaging
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Lanyu Xu, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2025
* USD 175,000.00

Given the ability to learn complex representations in a data-driven manner, Deep
learning algorithms have greatly impacted the medical imaging field. However,
achieving reliable healthcare artificial intelligence (AI) technology is
challenging due to the scarce annotation problem caused by the cost of
professional labeling, heterogeneity of human labels, and concerns over
healthcare information privacy. To overcome this scarce annotation problem,
there are currently two solutions. One solution is enabling multi-institutional
collaboration to train a dedicated model. Another is obtaining multi-scale
features from training a shareable model to fine-tuning multiple tasks. The
first method involves huge computation and communication costs to train a
dedicated model for only one type of task; while the second method is currently
only applied to the autonomous car where a rich amount of data is collected and
processed frequently on a single node. This project seeks to fill this gap by
innovatively training multiple medical imaging tasks together with a cache
mechanism to build an efficient and effective multi-institutional collaborative
system. The goal of the proposed research is to design a multi-task learning
model for medical imaging tasks, design a cache mechanism for the system to
active relevant portion when interpreting a specific task, and develop a
prototype distributed multi-task learning system for medical imaging to evaluate
the model and system performance of the proposed solutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building a one-for-all collaboration system for medical
imaging will constitute a significant technological breakthrough toward
achieving practical AI in clinical practice. By facilitating the model sharing
within and among institutions, the proposed system can address the scarce
annotation problem and accelerates clinical detection, diagnosis, and treatment,
to benefit healthcare professionals. Furthermore, as a general-purpose
framework, the proposed system will also be deployed to other fields with
similar application requirements, such as connected autonomous driving and other
mobility systems on land, in the air, and at sea, where multiple nodes work as a
unit for a series of tasks. From the education aspect, the proposed system will
be developed as a basic experimentation platform for healthcare AI and can be
easily transplanted to other scenarios, such as smart homes and smart
transportation. The proposed system will be used for undergraduate and graduate
education and research with the goal to inspire students' interests in edge
intelligence, broaden participation in intelligent computing, networking, and
systems, and enhance education diversity, inclusion, and
equity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.