* 2245054
* Logic, Ramsey Theory, and Relational Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2022,08/31/2023
* NONE NONE, NONE
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2023
* USD 19,153.00

Ramsey Theory is a central area of mathematics aptly characterized by Motzkin's
motto, "Complete disorder is impossible." Ramsey's Theorem states that given any
coloring of all pairs of natural numbers into finitely many colors, there is an
infinite subset in which all pairs have the same color. Since its inception,
Ramsey theory has developed in multiple directions, often appearing as the core
content in solutions to deep problems from a wide range of mathematical
disciplines. This project utilizes techniques in mathematical logic to more
fully develop Ramsey theory of infinite relational structures. A major
motivation is to find dividing lines between those infinite structures which act
like the natural numbers in the sense of possessing analogues of Ramsey's
theorem, and those which do not. Of particular interest is the advancement of
Ramsey theory for structures with forbidden configurations. Progress on infinite
structures works in tandem with progress in mathematical logic and topology,
creating new pathways between several areas of mathematics. This project
includes some important questions which are suitable for graduate students and
early career researchers, thus providing opportunities to broaden participation
of well-trained mathematicians via the PI's mentoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
research program will develop the Ramsey theory of infinite relational
structures, especially those with forbidden configurations, an area which had
been largely impervious to investigations prior to the PI's recent solution for
the universal homogeneous triangle-free graph. This will involve constructing
new types of trees which code homogeneous relational structures and using the
technique of forcing to produce (in ZFC) Ramsey theorems for these classes of
trees. These new techniques will be used obtain better bounds for finite
structural Ramsey theory. Computability theoretic strengths of varying Ramsey
statements, and connections with classification schemes in model theory will be
investigated. Infinitary Ramsey theory will continue to be developed with a
broad spectrum of implications for and applications to other areas of
mathematics. The techniques developed, involving simultaneous uses of logic,
combinatorics and topology, will create new pathways between these areas of
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.