* 2245827
* CRII: CNS: An Experimental Infrastructure to Reduce Latency Long-tail in Real-time Stream Processing
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Shungeng Zhang, AUGUSTA UNIVERSITY RESEARCH INSTITUTE, INC.
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 03/31/2025
* USD 175,000.00

Because of Covid, businesses are reassessing their decades-old traditional
strategies. Leading companies such as Walmart are embracing event streaming and
cloud-centric web applications to rapidly reshape their business models.
However, unexpected performance variances in these web-facing applications could
significantly and adversely affect consumers and, ultimately, online businesses.
The project addresses this challenge with an experimental infrastructure and
research aimed at relieving potential performance concerns from service
providers to achieve good performance and high resource efficiency for web-
facing applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Consistent low latency has become
essential for user-facing, latency-sensitive web applications such as e-commerce
and real-time stream processing due to its business impact. For example, the
Bing search engine team reported that a 500-millisecond delay could lead to a
decrease in revenue by 1.2%. Despite continuous efforts made by practitioners,
the latency long-tail problem still consistently occurs, where a small number of
requests take a long response time (e.g., multiple seconds) to return. Existing
(and state-of-the-art) infrastructures mainly focus on the correlation between
execution time variance localized in the critical paths (i.e., the longest path
in time for a request from start to finish) and latency long-tail in web-facing
applications. However, our preliminary experimental results suggest that
asynchronous, very short but intense resource demands (milliseconds level,
referred to as the “millibottlenecks”) outside of critical paths can also cause
signiﬁcant latency long-tail, causing serious end-user dissatisfaction and
leading to significant revenues loss. This project targets the unique challenges
of millibottlenecks outside of critical paths by designing a fine-grained
monitoring toolkit and developing sophisticated quantitative analyses for
millibottlenecks as well as effective cures for latency long-tail problems to
achieve the goals of reducing latency long-tail in emerging real-time processing
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project responds to this research
challenge with an experimental infrastructure, to reduce latency long-tail
caused by millibottlenecks in real-time stream processing. The project will
proceed along with three tasks. First, the experimental infrastructure starts
with the initial results of the observed latency long-tail in emerging real-time
stream processing through ﬁne-grained performance monitoring (e.g., both system-
and application-level metrics). Second, the team will propose to methodically
evaluate and validate millibottlenecks (including that outside of the critical
path) and to determine their causal relationship to the latency long-tail.
Third, effective cures will be proposed to reduce latency long-tail by
disrupting the causality from millibottlenecks to the latency long-tail problem
with negligible overhead. Furthermore, the knowledge gained on the latency long-
tail problem caused by various millibottlenecks will enable more reliable
performance studies and long-term advances in the design and implementation of
mission-critical web applications in clouds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.