* 2245287
* IRES Track I: US-Finnish research on sustainable evolution and technical debt management in cloud-native systems
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Tomas Cerny, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 05/31/2026
* USD 299,993.00

Cloud-native software design aims to fully utilize the benefits of cloud
infrastructure. The development of cloud-native systems is complex and requires
the interaction of many teams, often responsible for individual subsets of such
a system or different perspectives (i.e., operations). However, the evolution
management of these systems is challenged by their decentralized nature and
possibly separately managed codebases. Understanding the holistic perspective of
such systems with many moving parts involved takes herculean efforts for
developers to analyze the system as a whole. This research project advances
knowledge in cloud-native system analysis. It introduces evolution safeguards to
cloud-native systems to reduce maintenance efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project combines dynamic and static system analysis perspectives into a
comprehensive system intermediate representation leading to holistic reasoning.
Such a representation will enable comprehensive system assessment and automated
reasoning about potential design anomalies. It will include interactive
visualization of various system aspects to help practitioners better observe
their systems holistically and educate practitioners and students about typical
design pitfalls specific to these systems. This project considers human-centered
and technical perspectives to enable automation and expert knowledge for more
sustainable system evolution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Throughout the lifespan of
this project, 18 US students will be engaged in international research
experience taking place at Oulu University in Finland, under the supervision of
Professors Davide Taibi and Valentina Lenarduzzi, who will work in concert with
the US Principal Investigator. Project results will also be used to engage
prospective students with STEM and promote university research and coursework in
software engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.