* 2245139
* NSF Showcase for DUE Projects at the ACM SIGCSE Symposium
* EDU,DUE
* 12/15/2022,11/30/2025
* Jian Zhang, Texas Woman's University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 11/30/2025
* USD 182,046.00

The Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education organized by the
Association for Computing Machinery (ACM) Special Interest Group on Computer
Science Education (SIGCSE) is one of the oldest ACM conferences and is SIGCSEâ€™s
flagship conference. The Symposium is held annually, in North America, and is
the premier venue for computing education researchers to meet and disseminate
their work. The NSF showcase at the SIGCSE Technical Symposium provides an
opportunity for NSF grant recipients to showcase and disseminate the results of
their work. The NSF showcase provides grant recipients the opportunity to
circulate their ideas, obtain feedback, recruit collaborators and adopters, and
consult with program officers much earlier in the project cycle, providing
crucial insights that improve the likelihood of the projects succeeding and the
findings being disseminated. The NSF showcase will also include opportunities
for members of the computing education community to connect with NSF program
officers to explore grant programs and to receive feedback on proposal ideas.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF showcase will facilitate a discussion among the
affinity groups who collectively participate in computing education research,
specifically targeting issues related to preparing students who are
computationally fluent, and building and enhancing the computing professional
workforce, which includes research software engineers, research data science
professionals, advanced cyberinfrastructure systems professionals, and others.
The NSF showcase provides a way for many computing educators to see NSF projects
in progress, to interact with NSF program officers, to learn about NSF programs,
and discuss potential projects for funding. The SIGCSE Technical Symposium is
regularly attended, with pre-pandemic attendance at 1,900 attendees. The
conference primarily serves a US audience with around 90% of the attendees being
from the US with an additional 5% from Canada and other attendees from Europe,
Asia, and Australasia primarily. The NSF Showcase is funded by the NSF IUSE: EHR
Program, which supports research and development projects to improve the
effectiveness of STEM education for all students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.