* 2245591
* Next-generation Tempering Methods for Multimodal Sampling: Theory and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Quan Zhou, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Yong Zeng
* 05/31/2026
* USD 59,298.00

The data we collect today is more complex than ever, requiring sophisticated
statistical models to uncover intricate patterns and extract useful information.
These models come in various forms, such as neural network models for image and
speech recognition, mixture models for text classification, and graphical models
for studying the interaction between genes. But the increasing volume and
complexity of the data make it infeasible to perform exact calculations with
such models. A viable alternative used ubiquitously in data science is sampling,
which can generate approximate, randomized, and computationally efficient
solutions. For example, given a data set of thousands of genes, by generating
random gene networks repeatedly according to some sampling scheme, one can
determine which network best explains the observed data and quantify the
probabilities of gene interactions. However, the performance of sampling methods
can vary significantly across different problems and is often hard to analyze
theoretically. In this project, a paradigm-shifting sampling methodology with
theoretical guarantees will be developed. The methods developed are widely
applicable and are particularly useful when a large number of good solutions to
the problem exist, but only a few can be identified by traditional sampling
algorithms. The research team will implement the methods for solving
computationally intensive problems in genomics, such as heritability estimation
of complex traits, and for studying the water use efficiency of different cotton
varieties. The latter will help agronomists develop and select high-yielding
cotton varieties with better drought tolerance. The research includes projects
suitable for training graduate students and open-source software
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to develop new algorithms
for sampling from multimodal target distributions, a universal computational
challenge in statistics, machine learning, and applied sciences. A novel
approach to devising Markov chain Monte Carlo methods will be developed, which
bridges existing sampling techniques, including random walk Metropolis-Hastings
algorithms, importance sampling, and simulated tempering. This new paradigm
enables researchers to combine different techniques conveniently, leading to
both theoretical and methodological advancements that are impossible in the
classical framework. Particularly, the research team will develop new algorithms
that involve multiple chains, with each chainâ€™s behavior and computational cost
optimized according to whether it is used for exploration or exploitation.
Convergence analysis will be conducted under general multimodal settings to
provide theoretical guarantees. One application of the proposed sampling
methodology that will be researched in depth is the learning of partial
differential equation models. A novel Bayesian methodology based on Gaussian
processes will be developed for inferring unknown parameters in highly non-
linear partial differential equation models, which can be seamlessly integrated
with the proposed sampling methods. Other applications, including high-
dimensional model selection problems, will also be studied, and algorithms
tailored to each problem will be developed. All resulting software packages will
be made publicly available. Ultimately, the statistical methodology and
algorithms developed in this project will be utilized to tackle pressing
problems in genomics and crop sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.