* 2245064
* Conference: Salt contamination of water supplies in tidal rivers
* GEO,EAR
* 02/15/2023,01/31/2025
* David Ralston, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Standard Grant
* Laura Lautz
* 01/31/2025
* USD 99,999.00

Access to clean and safe drinking water is critical to public health and
economic prosperity. About 70% of U.S. drinking water comes from surface waters,
including the tidal fresh regions of estuaries. Drought, sea level rise,
watershed and port &amp; harbor engineering, and changes in land-use are
increasingly threatening such water supplies in coastal regions due to
increasing risk of salinization. The risk extends to water extraction from the
coastal zones for thermoelectric power, irrigation, and industrial production.
This project will bring together an interdisciplinary team of researchers and
stakeholders to assess the risks of salt contamination of water supplies in
tidal rivers, synthesize the current understanding and identify knowledge gaps.
A better understanding of climatic and other anthropogenic effects on the water
supplies will be valuable for bolstering the resilience of water infrastructure
and protecting public health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A series of virtual web
panels and an in-person workshop will be organized to assess the science on this
emerging topic. Case studies of saltwater intrusion and freshwater salinization
in tidal rivers in the US and around the world will be discussed and
synthesized. The workshop will bring together national and international
communities of diverse researchers working on the interdisciplinary aspects of
salt contamination of water supplies in tidal rivers, involving senior and
early-career scientists, postdoctoral fellows and graduate students. The
workshop will include outreach activities through engagement with stakeholders
involved in water management, conservation, drinking water treatment operations,
and will include participants from the agricultural, industrial, municipal and
power generation sectors that rely on access to freshwater sources. The overall
goals are twofold: (1) publish a systematic review paper to synthesize current
understanding of this interdisciplinary topic and identify major knowledge gaps;
(2) produce a forward-looking workshop report to create a research vision and
guide future research activities on salt contamination of water supplies in
coastal zones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award is co-funded by the Hydrologic
Sciences and Physical Oceanography programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.