* 2245508
* CRII: III: Measuring the alignment between the interests of local communities, local news, and the national news media
* CSE,IIS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Alexander Nwala, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Hector Munoz-Avila
* 07/31/2025
* USD 175,000.00

As citizen interests combine national and local community topics, their
interaction with online news sources is expected to reflect this duality of
focus. For example, online news should combine stories about local school
districts and ones about national interests. In this award, the researchers will
advance our understanding of how local and national news reports address the
needs and interests of local communities. The findings could inform more
effective communication strategies and improve our knowledge of critical issues
affecting communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research comprises
four main thrusts. First, creating a novel longitudinal local news repository to
complement an existing longitudinal national news repository the researchers
pioneered in a past collaboration with the Internet Archive. Second, the project
will research new natural language processing (NLP) approaches to identify the
geographic locations covered or not covered by the news, to provide a dynamic
measurement of news deserts in a rapidly changing news landscape. Third, the
project will mine community interests and needs expressed by topics on social
media and search trends. Fourth, the project will explore the alignment between
the interests of local communities and news topics. By fulfilling these goals,
this research would create new techniques and best practices in building
longitudinal local news datasets, which could be a valuable resource for
researchers from different disciplines to study the United Stated via local
media. Additionally, this effort would pioneer novel NLP models for identifying
communities covered by news reports, and map the extent of local news deserts to
unveil neglected and marginalized communities. Moreover, the proposed activities
will quantify the degree of alignment between community interests and news
stories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.