* 2245575
* DMS/NIGMS 1: Statistical Methods for Design and Analysis of Clinical-scale Single Cell Studies
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Nancy Zhang, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Pena Edsel
* 06/30/2026
* USD 600,000.00

Over the last two decades, scientific discoveries in biology and medicine have
increasingly relied on the statistical analysis of large genomic data sets.
Thus, the development of rigorous statistical methods for reproducible and
scalable analyses on such data sets, and the interdisciplinary training of a
next generation of scientists who can straddle the computational and biomedical
sciences, is crucial for our scientific advancement. This project focuses on
challenges in the analysis of data from single cell experiments, which are made
possible by recent technological developments enabling genome-scale measurements
to be made on individual cells, in high throughput across millions of cells at
one go. Such single cell experiments are now the bread-and-butter of biomedical
research, playing a cardinal role in our quest for a more complete understanding
of cell biology as well as our pursuit of cures for every disease, from
infectious diseases such as COVID-19 to cancer to aging-related maladies such as
neurodegeneration. Despite the promise of these new technologies, current
methods for single cell data analysis are not designed for clinical-scale
disease research, and do not adequately harness the information provided by the
many recently completed single cell reference atlases, the latter realized
through years of consortia-level efforts and millions of dollars in national
funding. This project aims to bridge this computational analysis gap,
specifically by addressing two critical limitations in the field: (1) The lack
of a principled approach for the removal of unwanted technical variation from
clinical-scale single cell sequencing studies, and (2) the need for an
integrated approach to clinical-scale proteomic profiling that harness single
cell reference atlases to achieve more precise cell type composition analysis.
For both problems, the project’s goal is to develop principled, transparent, and
scalable methods for reproducible scientific research. Broader impacts of this
project are its potential impact in improving the well-being of individuals in
society; its contributions in STEM education for undergraduate and graduate
students; and in the involvement and participation in research of women and
under-represented minorities in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more
technical detail, the first aim of the project focuses on the removal of
technical “batch effects”. Technical batch correction is an unavoidable and
challenging step in *all* single cell data analysis pipelines. Many methods have
been proposed for batch effect correction in single cell experiments, but they
were designed to align cells across all batches, ignoring design principles such
as control cohorts, longitudinal sampling, and biological replicates. Without
utilizing these design principles, existing methods can not adequately estimate
batch effects and often confound them with real biological signals. Aim 1 of the
project formulates new statistical methods for batch effect correction that are
adaptable to a multitude of experimental designs and develops statistical
inference procedures for quantifying the strength of biological signals (e.g.
differential expression or emergence of a new cell type) accounting for the
uncertainty in batch correction. Aim 2 of the project tackles a different
challenge arising in clinical-scale single cell proteomic profiling: Despite
decreasing sequencing costs, flow and mass cytometry are still orders-of-
magnitude faster and cheaper, and thus remains the method of choice in clinical-
scale immunological studies where large cohorts need to be profiled on a tight
timeline. However, each flow/mass cytometry run only measures a limited panel of
proteins, and thus does not allow cell-type labelling at the level of detail
afforded by single cell transcriptomics. Aim 2 develops a new approach to cell
type profiling that integrates multiple flow/mass cytometry runs, with
complementary panels, on the same sample, with the goal of achieving cell-type
tabulation accuracy matching state-of-the-art single cell sequencing protocols
at only a fraction of time and cost. This aim leverages the growing compendium
of single cell reference atlases, providing a roadmap for the future use of
these atlases in population-level cell type censusing projects. Through
collaborations, the developed methods will be applied to multiple ongoing large-
cohort studies that have direct clinical impact. Methods developed in this
project will be released as open-source software, and the datasets generated
will be uploaded to public repository for general use.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.