* 2245753
* CRII: CSR: Understanding and Enhancing Unsafe Rust Code in Resource-constrained Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Chen Cao, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Marilyn McClure
* 05/31/2025
* USD 151,453.00

Resource-constrained systems run on resource-constrained devices, which have low
computation power, and limited memory and storage with the advantage of low-
electrical-power consumption. They are increasingly used nowadays, including IoT
(Internet of Things) devices (e.g., smart home devices) and embedded devices
(e.g., Bluetooth/Wi-Fi modules in the desktop/mobile platform). However, the
advantage comes with the expense of no or limited software and hardware
protections. As a result, new vulnerabilities are being discovered in resource-
constrained systems. To mitigate this problem, Rust is gaining popularity in
implementing these systems due to its safety and close performance to C/C++,
while a Rust compiler enforces restrictive rules and leverages the unsafe
keyword to bypass them. Unfortunately, the introduction of unsafe Rust code also
introduces potential safety issues defeating the purpose of using Rust to
enhance resource-constrained systems. This project addresses this challenge by
exploring, designing and experimenting with various tools and frameworks in the
context of resource-constrained systems, and provides insights on unsafe Rust
code in these systems. In this way, this project targets reducing the negative
effect of using the unsafe keyword and support developers with more confidence
in safety guarantee. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to improve using
Rust in resource-constrained systems by eliminating unnecessary usage of the
unsafe keyword or preventing the potential issues caused by unsafe Rust code. As
a result, resource-constrained systems written in Rust would be more secure,
even if the unsafe keyword is used. Furthermore, tools and frameworks developed
in this project will be open-source. They will not only be helpful to resource-
constrained system developers, but also contribute to the Rust community. The
best practices concluded and lessons learned during this project will also be
open to the community. The goal is to elaborate the result as RFC (Request for
Comments) documents and make them the standard. As part of the outreach effort,
the data and the results of this project will be incorporated into undergraduate
courses in both computer science and cybersecurity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.