* 2245670
* LTREB Renewal:  Drivers of temperate forest carbon storage from canopy closure through successional time
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2022,06/30/2024
* Lucas Nave, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 06/30/2024
* USD 297,190.00

Forest disturbances, such as clear-cutting and fire, typically lead to large
losses of carbon and nutrients from forests and their soils. Virtually all
forests in the Eastern US are recovering from such disturbances, whether natural
or human-caused. It is, however, not well understood what mechanisms control
recovery times of forest carbon and nutrient stocks following disturbance. Also
not well known is how plant growth, soil development and climate variation
interactively regulate recoveries of carbon and nutrients in aging forests. This
project uses long-term experimental plots at the University of Michigan
Biological Station (a 110-year-old field station in northern Michigan) to
investigate how changes in forests lead to overall carbon capture and storage.
Globally, forests remove approximately 1/4 of carbon emissions from fossil fuel
combustion, with temperate forests, like those studied here, being responsible
for almost half of that carbon removal from the atmosphere. However, it is
uncertain whether forests will continue to partially offset human-derived carbon
emissions as they age and mature following past large-scale disturbances. This
project provides critical data and mechanistic understanding needed to predict
the magnitude and duration of continued temperate forest carbon uptake, and the
ability of forests to provide fiber, fuel, habitat, and many other benefits to
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This long-term (10-year) project began to answer
globally significant questions in its productive first 5 years. Researchers are
measuring the forests and soils in 6 forest stands (approx. 2 acres each) that
were experimentally cut and burned in either 1936, 1948, 1954, 1980, 1998, or
2017. These cutting and burning treatments replicate larger-scale cutting and
burning that occurred in the early 1900s across the Great Lakes region within
which the experimental stands are nested. Forest structural measurements include
patterns of tree, leaf, and branch density and arrangement. Soil measurements
include both nutrient distribution and availability and soil carbon fluxes. By
using nearby old forests (130- to &gt;200-yr-old) that were not severely cut and
burned as reference points, the team is linking disturbance, climate, soil, and
vegetation controls to long-term patterns of carbon sequestration in forests
that are representative of other forests across the northern U.S. and similar
regions in Canada, Europe and Asia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.