* 2245117
* Collaborative Research: GOALI: Bio-inspired bistable energy harvesting for fish telemetry tags
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2022,10/31/2024
* Lei Zuo, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 10/31/2024
* USD 230,583.00

Aquatic systems are highly interconnected, which allow fish to traverse long
distances, to dive through a water column, and, for some species, to move
between fresh and saltwater environments. There is critical and urgent need for
long-life unremitting fish monitoring technologies that can help with
understanding fish behavior, selecting offshore wind farm sites, operating
hydroelectric power plants, and assessing environmental impacts of marine
hydrokinetic energy systems. The total market value of global telemetry
including fish telemetry tags is estimated to reach $243 billion by 2020.
Current fish telemetry tags are constrained by the limited lifetime of
batteries, and periodic battery replacements are expensive and harmful to the
fish. Another challenge is how to attach these tags to a fish with minimum
impact on its normal life. Implanting a tag inside a fish body constitutes a
complicated surgery process with the risk of impeding the fish life, and the
mechanical clamping to the fin may negatively affect the fish motions.
Therefore, this proposal aims at investigating a self-powered strategy and a
bio- inspired attachment method for fish telemetry tags through energy
harvesting from the surrounding fluid and fish
maneuvering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of this GOALI project are to design
and validate a novel bio-inspired attachment with a minimal influence on fish
life and mobility and a bio-inspired broadband energy harvester to achieve a
self-powered fish telemetry tag. The proposed bio-inspired fish tag consists of
a bio-inspired bi-stable energy harvester, a bio-inspired sucking disc, an
acoustic transmitter, and an integrated circuit board that contains both the
transmission circuit, sensors, and the energy-harvesting management circuit.
Particularly, the principle behind the Venus flytrap will be fully understood to
investigate the snap-through dynamics of the proposed bi-stable galloping
piezoelectric harvester subjected to the combined excitations from fish maneuver
and fluid flow. The remora-shark "symbiotic relationship" will be studied and
used to guide the design of the bio-inspired sucking pad with stiff metal-based
teeny spikes (in mimic the lamellar spinules) to attach the harvester on the
fish. The specific work scope includes (1) a bio-inspired design of an
attachment mechanism and a self-power sensing and communication system, (2)
modeling of the fluid-structure-piezoelectric interaction, (3) the bio-inspired
dynamics of the bi-stable piezoelectric energy harvester under complex
excitations, and (4) experimental validation on robotic fish, live fish, and on-
site demonstrations to investigate the performance and the influence of
harvester on the fish life and mobility. The research is integrated with an
educational and outreach plan, including course development, undergraduate
research, K-12 students and teachers, and opportunities for minorities and
women. The active collaboration between the two universities and industry will
guide fundamental research to solve a critical industry need and enable wide
dissemination and accelerated implementation of developed knowledge with
immediate industry impacts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.