* 2245972
* Collaborative Research: CUE-T: HBCU Learning Community-based Intervention in Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Elva Jones, Winston-Salem State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 06/30/2026
* USD 146,896.00

The University of the District of Columbia, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical
University, Winston-Salem State University, Mississippi Valley State University,
Norfolk State University, and Hampton University will collaborate to develop the
Historically Black Colleges and Universities Learning Community-based
Intervention in Computing (HBCU LCI-CS). This project will be designed to
prepare and retain student populations underrepresented in computing and
ultimately increase diversity in the computing workforce. This project team
intends to explore the impact of an intercollegiate learning community-based
intervention on the retention of underrepresented minority incoming students in
computer-related fields. Although this learning-based community will be
implemented among the partnering HBCUs, the activities of the project will be
scalable to other institutions. This project intends to understand how to teach
computing effectively to a broad group of students, in a scalable manner, with
an emphasis on broadening the participation of groups who are underrepresented
and underserved by traditional computing courses and
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of HBCU LCI-CS will be to increase the
retention of first-year students in computer-related fields by preparing them
for collegiate success. HBCU LCI-CS will involve a three-fold approach: 1) an
intercollegiate collaborative bridge program 2) a service-learning program and
3) a lecture series. The proposed research activities will include (1)
investigating how community-based activities affect underrepresented minority
students' preparedness, (2) exploring how community-based activities affect
underrepresented minority studentsâ€™ retention during their freshman year in
college (3) examining how participation in an HBCU community affects participant
attitude, confidence, and sense of belonging, and (4) exploring if service-
learning increases the motivation and engagement of students from groups
underrepresented in computing in a computing-related major. This project is
jointly funded by IUSE:CUE and the Historically Black Colleges and Universities
Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.