* 2245705
* CRII: AF: Variational Inequality and Saddle Point Problems with Complex Constraints
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2025
* Digvijay Boob, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 02/28/2025
* USD 174,927.00

The variational inequality (VI) problem is a general tool for modeling various
optimization and equilibrium problems. Such problems have applications in
traffic networks, power market pricing, signal processing, risk-averse/robust
optimization, and adversarial learning. Many of these application problems
impose complicated constraints that must be satisfied. These constraints can
arise due to engineering, ethical or legal concerns for the context of the
respective application, and often have a functional form. In some cases, the
constraint function is data-driven with unknown data distribution - making it
impractical to evaluate its value even at a single point. This project aims to
develop novel first-order algorithms that can work for VI problems with complex
constraints in functional form.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Existing algorithms for VI
problems assume that one can efficiently project onto the constraint sets. This
assumption is not satisfied when constraints have a general functional form,
even more so when the function is data-driven. Hence, the projection requirement
severely restricts the applicability of current algorithms to real-world
problems of consequence. The algorithms developed as part of this project will
solve VI problems without requiring any projection onto complex constraints in
functional form. It includes (1) the deterministic problems algorithm evaluates
the VI objective and constraint function exactly; (2) data-driven problems where
an exact evaluation of the VI objective or the constraint function may not be
possible due to large data/unknown underlying distribution; and (3) extending
these methods for min-max saddle point problems - an important specific case of
the VI problem. The successful completion of this project will yield state-of-
the-art algorithms for the VI problem with these complex constraint satisfaction
requirements. The proposed algorithms will be equipped with provable convergence
guarantees for each of the three subcases above. The project will include a
comprehensive numerical validation of the proposed schemes for an equilibrium
problem arising from wireless communication. The intellectual property generated
as a part of this project, e.g., computer codes, data sets, research articles,
and conference proceedings, will be shared with the public through open-source
online repositories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.