* 2245163
* Flow-Induced Structures in Lyotropic Chromonic Liquid Crystals
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Irmgard Bischofberger, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 05/31/2026
* USD 442,985.00

Non-technical Description:&lt;br/&gt;Liquid crystals are highly sensitive to
external influences, including electric fields, magnetic fields, or mechanical
stresses. The tunable properties of liquid crystals that result from this
sensitivity have enabled revolutions in display technology and optical sensors.
Over the past decade, a new class of liquid crystals has gained increasing
attention, so-called lyotropic chromonic liquid crystals. These are water-based
bio-compatible materials that therefore offer novel opportunities in biosensing
and microfluidic applications. To fully harness their vastly unexplored
potential, it needs to be understood how these liquid crystals respond to flow.
Such an understanding, however, is currently lacking. Remarkably, flow can
induce large-scale ordered structures. This project explores how these
structures spontaneously emerge and how they can be controlled by tuning the
flow and material properties. Integrated into the research is a comprehensive
outreach plan that includes lectures for high-school students and teachers,
research internships for undergraduates, and laboratory workshops for women
high-school students. The project will present live science and art performances
that will integrate visual, audio and dance elements to engage a broad audience
in genuine scientific dialogue.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description:&lt;br/&gt;The research probes the conditions under which self-
organized structuring can be achieved in flowing nematic lyotropic chromonic
liquid crystal solutions. Using a combination of advanced microscopy techniques,
stability analyses, and numerical simulations, the project addresses how
instabilities of the director field can trigger flow structuring and how these
unstable configurations relax into macroscopic domains. In particular, two
steady-state flow-induced textures are investigated: a periodic stripe pattern
that occurs for planar surface anchoring conditions when the alignment is
parallel to the flow direction and a band texture that emerges for a planar
alignment perpendicular to the flow direction. Excitingly, the periodic stripe
pattern is chiral: its mirror image cannot be superimposed on the original. This
is remarkable, as the liquid crystalline units themselves are achiral, and
achiral nematic liquids are generally expected to form achiral structures. The
project aims to reveal the mechanism for the mirror symmetry breaking. By
establishing the role of the surface anchoring conditions, the flow, and the
material properties for the selection of characteristic length scales and
macroscopic textures, the work will open the path to exploit flow as a simple
and non-invasive pathway to intricate ordered structuring of complex
fluids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.