* 2245343
* CDS&amp;E: Multiscale Computational Modeling of Flow-Induced Mechanical Deformation via Nonlocal Formulations
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Ivan Christov, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Reha Uzsoy
* 05/31/2026
* USD 386,562.00

This Computational and Data-Enabled Science and Engineering (CDS&amp;E) project
will contribute to the advancement of national prosperity and economic welfare
by enabling predictive simulations of complex mechanical problems with relevance
to biomedicine (how to adhere layers of tissue together after surgery) and the
development of coatings and sealants (how to ensure dried paint remains attached
to a surface). Most have experienced the commonplace challenge of peeling off a
piece of tape from a surface or attempting to lift a thin object stuck to a wet
glass tabletop. From paint and do-it-yourself home repair to diapers and hygiene
products, soft coatings involve the fluid-layer-mediated adhesion of an elastic
material to a rigid substrate. The ability to accurately simulate the adhesion
and debonding processes, including material failure, in real-world scenarios
remains a challenge. The fundamental research supported by this grant will
promote the progress of science by developing theories that will lead to fast
and accurate simulation tools capable of handling the complex interaction
between thin layers of fluids and soft, elastic surfaces that can adhere,
detach, or even tear apart due to the flow of the fluid. Undergraduate and
graduate students will be trained in computational mechanics, and planned
interactions with an HBCU will increase the diversity of individuals pursuing
higher degrees, and ultimately of the STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
grant will enable predictive, multiscale simulation of flow-induced mechanical
deformation using nonlocal formulations of continuum mechanics via the
construction of tractable 1D models coupling nonlocal mechanical response to
fluid flow, leading to creation of 3D solvers for peridynamic equations,
employing novel finite-volume discretizations that permit the simulation of two-
way coupled fluid-structure interactions featuring nonlocal mechanics. Using
recent developments in mathematical analysis, such as weakly-singular kernels
for defining nonlocal generalization of the Laplacian, nonlocal 1D models will
be derived to understand the fundamentals of flow-driven delamination of
nanosheets where classical continuum mechanics approaches fail. Ideas from the
finite-volume implementation of meshless (particle) methods will be used to
design and build 3D computational tools upon standardized, open-source
frameworks that can be made freely available to researchers and practitioners.
The resulting computational tools will be capable of bridging scales (from the
mesoscale to the continuum scale via nonlocal theories) to enable predictive
simulation of flow coupled to nonlocal mechanics relevant to applications such
as soft adhesion, additive manufacturing and
biophysics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.