* 2245173
* I-Corps: Next Generation Device for Airway Clearance
* TIP,TI
* 12/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Robert Hood, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps is the development of a
medical device for airway clearance to be used by civilian and military first-
responders. The proposed technology is a portable suction device. Airway
management is critically important in trauma patients, and airway compromise is
the second leading cause of potentially survivable death on the battlefield.
Effective portable suction is a key component of airway clearance for first
responders; however, currently available devices are either too heavy and bulky
to be carried (e.g., electrical units) or insufficiently powered (e.g., manually
powered) to be useful. Many combat medics and civilian first responders decide
against carrying suction units due to their poor efficacy and cannot justify the
weight and space in their kits. Currently, none of the available products meet
the functional needs of combat medics caring for massively injured casualties,
and none have a robust design and logistical considerations needed by a mobile
and agile military force. In addition, airway clearance may have important
applicability in civilian emergency departments and intensive care
units.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of
a medical device for airway clearance. The proposed battlefield-ready suction
kit is designed for combat casualty care providers or their civilian
counterparts. The proposed technology is based on innovations in the interior
flow loop that reduce resistance to flow, enabling higher suction pressures and
evacuation flowrates. In addition, the device is designed to be capable of
operating in any physical orientation during usage. The proposed interior flow
loop also may permit a lighter, more compact design, reducing the size and
weight as compared with current electrically powered portable suction units on
the market, which represents a critical improvement for a portable device. A
prototype has been developed and results demonstrate the proposed airway
management device may have applicability in trauma patients in emergency
departments and intensive care units.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.