* 2245689
* CRII: SaTC: Local Differential Privacy under Correlation
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Yidan Hu, Rochester Institute of Tech
* Standard Grant
* Anna Squicciarini
* 03/31/2025
* USD 175,000.00

As data has become the fuel that drives business growth, an increasing number of
service providers collect large volumes of data from users to gain insights for
better business decision-making. Such data may contain or reveal sensitive
personal information, and disclosing such information raises significant privacy
concerns among the general public. Various Local Differential Private (LDP) data
analysis techniques have been proposed to allow a data collector to gain helpful
information from the data while ensuring users' privacy. Still, these methods
exhibit an inherent trade-off between individual data privacy and data utility,
i.e., strong data privacy for individual data contributors comes at the cost of
reduced data utility for the data collector, which has been hindering their
broad adoption. This project's novelties lie in exploiting the correlation that
commonly exists in multi-attribute data, e.g., a person's age and salary, and
new correlated random perturbation techniques to develop effective LDP
techniques with much-improved privacy and utility tradeoff. The project's
broader significance and importance include new tools for service providers to
improve how they collect and utilize user data to drive their business decisions
and growth while ensuring strong privacy guarantees to individual users as well
as privacy-preserving data analysis techniques in various web, mobile, and IoT-
based applications and services.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project develops
novel LDP techniques to significantly improve the privacy and utility tradeoff
by exploiting the correlation in multi-attribute data and the correlation that
can be introduced into different users' random perturbations. The project will:
(1) develop novel LDP techniques for correlated multi-attribute data via
sequential random perturbation for improving data utility without sacrificing
privacy guarantee, and (2) design novel LDP techniques with improved privacy and
utility tradeoffs by exploiting correlated random perturbation among randomly
formed groups of data contributors. The findings from this project will enrich
the scientific knowledge of privacy-preserving data analysis and privacy-
enhancing technologies. Insights gained from and outputs of the project will be
made publicly shared through online tutorials, talks, publications, and software
toolkits. The project will integrate research outputs in curriculum development,
and will contribute broadly through undergraduate and graduate mentoring, and
outreach to K-12 and underrepresented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.