* 2246959
* Divided Differences, Pipe Dreams, Brick Manifolds, and Braid Varieties
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Allen Knutson, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 07/31/2026
* USD 360,000.00

Many mathematical (and other-scientifical) problems are of the form: if we
impose a certain list of conditions on some desired object X, how many Xs exist,
or indeed are there any at all? Any nonlinear such problem (for example, "how
many points lie both on this line and that circle?" probably two) has
linearizations and even those can be hard to answer. 20th century algebraic
tools are powerful enough to compute the number of Xs satisfying basically any
such linearized problem; however, when that number is computed as one big sum
minus another big sum, it can be hard to predict when the result is zero vs.
positive! Much of the PI's work, and the first part of this project, is in a
search for alternate formulae that do not involve any cancelation. Graduate
students will be trained and postdocs will be mentored during the course of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project consists of three subprojects (almost
wholly independent, though all straddle algebraic combinatorics and algebraic
geometry). The first subproject concerns the divided-difference-operator
recurrence that defines Schubert polynomials, characterizing and exploiting a
second family of operators that commute with the first. The second subproject
has a new approach to an age-old question: "is the scheme of pairs of commuting
matrices a reduced scheme?" The PI has a degeneration of this scheme to a union
of components (indexed by "generic pipe dreams", which are of great interest in
their own right), and if this latter union is reduced then so too is the
commuting scheme. The third and final subproject introduces a spectral sequence
for computing the cohomology of "braid varieties", which connects to Khovanov
homology of links, to cluster algebras, and to basic questions in representation
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.