* 2246838
* Rare Events and High-Dimensional Stochastic Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Kavita Ramanan, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Wilmer
* 07/31/2026
* USD 365,000.00

Large collections of interacting random elements arise in many areas, ranging
from physics and neuroscience to engineering and operations research. It is of
great importance to study fluctuations and large deviations from the typical or
mean behavior of these systems. Indeed, fluctuations and atypical events,
although rare, can have significant impact, so it is important to quantify these
probabilities and to understand typical occurrences of rare events. A
significant mathematical challenge is to see how the structure of interaction
between large collections of stochastic elements influences the nature of such
deviations. This project will address this challenge for three classes of
stochastic systems. The first class consists of large collections of interacting
diffusions that arise as models of stock prices in finance, as continuum models
of population dynamics in biology, and in statistical physics. The second class
concerns high-dimensional measures, such as random ensembles of matrices arising
as representations of high-dimensional data, and their relation to lower-
dimensional projections, which are used as a dimension-reduction technique when
analyzing data. Understanding the statistics and deviations of lower-dimensional
projections is not only relevant for statistics and data science but also has
significance for some open conjectures in convex geometry. The third class
pertains to the study of fluctuations of eigenvectors of random matrices and
addresses hypotheses related to quantum mechanical systems. The project will
include vertically integrated mentoring of junior researchers at multiple levels
and outreach efforts to foster broadening the mathematical participation of
underrepresented and disadvantaged groups. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
will study high-dimensional stochastic systems and work to characterize
fluctuations and large deviations from mean behavior and the nature of rare
events in such systems. Three classes of problems will be considered. The first
focuses on large collections of diffusions whose local interaction structure is
governed by an underlying graph, and aims to study their atypical or large
deviation behavior. While this has been well understood for almost half a
century in the case when the underlying graph is the complete graph, the goal of
this project is to study the complementary case when the graphs are (uniformly)
sparse, which is also the relevant regime for many applications. This will
require a combination of tools from random graph theory, stochastic analysis and
variational methods. The second class of problems relates to the study of
concentration and large deviation behavior of projections of high-dimensional
convex bodies, with a focus on non-commutative settings, such as the level sets
of norms of Banach spaces of matrices such as the p-Schatten spaces. The
relation to some outstanding conjectures in convex geometry will also be
explored. The third theme concerns the study of universality of the Eigenstate
Thermalisation Hypothesis from physics, which is a statement about eigenvectors
of random matrices, and corresponding fluctuations. These problems address
fundamental problems in probability theory and have applications to statistical
physics, asymptotic convex geometry and statistics. The project will employ a
combination of analytical, geometric and probabilistic
methods.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.