* 2246887
* Collaborative Research: A National Consortium for Synergistic Undergraduate Mathematics via Multi-institutional Interdisciplinary Teaching Partnerships (SUMMIT-P)
* EDU,DUE
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Susan Ganter, University of Texas of the Permian Basin
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 03/31/2024
* USD 223,287.00

In conjunction with the Committee on Curriculum Renewal Across the First Two
Years (CRAFTY) of the Mathematical Association of America (MAA), a consortium of
eleven institutions will collaborate to revise and improve the curriculum for
lower division undergraduate mathematics courses. A key element of these
innovations will be interdisciplinary partnerships, with partner disciplines
directly involved in decisions about curricular needs. Collectively, the
consortium will impact over 52,000 undergraduate students and 200 college
faculty from a wide array of disciplines through implementing major
recommendations from the MAA Curriculum Foundations (CF) Project and changing
the undergraduate mathematics curriculum in ways that support improved STEM
learning for all students while building the STEM workforce of tomorrow. The
project will also foster a network of cross-disciplinary faculty in order to
promote community and institutional transformation through shared experiences
and ideas for successfully creating functional interdisciplinary partnerships
within and across institutions. Materials and ideas generated by the curricular
changes and the interdisciplinary collaborative process will be widely
disseminated through workshops at national conferences, two journal special
issues, extensive publications, and open webinars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will be based on research about the needs of partner disciplines, as
identified in a series of 22 workshops organized by CRAFTY. At each of the
eleven participating institutions in the project, mathematics and partner
discipline faculty will collaborate to better understand the CF recommendations,
determine how these recommendations can be used to effectively improve the
content of affected courses, introduce modifications in pilot sections, work
with a central evaluation team to measure the effectiveness of new approaches
(especially as it pertains to students from underrepresented groups), offer
workshops and support for instructors using these new curricula (locally,
regionally, and nationally), and scale-up these new offerings within the
consortium and through dissemination to additional campuses. The central
evaluation will yield extensive, consistently-collected data to accurately
determine the effects of innovative partnerships and resulting curricular
changes. Additionally, the project will contribute significantly to the Faculty
Learning Communities (FLC) knowledge-base and generate a greater understanding
of the interdisciplinary nature of mathematics within the broader undergraduate
curriculum.