* 2246236
* IRES Track1: In-situ Jungle Biomechanics Laboratory (JBL) Research Experience in the Amazon Rainforest
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* David Hu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 03/31/2026
* USD 300,000.00

This project brings a diverse group of U.S. undergraduate and graduate students
to the Peruvian Amazon Rainforest, where they will collaborate with Peruvian
scientists and students to study the biomechanics and physics of a broad
diversity of biological systems. Over the next three years, the team will bring
US students to Finca Las Piedras, a biological station located in the Madre de
Dios region of the Peruvian Amazon Rainforest. The Amazon is the largest and
most biodiverse rainforest on Earth, with several times more species of trees,
butterflies, and other species than North America. Observing organisms in their
natural habitat has led to the discovery of new principles in material science,
engineering, and robotics. However, significant barriers exist for US scientists
to study in these biodiverse locations: field sites are traditionally under-
equipped, budget-conscious, and with minimal infrastructure. Substantial
training and mentorship are necessary for students to successfully travel and
perform research in such locations. The goal of this grant is to lower these
barriers and enable successful scientific research experiences for US
undergraduates and graduate students. Students will gain access to a unique
location to do field research, increase their intercultural awareness, and
strengthen research ties between Peru and the US.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This
IRES program will implement a jungle biomechanics laboratory (JBL) to (1)
provide international research and professional experience to US undergraduate
and graduate students, (2) provide opportunities for the students to explore
non-traditional organisms for biomechanics and robotics research, and (3)
establish a paradigm for training and research laboratories to be built in other
international budget-conscious settings. Biomechanics and robophysics work will
be enabled by high-speed cameras, materials and fluid measurement devices, 3D
printers, and ad-hoc equipment built using the paradigm of frugal science. The
requested funding provides financial support, training, materials, supplies, and
travel for the students and evaluation of the program goals by an independent
third party. This program will support a diverse group of U.S. students, giving
them practical field research experience in a growing interdisciplinary field of
bioinspired design. Through the next few years of refinement and testing, the
proposed JBL will be an emerging model for field-based biomechanics laboratories
in highly biodiverse, yet infrastructurally limited regions of our
planet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.