* 2246221
* CRII: RI: Interpretable Framework and Transformative Applications for Viability in Autonomous Agents
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Stas Tiomkin, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Juan Wachs
* 03/31/2025
* USD 174,874.00

This project advances the knowledge in robot intelligence via research on
“viability” of robots. Viability is the ability of a system to autonomously
maintain itself or recover functionality after an adverse critical event and is
a desired feature of robust intelligence and autonomy. An example of a critical
event is a robot landing upside down and being unable to stand up without an
external assistance. Other examples are an unmanned underwater vehicle in an
unrecoverable state, a robotic arm getting stuck in clutter, or a car with poor
braking performance due to a mechanical failure. The principal objective of this
project is to develop a framework for the design of viable (self-recoverable)
artificial agents. The main challenge is to formulate a metric for viability
that can be calculated for various scenarios. This metric needs to be computable
from the motor and sensor readings. The first task of this project is to develop
an effective metric for agent viability from the essential properties of control
systems, along with computationally efficient methods for its calculation. The
second task is to demonstrate the applicability of this framework for useful
problems in (i) self-recovery of walking robots and (ii) self-maintenance of car
brakes. This project not only advances the understanding of robot viability, but
also proposes new machine-learning approaches for control and analysis of
dynamical systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve its goals, this project will
extend the classical notion of Lyapunov exponents towards ’Agent-Induced
Lyapunov Exponents’, AILE, which prioritize states with diverse potentialities,
and with a large space of effectively controllable states. AILE allows
artificial agents to train autonomously, maintaining themselves or recovering
capabilities without the need for problem-specific externally provided reward
functions. Computational methods will be developed for the calculation of the
AILE metric with known and unknown dynamics, and with partially and fully
observable state. This capacity will allow for the broad applicability of the
framework. It will be demonstrated in two transformative applications: self-
recovery of locomotion agents, and control of chaotic ’stick-slip’ friction in
car brakes. This project is not framed along the lines of traditional
disciplinary boundaries, but rather bridges between machine learning, dynamical
systems, mechanics, and information theory. This project will open doors to new
research directions and technology for fully-autonomous agents with an enormous
potential for replacing and/or assisting humans in risky situations, such as
driving.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.