* 2246598
* Higher classification theory in model theory and applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Artem Chernikov, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2026
* USD 240,000.00

Model theory studies the ways in which mathematical objects can be defined in
some restricted formal language, and what structural properties are implied by
these definability assumptions. It provides methods of converting asymptotic
questions about finite structures into qualitative questions about the shape,
volume or dimension of certain limiting infinite objects. This method of study
originated in questions on foundations of mathematics, but in recent years it
has found important applications in the study of some central objects of
classical mathematics and computer science. The project investigates further
these connections, with the major motivation of extending the existing
techniques from binary structures (graphs) to structures of higher arity
(hypergraphs), which represent a mathematical way of describing more complex
networks in which interactions happen not just between two nodes at a time, but
between multiple nodes simultaneously. This study will both deepen and extend
the scope for applications of the infinitary model-theoretic machinery to
questions in combinatorics of geometrically or algebraically arising
hypergraphs, and conversely for applications of combinatorics to open questions
in model theory. The project will involve training of graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Shelah's classification program isolates
combinatorial dividing lines (stability, distality, NIP, etc.) separating
mathematical structures exhibiting various degrees of Gödelian behavior, from
the tame ones in which one develops a “geometric” theory akin to algebraic
geometry for definable sets in such structures. These tameness notions in
Shelah’s classification theory are typically given by restrictions on the
combinatorial complexity of definable binary relations. Many of the central
results in graph combinatorics can be then improved dramatically if one
restricts to graphs on the tame side of this classification, in particular to
graphs arising from various algebraic or geometric configurations. The PI will
investigate a higher generalization of Shelah's classification theory, where the
restriction is only put on higher arity relations, focusing on n-dependence
(with the case n=1 corresponding to the well studied class of NIP structures),
n-stability, n-distality, and n-amalgamation, as opposed to the traditional
binary case n=1. This will be applied to questions in extremal combinatorics of
hypergraphs definable in various tame structures (via Keisler measures), as well
as to generalizations of the polynomial expansion phenomena (Elekes-Szabó type
theorems), and to the study of algebraic structures such as groups and fields
definable in n-tame theories.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.