* 2246158
* CRII: SCH: Towards Smart Patient Flow Management: Real-time Inpatient Length of Stay Modeling and Prediction
* CSE,IIS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Yuxin Wen, Chapman University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Yang
* 05/31/2025
* USD 174,371.00

Patient length of stay has been used as an essential criterion for the effective
planning and management of hospital resources. Prolonged stay increases
patients’ risk of hospital-acquired infections and disrupts patient flow and
access to high-quality healthcare services. As such, a model that can reliably
predict the length of stay for a specific patient is desirable to mitigate the
prolonged stay and guide personalized decision-making. However, the length of
stay can be affected by a multitude of factors and can vary based on different
patients’ conditions and disease progression. The complex and dynamic nature of
massive clinical data, not to mention the presence of a large portion of missing
and censored values in the healthcare data, poses significant challenges for
efficient modeling and dynamic prediction. This project aims to offer an
integrated solution by establishing a pipeline consisting of advanced
statistical modeling, monitoring, and deep learning techniques based on patient
information collected from heterogeneous medical systems over time. The success
of the project will catalyze a transition from a traditional standard-driven
discharge scheduling service to a data-driven proactive scheduling paradigm. The
success of the project will alleviate the hospital’s pressure on resource
allocation and improve patient flow and, more importantly, pandemic
preparedness. The project can provide opportunities for research-based
interdisciplinary training of undergraduate and graduate students in health
informatics, statistics, and artificial intelligence from diverse backgrounds,
including women and underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address the
critical challenges of healthcare data analysis, i.e., heterogeneity, multi-
modality, and data sparsity. Conventional data-driven methods have been
predominantly focused on identifying the factors that strongly influence the
length of stay as opposed to predicting the length of stay itself. Moreover, the
existing approaches failed to address the inherent uncertainty and were
incapable of incorporating different data modalities and dynamic prediction. The
project proposes a personalized framework by integration of advanced tensor
fusion and time-to-event modeling techniques towards smart patient flow
management, which ultimately allows for faster achievement of health outcomes
and reduction of hospitalized costs. The proposed intelligent framework will
advance the state-of-art research of real-time data fusion and personalized
prognosis in the following aspects: (1) brings the data fusion and length of
stay prediction into a unified framework; (2) facilitates personalized length of
stay prediction in a real-time manner; (3) naturally has the capability to
incorporate uncertainties in the decision-making process to provide a confident
and intelligent scheduling service. Although the methodology is proposed for the
patient length of stay prediction, it does not depend on any restrictive
assumptions of domain knowledge and specific disease and thus can potentially be
applied to a broad range of events predictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.