* 2246537
* Spectral Shape Optimization: Extremality and Curvature
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Richard Laugesen, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 04/30/2026
* USD 330,474.00

Mathematics successfully models the natural and human worlds by exploiting
hidden phenomena that underpin seemingly unrelated scenarios. Wave motion
through water, sound waves in air, seismic waves through the earth’s crust,
radiation traveling in the vacuum of outer space (satellite communications),
pollutants diffusing through groundwater, heat spreading through a machine part,
and quantum waves or particles moving at subatomic scales — all these and more
are analyzed by equations involving the same mathematical object, a "second
order rate of change" operator called (in honor of the 18th century scientist
Pierre-Simon Laplace) simply the Laplacian. The "eigenvalues" of the Laplacian
represent frequencies of wave motion or radiation, rates of spreading for
pollutant, speed of heat transfer, and energy levels of particles. This research
project promotes the progress of science by discovering new mathematical
properties of eigenvalues of the Laplacian for waves, diffusions and particles
living in spaces that are not flat like our usual three-dimensional space but
are instead curved positively like a sphere or else negatively like a saddle.
Problems include the identification of shapes supporting the fastest vibrations,
an explanation of why a mysterious "zeta function" of eigenvalues depends
increasingly on the curvature, understanding how scaling invariance persists in
curved spaces through an eigenvalue monotonicity relation, and finding the
largest eigenvalues among deformed-sphere surfaces. The project provides
research training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project advances mathematical knowledge at
the intersection of analysis, partial differential equations and geometric
analysis. Conjectures are addressed for extremal frequencies, energies and
diffusions, offering theoretical insights and practical applicability.
Conceptual and technical challenges are overcome by synthesizing modern analytic
techniques into a suite of tools including variational principles, metric
perturbation and monotonicity, conformal mapping, probabilistic coupling, and
elliptic partial differential equations (PDE) symmetrization, applied on regions
of positive, zero or negative curvature. Free membrane frequencies on the sphere
are maximized by differing techniques depending on the presence or absence of
holes. Curvature-driven monotonicity of the spectral zeta function is to be
derived from new properties of the heat kernel on the spatial diagonal in
hyperbolic space and the sphere. On higher dimensional projective space, the
third eigenvalue is conjecturally maximized by constructing appropriate trial
functions, while for the fourth-order biharmonic landscape function, extremality
is investigated by a new kind of two-ball optimization under elliptic
symmetrization. The unifying emphasis on maximization of eigenvalues is designed
to yield both computable bounds and qualitative insights into the behavior of
waves, diffusions and particles in curved geometric
spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.