* 2246641
* Extremal Combinatorics: Themes and Challenging Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2028
* Fan Wei, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 08/31/2028
* USD 63,519.00

Combinatorics is a fundamental area of mathematics. This project mainly concerns
the area of graph theory, an active area of combinatorics which has been booming
in recent years because of its connection to other areas of mathematics and
theoretical computer science. Many graph theory problems also have practical
motivations. Most of the world can be represented as large networks consisting
of nodes and the connections between certain pairs of them. For example, a
social network such as Facebook has over 2 billion users as nodes and friendship
relations as connections; a biological network like the brain has over 100
billion neurons as nodes and synapses as connections. Understanding those
networks and designing fast algorithms on them provides much practical value,
examples include understanding how news spreads in a social network,
understanding brain functions or diseases and improving artificial neural
networks for machine learning applications. This project considers several
fundamental questions in extremal graph theory. The project also provides
training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are multiple techniques the PI plans to use
and further develop, including regularity methods such as Szemeredi's regularity
lemma and weak regularity lemmas; analytic tools such as graph limits, random
processes and entropy methods; and various other combinatorial tools. The first
project is related to Szemeredi's regularity lemma, which is an extremely
powerful tool in modern graph theory which spurred a dramatic change of how we
view and study graphs. It is a major direction of research to study which
applications of the regularity lemma have considerably better bounds. The PI
will work on several classical questions where the goal is to improve our
understanding of the power and limitation of the regularity method through
understanding the bounds in various important applications. Another major
project is to determine when random constructions using the probabilistic method
give optimal or nearly optimal bounds. Several classical topics include
Sidorenko's conjecture, Ramsey theory, and related questions in graph limits.
The goal is to better understand this general direction through studying several
closely related and concrete problems and gain more insight on the connections
between these topics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.