* 2246913
* Electron Delocalization in Linear Heterotrimetallic Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* John Berry, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 05/31/2026
* USD 587,228.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor John F. Berry of the University of Wisconsin – Madison will study how
stringing three metal atoms together alters the electronic structures of these
model molecular wires. The supported work includes synthesis of molecule-scale
wire-like compounds that contain metal-metal bonds between similar or different
metal atoms. Measurement of physical properties and computational analyses will
allow for an assessment of the ability of these molecules to transport charge
through these metal-metal bonds. These and related studies are important for
advancing toward goals in the field of quantum computing, as they provide new
opportunities for us to learn how to control spins and charge flow through
synthetic molecule-scale devices. Collaborative projects with researchers in the
US as well as in Italy will be pursued. The team will design and play leadership
roles in science communication initiatives, presentations that highlight
connections between arts and science, outreach efforts aimed at broadening
participation in science by underrepresented groups, and other service- or
education-related projects. The proposed work thus has the potential to broadly
impact the discipline of inorganic chemistry and the field of chemistry as a
whole, and has implications in areas of physics, electrical engineering, and
computer science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goals of this research
project are to develop synthetic methods that allow for the fine control of the
axial and equatorial ligands that support heterotrimetallic extended metal atom
chains, as well as the metal atom identities and types of metal-metal
interactions. Control over the axial linking groups will allow for these
molecules to be effectively integrated into molecular circuitry so that charge
transport measurements can be made. Expansion of the types of metal atoms
included in these heterometallic molecules from first- and second-row transition
elements (e.g., nickel and molybdenum) to lanthanide and main group elements is
a major goal. Modification of the equatorial ligands as well as metal identities
should allow for the filled orbital energy levels (the molecular analog of the
“Fermi” level in metals) to be tuned. The Berry research team anticipates that
it will be possible to access new molecules having carboxylate-derived axial
ligands that will help us to test linking group effects in molecular
conductivity measurements. Discovery of new types of metal-metal interactions
has the potential to uncover molecular diode-like behavior, and multidimensional
spectroscopy measurements are designed to provide insight into the coupling
between low-energy metal-metal vibrations within the chain and electron
transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.