* 2246845
* Log-concave Inequalities in Combinatorics and Order Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Swee Hong Chan, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 08/31/2026
* USD 156,452.00

This project focuses on the fundamental mathematical phenomena that emerge as a
result of the underlying structure of objects that are often difficult to
discern. Unimodality is a remarkable example of such a phenomenon, which is
characterized by the presence of a single maximum or mode in a statistical
distribution. This phenomenon has been observed in various objects, including
student grade distributions and the frequency of earthquakes at a specific
location. The project aims to analyze the precise mechanism of the emergence of
such phenomena using approaches based on recent advances and techniques in
combinatorics, probability, and order theory. The PI will mentor students as
part of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More technically, the project deals
with log-concave inequalities and correlation inequalities in combinatorial
objects and their connections to the underlying combinatorial structure.
Significant advancements have been made in this field in recent years,
particularly with the solutions to the Heron-Rota-Welsh Conjecture and Mason's
Conjecture in matroid theory being the most prominent examples of progress. The
project aims to explore the combinatorial nature of these inequalities by
developing purely combinatorial tools to generalize and strengthen them to match
their equality conditions. On the order theory side, the project seeks to use
these new insights to establish log-concave and correlation inequalities, which
historically were crucial elements in deriving the best-known bound to the
1/3-2/3 Conjecture in order theory. The employed tools include a combination of
classical tools from these fields, such as FKG-type inequalities in probability
and mixed volume inequalities in geometry, along with some new tools such as
Lorentzian polynomials and the combinatorial atlas
method.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.