* 2246111
* CRII: CNS: RUI: Developing Computational Skills in Non-Computing Professionals using an Informal Learning Approach
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Joslenne Pena, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Forbes
* 05/31/2025
* USD 125,982.00

Macalester College will leverage libraries as inviting and inclusive spaces to
deliver informal learning opportunities for workforce professionals in the Twin
Cities area. Understanding non-computing adults in the workforce presents many
opportunities to design and develop informal learning programs that differ from
K-12 programs.. The PI and her team will harness the diversity of the region,
its unique geographic location, as well as Macalester College’s liberal arts
setting, to host workshops for diverse workforce professionals to learn
Computing skills through programming activities. Participants will engage in
weekly workshop sessions that culminate in an artifact with the goal of
expanding their interests in Computing beyond this initial exploration. This
project will contribute to the goal of increasing the Computing workforce from a
different part of the pipeline through a lifelong learning perspective. During
the project, the project will also contribute by sharing open-source materials
from the workshops, building community, and mentor emerging scholars from
diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Following a design-based research
approach, this project will develop an informal learning workshop series that
centers Computing skills for diverse workforce professionals in the Twin Cities.
The research objectives include: (a) identifying the needs of non-computing
professionals in the Twin Cities area and utilize the Macalester College Library
to create informal learning spaces; (b) design, develop, and implement two
instances of an informal learning workshop experience; (c) evaluating the
impacts using our initial psychological construct as well as behavioral
indicators of skill gains; (d) deploying a large scale survey study to refine
the psychometric properties of instrument. Through empirical investigations in
the workshop spaces, this project will contribute to computing education
research by creating models for design of informal learning programs for older
adults and explore the needs of this less studied population. Empirical
investigations will take place in libraries where the workshops will be hosted
during the academic year with a diverse group of workforce professionals.
Classroom observations, surveys, interviews, and project artifacts will be
collected to investigate how workshop participants engaged in the workshop and
came about skill gains. More importantly, a longitudinal approach will revisit
their Computing journeys to better understand their computational pursuits after
the workshops. This project will lead to three major research outcomes: (a) a
conceptual model that seeks to unpack this understudied population in the
context of the broader Computing pipeline; (b) the refinement and validation of
a psychological construct that aims to measure one’s acclimation or orientation
toward more computationally-sophisticated pursuits through the implementation of
the workshops; and (c) design recommendations for practitioners looking to
implement these specific programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.