* 2246543
* Component-Based Research (CBR) in STEM Education: Exploring a Potentially Transformative Research Paradigm and Infrastructure
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2024
* Jeanne Century, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jill Nelson
* 03/31/2024
* USD 99,000.00

This Mid-scale Research Infrastructure Conference will explore component-based
research (CBR) as a possible new paradigm for research in STEM education. In
addition, participants will explore what might comprise a corresponding
infrastructure to support the widespread use of CBR. When using CBR, researchers
look not only at an educational innovation as a whole, but also at its
individual parts. Additionally, they systematically describe the contexts within
which the innovation is happening. By doing so, researchers can determine more
than whether a program “works.” Over time, CBR may enable researchers to
identify the parts of an innovation that work for particular groups of students
in particular settings, resulting in customizable and more impactful
innovations. A CBR paradigm may also help address some long-standing challenges
in STEM education research. For example, while much research has informed many
instances of educational improvement, the field has been less successful at
accumulating knowledge over time. CBR, with its specific descriptions of
innovation and circumstantial components may assist with this problem. Also,
STEM education programs that work well in one situation don’t necessarily work
well in a different one, leaving local educators the challenge of adapting the
innovation without guidance. CBR approaches, along with supporting research
infrastructure, can support data-informed adaptations that enable practitioners
to customize education innovations for their specific circumstances. CBR
approaches also have potential to make data more readily available to
practitioners, instructional materials developers, and others who can use it to
inform their work. This two-day conference will bring together 30 individuals to
examine and articulate possible steps for bringing the CBR paradigm to the broad
field of STEM education research. Attendees will include individuals who work in
a range of capacities in STEM education and STEM education research, as well as
scholars who have been using CBR-like approaches in other disciplines such as
public health. Additionally, attendees will include a strong representation of
people from groups who have historically been excluded from STEM fields. The two
primary outcomes of the meeting are 1) community building and knowledge
generation, and 2) a monograph summarizing the work of the conference and next
steps. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This conference will focus on how the field might
operationalize the CBR paradigm in STEM education research. It will be organized
by five dimensions that need to be developed in order to have a foundation for
further CBR work, with additional attention on the research infrastructure
needed for such work. Specifically, there will be five working groups that
examine: 1) approaches to developing collaborative language, including
taxonomies, ontologies, and standards; 2) innovative analytic approaches that
can address the complexity of CBR analyses; 3) ways CBR can leverage data
mining, AI, and other elements of data science that can support CBR; 4)
databases, design, and other infrastructure to ensure accessibility to CBR-based
data and support its application in the field; and 5) the challenge of engaging
the field, developing collaborations and consensus, and creating training and
further education. Alternating with group work will be “consultation seminars”
that entail having working groups present their work to other working groups who
will interrogate the work to raise challenges, gain new insights, and identify
ideas to develop as well as those to jettison. After the conference,
participants, will be invited to contribute to the creation of a monograph
either through writing contributions or through review. This project is
supported through a partnership with the Bill &amp; Melinda Gates Foundation,
Schmidt Futures, and the Walton Family Foundation. Funding is also provided by
NSF’s EDU Core Research Program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.