* 2246991
* New Rules for Coupled Severe Plastic Deformations, Phase Transformations, and Structural Changes in Metals under High Pressure
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Valery Levitas, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan Madison
* 05/31/2026
* USD 600,000.00

NON-TECHNICAL ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Processes that require extreme
stretching, bending and forming of metals into useful parts typically involve
using very high pressures to do so. These very high-pressure methods are used
widely to create materials with very specific properties on the inside and at
their surface. However, all these operations are generally studied after the
events have been completed. This award supports a fundamental quantitative study
of these processes while they are occurring and is focused on finding new laws
that relate the severe stretching of metal, their evolution at a very fine
scale, on the order of a human hair, and the accompanying changes in the metal,
called phase transformations. In this project, Titanium, a mixture of Titanium
and Zirconium, and an alloy of Aluminum-Iron-Cobalt-Nickel-Copper are being
studied under high pressures and strain rates typical of current and future
materials technologies. In addition, the project provides opportunities to
educate and train undergraduate students, graduate students and a postdoc in the
areas of materials, high-pressure sciences and materials processing. This is
being accomplished through special courses and research at the PI’s institution,
experiments at an extremely high-powered x-ray facility called a “synchrotron”
and interaction between experimental and computational efforts, all with an
emphasis on underrepresented students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL
ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to perform a
fundamental in-situ quantitative study and find new laws for coupled severe
plastic deformation, nanostructure evolution, and phase transformations in Ti, a
mixture of Ti and Zr, and a AlFeCoNiCu high entropy alloy. These metals will be
explored over a broad range of straining programs under pressures up to 65 GPa,
and strain rates in the range 10-5-103/s. Experiments will be conducted using a
dynamic rotational diamond anvil cell and the intellectual merit will be derived
from the quantitative checking of our hypotheses, including: (a) Are crystallite
size and dislocation density of all phases getting pressure-, strain- and
strain-path-independent, steady-state values before and after phase
transformations, and does this depend on the volume fractions during phase
transformations and/or the strain rate? (b) Does each phase behave like a
perfectly plastic, isotropic, and strain-path-independent material for each
strain rate and what is the pressure and strain rate dependence of the yield
strength? (c) Are phase transformation kinetics independent of strain path? (d)
Does a high strain rate promote phase transformations due to increased yield
strength? And (e) Will phase transformations in each material in the Ti-Zr
mixture be promoted in comparison to single material studies due to additional
obstacles for dislocation pileups?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Methods to determine the
evolution of highly heterogeneous fields of stress, plastic strain, strain rate
tensors, volume fraction of phases, crystallite size, dislocation density, and
concentration of species in a dynamic rotational diamond anvil cell will be
developed, all in real time, using in-situ X-ray diffraction and other
diagnostics in a feedback loop. In addition, simulations including a microscale
phase field and physics-based macroscale model as well as a finite-element
simulation of the experiments are being developed. Parameter identification,
machine learning, model refinement, and all material properties (e.g.
viscoplastic, evolution of phase transformations, crystallite size, dislocation
density) are being determined, and quantitative models are also being finalized.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For broader impacts beyond the technical contributions, a
graduate course is being developed, and mentoring opportunities in research for
undergraduate students, graduate students and a post-doc are being carried out
in conjunction with this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly
funded by the Metals and Metallic Nanostructures Program and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.