* 2246549
* Asymptotics and ergodicity of hypoelliptic random processes
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Maria Gordina, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Wilmer
* 04/30/2026
* USD 330,000.00

Randomness has been used to model numerous phenomena in physics, biology,
finance etc. Starting with the classical example of Brownian motion used to
describe the motion of particles subject to thermal fluctuations and later to
model the value of stock prices over time, stochastic techniques have found many
applications. For example, randomness is a key ingredient in algorithms used to
analyze large data. One of the major questions in such an analysis is
understanding if and how a random system converges to an equilibrium. The
research in this award will study such convergence depending on the models used.
The project includes training graduate students, introducing undergraduate
students to research, while the results will be disseminated through
publications and presentations at conferences. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
project concerns problems combining probability, analysis, geometry. One of the
directions of research is to study limits laws such as small deviations, laws of
iterated logarithm and large deviations for hypoelliptic diffusions and random
walks. These questions are closely related to the Cameron-Martin-Girsanov type
quasi-invariance in hypoelliptic settings, applications to functional
inequalities, and smoothness of probability laws in hypoelliptic and singular
settings. The methods include diverse probabilistic techniques such as coupling
and Dirichlet forms. In particular, research concerns large and small
deviations, the Onsager–Machlup functional which can be viewed as an analog of
the Lagrangian of a dynamical system, and convergence to equilibrium of a large
particle system with singular potentials. Both degeneracy (lack of ellipticity)
and high dimensions have to be dealt with new techniques coming from different
fields such as probability, ergodic theory and sub-Riemannian geometry. While
many of these settings arise naturally in applications, their mathematical
analysis is not easy. In addition to the theoretical significance of such
questions, some answers have practical uses. For example, the rate of
convergence to the equilibrium, its dependence on the number of particles and
other parameters, or an explicit form of the rate function have many
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.