* 2246394
* CAREER: First Principles Design of Error-Corrected Solid-State Quantum Repeaters
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2022,06/30/2025
* Prineha Narang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Dominique Dagenais
* 06/30/2025
* USD 397,978.00

Quantum mechanics enables a new range of technologies that are inherently more
powerful than their classical counterparts, from ultraprecise sensors to secure
communications to quantum computing. Central to the development of these
“quantum technologies” is the need for materials and devices engineered to store
and process quantum information. The goal of this NSF CAREER program is to chart
a new approach with theory-driven discovery of solid-state quantum systems that
exhibit the required properties, tested by subsequent experiments and
integration into device architectures. This approach will be developed in
particular for the specific use case of a quantum repeater, a device that can
hold and process quantum information and couple it to photons, and is an
essential component of large-scale quantum networks. Further, to advance the
broader impact of quantum science and technology to society, this CAREER program
will pursue parallel approaches spanning i) Education and a Quantum Engineering-
focused curriculum, ii) Outreach programs emphasizing programs designed to
recruit and include underrepresented groups in STEM to the field of Quantum
Science and Technology, iii) Quantum simulations methods and calculations made
available open source and iv) a close engagement with industry partners and
startups entering the area of solid-state quantum technologies. Undergraduate
and graduate students will learn cutting-edge computational methods, advanced
concepts in materials and devices and protocols for quantum information in the
new “quantum engineering” courses designed by the PI. While the research plan is
fundamental in nature, translation to and impact on large-scale industry
partners and startups in the areas of next-generation solid quantum technologies
and quantum networks is a focus in this program. Interactions with industry
partners also provides an opportunity to train the current engineering workforce
in quantum science and technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description
and Intellectual Significance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A central requirement for
solid-state quantum technologies is the development of physical systems that can
coherently store and manipulate quantum states well enough for error correction.
Color centers in solids have emerged as leading candidate systems, promising to
combine the favorable coherence properties of isolated atoms with the
scalability and stability of solid-state technologies. The goal of this NSF
CAREER program is to chart an entirely new approach with first-principles
modeling and discovery of solid-state quantum systems that exhibit the required
properties, tested by subsequent experiments, spectroscopy and device-level
performance. This approach will be developed in particular for the specific use
case of a quantum repeater: a device that can hold and process quantum
information and couple it to photons. These devices could enable scalable
quantum computers, networks, and sensors, which are expected to be a dominant
driving force for technological innovation in the future. This Program will
overcome key problems in solid-state quantum technologies for quantum networks:
it will develop theoretical methods to model and predict the properties of
quantum defects quantitatively; protocols to characterize complex and coherently
coupled solid-state quantum systems; and it will deploy them in practical
quantum repeater nodes. The tight discovery loop availed by the approach in this
CAREER award will allow, for instance, to generate a local array of emitters in
a material, predict local and long-range properties such as inter-emitter
coherence lifetimes, make minute adjustments to the spacing or arrangements of
emitters, and engineer directly the structure-function relationships that govern
specific quantum behaviors needed to enable scalable integration of quantum
emitters. This integration is critical for solid-state quantum technologies as
additional qubits in quantum repeaters will be needed for error correction,
entanglement distillation, and quantum repeater
multiplexing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.