* 2246385
* RAPID: Ecological Shocks, Risk Perception, and Economic Decision Making
* SBE,BCS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Shane Macfarlan, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Jeffrey Mantz
* 09/30/2023
* USD 17,867.00

Livestock management is plagued by two major sources of risk: environmental
variability and economic security. This is experienced more acutely in rural and
arid settings, where infrastructural development and market access may be more
limited, and where drought contributes to lower nutrient quality impacting
livestock outcomes (weight loss, disease and parasite susceptibility, and
mortality). Despite the risks to herding associated with ecological shocks,
little Is known about how economic forecasting varies among households. This
project will test whether models that have been used in simulations and
laboratory settings in behavioral ecology to understand positive and negative
shocks on economic behavior can also be applied in a natural experiment to
evaluate variation in risk exposure, shock categorization, and economic
forecasting. The research explores household decision-making in the aftermath of
a major hurricane. Critical data and findings about the relationship between
ecological shock, risk preference, and economic decision-making will be
disseminated to organizations and officials to assist with future economic
planning. The project also provides training for graduate and undergraduate
students in methods of rigorous, scientific data collection and analysis, builds
capacity for conducting future scientific work, and broadens the participation
of groups historically underrepresented in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
researchers explore 1) how variation in hurricane-induced asset loss influence
people to categorize it as either positive or negative, and 2) how ecological
shock categorization (positive vs negative) and prior condition (good vs poor)
influences how people reason about future ecological conditions, herd management
strategies, and their likelihood for engaging in productive labor. These
questions will be explored using semi-structured interviews and surveys from 100
households across four communities. Data collection will be oriented toward
documenting how individuals characterize the range of variation in post-
hurricane household losses, how they perceive loss from the recent hurricane
compared to past catastrophic anthropogenic disasters, and what projections they
have with respect to future ecological shocks and economic behavior. Studies of
disasters in anthropology, development economics, and other scientific fields
have focused on the negative shocks that natural disaster events have on risk
preferences and economic decision-making, seldom exploring what positive
ecological shocks may be emerging in post-disaster contexts. Behavioral
ecologists have modeled positive and negative shocks on economic behavioral in
simulated models and in laboratory environments, but not in naturalistic
settings. This project conducts a novel natural experiment in this post-disaster
context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.