* 2246379
* Molecular Radiative and Relaxation Processes
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2027
* Shaul Mukamel, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Dawes
* 04/30/2027
* USD 236,912.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods (CTMC)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Shaul Mukamel of the University of
California, Irvine is developing new methods for studying molecular processes
which make use of the quantum nature of light pulses. In particular, Mukamel
will explore how the quantum correlation of photons, known as entanglement,
which has been extensively studied in quantum computing applications, can be
used to control the interaction between molecules and light. The quantum nature
of light offers numerous new opportunities for monitoring elementary molecular
events through windows that are unavailable by classical light. Models and
practical computational tools will be developed for the interpretation and
analysis of the proposed measurements. Interpreting the proposed quantum signals
will be made by the combination of electronic structure and quantum dynamics
simulations with state-of-the-art quantum optics technology. In addition,
optical microcavities can manipulate electron and nuclear dynamics by strong
light-matter coupling to localized cavity modes, which create hybrid light-
matter particles known as polaritons. The collective response of many molecules
interacting with the same cavity mode will be investigated. Coherent control
schemes will be employed to optimize the proposed nonlinear optical signals.
Coincidence measurements of individual entangled photons and quantum
interferometry techniques will be employed to probe molecular chirality.
Students working on this project will be immersed in frontier research relevant
to quantum information science. Also contributing to the broader impacts, Dr.
Mukamel will continue to serve an advisory role on the boards of several
worldwide research centers in the field of nonlinear ultrafast spectroscopy and
quantum light technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Novel spectroscopic techniques
that involve optical cavities and quantum light will be developed and applied to
study elementary photophysical and photochemical processes in molecules.
Computational techniques that combine nonadiabatic molecular dynamics,
wavepacket simulations of quantum nuclear degrees of freedom, and quantum photon
statistics will be employed. Pulse shaping, phase control, and chiral
polarization configurations will be utilized. Stimulated Raman techniques that
can directly probe the passage of molecules through conical intersections in
microcavities will be predicted. Engineered states of quantum light developed in
quantum optics will be adopted to molecular spectroscopy applications with
unprecedented temporal, spectral, and spatial resolutions. The back and forth
transfer of entanglement between photons and matter will be used to create new
classes of correlated excited states in molecular aggregates. The elementary
charge and energy migration processes in molecular aggregates and in
photosynthesis will be investigated using the new techniques. These have the
potential for broad long-term scientific impact for the design of artificial
light harvesting systems that convert sunlight to chemical energy with high
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.