* 2246765
* Single Molecule Studies for Characterizing Dynamical and Mechanical Properties of Glassy Systems
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Laura Kaufman, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* John Papanikolas
* 03/31/2026
* USD 525,001.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms A (CSDM-A)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Laura Kaufman of Columbia
University is using single-molecule microscopy methods to study structural
domains in glassy polymers. Glasses appear to be solid, but in contrast to
crystals, they have amorphous structures that are more akin to liquids.
Polymers, like plastics and rubbers, frequently form glassy solids. While they
are ubiquitous in modern life, they still exhibit poorly understood behaviors.
For example, they appear to be made up of small structural domains that slowly
move through the seemingly solid material, oftentimes at different speeds.
Professor Kaufmann and her students are watching the fluorescence from
individual molecules embedded within polymers to track the movement of these
domains. Their discoveries could inform the design of materials for use in a
wide range of applications, from household goods to solar cells and biomedical
materials. The students engaged in this research learn a broad range of
experimental techniques and analysis approaches that are applicable to many
areas of science and technology. The Kaufman group also regularly engages with
K-12 students through talks and demonstrations that introduce students to the
unusually interesting properties of glassy materials.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Professor Kaufman will refine and extend single molecule imaging. The
addition of complementary approaches is expected to provide for a more detailed
view of dynamic heterogeneity in polymeric glass formers. Fluorescence signals
detected from novel probes will be followed over time scales ranging from
minutes to hours and used to characterize the length scale, organization, and
mechanical properties of heterogeneous regions in glassy polystyrene. First, a
set of experiments comparing the behavior of free and tethered single molecule
probes in physically entangled and chemically cross-linked polymers will
elucidate aspects of the spatial extent of heterogeneous domains. Following
this, investigations into bulk and local mechanical properties in polystyrene
below its glass transition temperature, including following perturbations, will
be undertaken in this and similar systems. Using a modular approach, the Kaufman
group will perform integrated imaging and rheology experiments to detail
connections between bulk mechanical properties, local free volume, and
spatiotemporally local dynamics in glasses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.