* 2246079
* CUE-M: LEVEL UP: Charting a Pathway toward Inclusive Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2023,09/30/2024
* Tracy Camp, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 09/30/2024
* USD 1,000,000.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by building consensus for a
united vision of undergraduate computing education around the areas of
inclusion, diversity, equity, and accessible learning. The goal of this project
is to move the needle on several of computing’s biggest challenges in
undergraduate programs. Examples of challenges include how to manage booming
enrollments in computing without damaging diversity efforts and how to widen a
domestic path to PhD programs. Computing education continues to face challenges
around inclusion, diversity, equity, and accessible learning. While several
departments and colleges are achieving major successes in these areas, many
others are lagging. Change is possible with a coordinated effort among computing
department leaders and faculty. All universities and colleges need to “LEVEL UP”
and implement the best practices that broaden participation in computing.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve the goal of developing consensus on a shared
vision of change, a series of regional workshops will be held where faculty
across the country will meet and build consensus around inclusive computing
education. The project will utilize an equity lens and involve several NSF BPC
Alliances and BPC community members. The results of the workshops will be
compiled, summarized, and disseminated nationwide in an evidence-based report of
best practices towards inclusive computing. This project will involve faculty
from diverse institutions, representatives of the NSF Broadening Participation
in Computing Alliances, and an advisory board of highly respected computing
educators and professionals. The advisory board will coordinate the creation of
the final report.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.