* 2246906
* Problems in Harmonic Analysis Relating to Curvature
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Betsy Stovall, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 07/31/2026
* USD 446,924.00

The field of Euclidean harmonic analysis grew out of the use of Fourier series
to decompose natural signals (such as sounds) as superpositions of coherent
linear waves (such as notes). This decomposition was originally developed to
prove the existence and study the properties of solutions to certain time-
dependent partial differential equations (particularly the heat and wave
equations) that are used to model physical processes. With the demands of such
applications as quantum mechanics, medical imaging, and signal
encoding/compression, the field has expanded. Approximating natural signals by
mathematical functions, decomposing these functions as superpositions of simpler
parts, modeling physical processes by mathematical operations on the parts, and,
finally, reconstituting the parts by summation each necessarily leads to errors.
Theoretical harmonic analysis seeks to establish a general mathematical
framework by which we can say that, provided the initial approximation and model
are close to reality, subsequent errors introduced by the decomposition,
mathematical operation, and reconstitution steps are small. One mathematically
proves that such approximations lead to manageable losses by “bounding” certain
linear operators, and it is also of interest to understand the corresponding
“reverse inequalities” by determining what kinds of data lead to the largest
possible output. This project seeks to bound and study reverse inequalities for
certain mathematical operators, called Fourier restriction and averaging
operators in which the curvature of some underlying manifold plays an important
role. Such operators arise, for instance, in studying truncation methods for
multidimensional Fourier series, as well as certain partial differential
equations motivated by questions in physics. Curvature causes these operators to
behave better than would be predicted by simply counting the dimension of the
manifold, and yet many open questions remain about precisely how much better.
The cases when the curvature goes negative or vanishes along some nonempty set
or when the underlying manifold lacks the expected degree of smoothness are of
particular interest. These scientific endeavors are inextricably linked with the
investigator's efforts to help train the next generation of mathematicians. This
workforce development encompasses two main directions: advising and mentoring
Ph.D. students in mathematics and creating opportunities for mathematicians at
all career stages to meet and interact at conferences and other
meetings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will follow three lines of inquiry
regarding Lebesgue space bounds for operators in harmonic analysis in which the
curvature of some underlying object plays an important role. One is to prove new
bounds for the restriction of the Fourier transform to manifolds whose curvature
either goes negative or vanishes along some nonempty set; another is to prove
new inequalities for linear and multilinear generalized Radon transforms;
finally, is the use and development of concentration–compactness methods for
such operators. The main part of this proposal considers such problems in
pathological situations where the curvature of the manifold goes negative or
vanishes along some nonempty set, with a particular focus on optimal estimates
by using a measure that gives small weight to regions where the curvature is
small or by changing the Lebesgue exponents under
consideration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.