* 2246292
* Density and Edge Coloring
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2024
* Guangming Jing, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 03/31/2024
* USD 16,680.00

A graph is a mathematical structure that can be used to model relationships
between objects. Take social networking as an example: each person in the
network could be considered as a point, called a vertex, and two people are
joined by an edge if they are friends. Edge-coloring studies the ways one can
color edges of a graph under some restrictions. For example, a proper edge-
coloring is an assignment of colors to the edges of a graph so that no two edges
sharing the same vertex have the same color. One important problem is to find
the smallest number of colors possible that can be used for a proper edge-
coloring. In this project, the PI is planning to address open problems in edge-
coloring as well as deriving efficient algorithms for graph coloring problems.
Theoretical results and algorithms in edge-coloring have important applications
in network problems, communication problems, scheduling problems, and many other
optimization problems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Density as a graph parameter is
involved in many open problems in edge-coloring. The main goal of this project
is to apply density-related techniques such as a generalization of the Tashkinov
tree method obtained in attacking the Goldberg-Seymour conjecture, and a
generalized Kempe Change method developed in exploring the Hilton-Zhao
conjecture, to attack the following density-related problems: (1) the Hilton-
Zhao conjecture and the overfull conjecture; (2) Gupta’s co-density conjecture;
(3) Goldberg’s generalization of the total coloring conjecture for multigraphs;
and (4) finding efficient algorithms to color graphs with the optimal number of
colors in the conjectures above. The PI is also hoping to develop new density-
related techniques through exploring the above
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.