* 2246758
* NSFGEO-NERC: Deciphering the Dynamics of Geomagnetic Excursions
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Catherine Constable, University of California-San Diego Scripps Inst of Oceanography
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy Panero
* 05/31/2026
* USD 273,324.00

Earth’s internal magnetic field is produced by fluid motions in the liquid, and
its sustained presence is of great societal importance because, in addition to
providing navigational guidance, it effectively shields the surface environment
from the solar wind and space weather. The magnetic field varies on a wide range
of time scales and the most striking variations occurring on geological time
scales are polarity excursions and reversals. These events can lead to
significantly weakened the global field strength, have the societal impacts
arising from reduced magnetic shielding of the surface environment, and may be
central to understanding the processes that generate and sustain the geomagnetic
field in the liquid core. Excursions have received relatively little attention
compared to reversals despite occurring more frequently and lasting long enough
to cause potentially significant societal disruption. Recent observational
models spanning the past hundred thousand years are illuminating the evolution
of excursional fields in previously inaccessible detail. When combined with
advances in numerical simulation of the physical field generation process, this
paves the way for a new approach to understand such enigmatic events. An
integral aspect of the work will be building models enabling further synergy
across the geomagnetic, paleomagnetic, and numerical geodynamo and, by
extension, the international Studies of Earth’s Deep Interior and planetary
science communities. This is a collaborative proposal between scientists at the
University of California San Diego and Leeds University, and is therefore co-
funded by the National Science Foundation (NSF) and the United Kingdom’s Natural
Environment Research Council (NERC). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Several global,
spatial, and temporal representations of Earth’s magnetic field cover 0-100 ka
or subsections thereof, and document up to 5 geomagnetic excursions with
qualitative similarities as well as distinct differences. Formal definition of
excursional field perturbations, duration, local asynchroneity, etc., can be
made via the Paleosecular Variation Index allowing comparisons with numerical
geodynamo simulations. Expanding the time interval to 0-120 ka, we will produce
the first high-resolution models with quantified uncertainty for the Post-Blake
excursion at ~95 ka and the Hilina Pali excursion at ~20 ka. In parallel,
numerical simulations will build on research at Leeds University (UK) that is
defining the requirements for “Earth-like” field behavior. The focus of this
proposal is to improve understanding of the nature and origin of geomagnetic
excursions using these two synergistic interlinked components. We
will&lt;br/&gt;(1) Use new and existing global and time-dependent observational
models of several excursions during the past 120 kyr to characterize field
behavior before, during, and after excursions;&lt;br/&gt;(2) Analyze the
excursion mechanism and predictability in new geodynamo simulations conducted
with a dominant force balance that reflects expected behavior in Earth’s liquid
outer core;&lt;br/&gt;(3) Develop formal criteria for defining excursions and
reconcile paleofield behavior with current and emerging views on Earth-like
numerical dynamo simulations.&lt;br/&gt;A vital aspect of this proposal is
exploiting existing synergy between the Scripps Institution of Oceanography
(SIO) observational geomagnetic field modelling and paleosecular variation
analysis and Leeds simulations of core dynamics. Observational models will
contribute to new Earth-like standards for simulations, which will in turn be
used to make high-resolution predictions of observable field variations that can
be sought in the lower resolution observational data. We expect to enhance
understanding of the dynamics of geomagnetic excursions, including their
predictability and relation to polarity reversals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.