* 2246225
* Core Support for Future Earth Global Change Strategic Activities
* GEO,RISE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Erica Key, FUTURE EARTH
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 07/31/2026
* USD 849,889.00

Future Earth is a globally connected science-based organization working to
transform societal decision making so that it is informed by integrated,
accessible, and co-developed knowledge. The US Global Hub of Future Earth
advances this process by supporting transdisciplinary, transnational research,
making innovative yet plausible sustainability options accessible to a public
audience, and providing a platform for inclusive dialogues and skill building to
create an ever-broadening network of experts moving knowledge to action. This
project supports the U.S. Hub’s strategic leadership of these activities within
the constellation of Future Earth offices as well as the global engagement and
translation efforts that raise the visibility and uptake of sustainability
science options worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a partner of the Belmont
Forum, Future Earth mobilizes and grows the global transdisciplinary research
community, advancing themes at the nexus of science and society, and supporting
the inclusion of knowledge from underrepresented groups in the scoping,
resourcing, and communication of these themes. To provide this community
somewhere to convene, the US Hub staff have led the co-design and delivery of
the Sustainability Research and Innovation Congress, the world’s largest annual
sustainability science event, which brings together experts from across sectors
and geographies in a hybrid, multi-continent format that emphasizes action and
interaction over passive learning. Emerging sustainability innovations, green
technology, and socio-technical advances are featured in the award-winning
Anthropocene Magazine, Fixing Carbon newsletter, and a new futures anthology
edited and produced by the Future Earth US Hub. These and other Future Earth
initiatives are further supported through a member portal that amplifies
exchange not only across the 9 Global Hubs, 27 Global Research Networks, and 19
National Committees, but with international science coordination, science
policy, and implementation partners.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.