* 2246022
* CRII: OAC: RUI: Real-Time, Mixed-Integer Model Predictive Control via Learned GPU-Acceleration
* CSE,OAC
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2025
* Brian Plancher, Barnard College
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 08/31/2025
* USD 174,957.00

From self-driving cars to robotic home-health aids, in order for autonomous
systems to meet their potential, they must operate safely around humans in
unstructured and dynamic environments. This requires these systems to quickly
and accurately solve motion planning and control problems. Unfortunately, many
state-of-the-art algorithms used to solve these problems today are too slow to
run in real-time, limiting such systems. This project helps alleviate these
issues by leveraging parallel computing and machine learning to develop new
solvers that accelerate the computation of optimization-based algorithms used
for planning and control. This project addresses critical scientific needs for
practical online planning and control for field robots and results in open-
source solver artifacts that can be used in wider scientific computing domains
such as operations research. This project also directly feeds into the
development of new open-source robotics courses and, as the project is located
at an undergraduate women’s college, this research also provides opportunities
for a number of women undergraduates to participate in research - many for the
first time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the computational
challenges of mixed-integer trajectory optimization problems, which are crucial
for motion planning and control in autonomous systems operating in unstructured
environments. The project builds on recent research that has shown that these
algorithms can be accelerated through parallelism using Graphics Processing
Units (GPUs) and machine learning. The project develops an open-source GPU-
accelerated mixed-integer solver architecture. A learned parallel search
heuristic that accelerates the outer branch-and-bound layer of the overall
solver is developed by leveraging domain knowledge and machine learning. A GPU-
accelerated direct trajectory optimization solver is also developed for the
underlying continuous problem. This underlying solver takes advantage of the
block-tridiagonal structure of the Schur Complement of the trajectory
optimization problem through a novel symmetric stair preconditioner, a
preconditioned conjugate gradient solver, and a block-factorization-based
solver. The overall solver is evaluated and compared to state-of-the-art
approaches through simulation and on a physical quadruped robot to demonstrate
its effectiveness in generating dynamic locomotion
behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.