* 2246324
* IRES Track I: Understanding Climate, Renewable Energy, and Oceanic Condition Effects on Intercontinental Connections of Birds of Prey
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Gregory Kaltenecker, Boise State University
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 05/31/2026
* USD 299,997.00

Boise State University’s Raptor Research Center (RRC) and Intermountain Bird
Observatory (IBO) constitute part of a globally recognized hub of raptor
research located in Boise, Idaho. Boise is also home to the nation’s only MS
graduate program in Raptor Biology. Our IRES project leverages this expertise
with that of a globally recognized international partner, Foundacion Migres,
located in Tarifa, Spain, to collaborate on transformative research focused on
potential effects of a changing climate, oceanographic conditions, wind
dynamics, and renewable energy on migratory raptors. The Migres research campus
is uniquely located in the world’s most important flyway for raptors, on the
Iberian Peninsula between Europe and Africa at the strait of Gibraltar. This is
an important area for renewable (wind and solar) energy development and
research, and focus is on intercontinental connections of migrating birds and
resolving conflicts between wildlife and renewable energy. Our IRES program
leverages the RRC, IBO and Migres partnership to deliver 8-week, international
student research experiences for U.S. graduate and undergraduate students,
engage students in structured professional development and scientific
communication, and allow students to gain an understanding of a multicultural
research environment abroad to help prepare them for the global workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our collaborative international research focuses on
effects of weather, wind, oceanographic conditions and wind/solar energy
development on migration and population dynamics of birds of prey. Weather and
wind conditions, influenced by changing climate and oceanographic conditions,
may significantly affect a bird’s decision to initiate migration, the course and
pace of migration, and survival during migration. These factors especially
affect large raptors and other soaring birds. We focus on migrating raptors
crossing the Strait of Gibraltar during migration and range expansion of African
raptor species in a region that connects birds from the European and African
continents. Because of a changing climate and increased need for energy
production, there is need for mitigating conflicts arising among anthropogenic
and biological factors and wildlife.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.