* 2246600
* Collaborative Research: Atmospheric controls of moisture extremes over Greenland
* GEO,OPP
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Thomas Ballinger, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Colleen Strawhacker
* 06/30/2026
* USD 585,834.00

Greenland has experienced some of the largest summertime atmospheric warming and
moistening trends of any region within the Arctic since at least 1979. The
observed increases in air temperatures and atmospheric moisture content over
Greenland have significant implications for the region’s climate. These changes
have altered the frequency, type, and total amount of precipitation falling on
the Greenland Ice Sheet and increased the likelihood of extreme heatwaves and
melt events that directly affect sea and land ice growth and loss rates in and
around the region. Despite the notable warming and moistening atop Greenland,
the driving mechanisms behind these recent trends are poorly understood.
Research to date has been inconclusive on whether local oceanic and atmospheric
processes, broader-scale mechanisms in the climate system, or a combination of
these multiscale factors are attributable to sustaining the atmospheric
circulation patterns associated with Greenland’s warming and moistening. A more
complete understanding of these complex climate system interactions is essential
to improving climate model physics and more accurately capturing Greenland’s ice
sheet changes and resulting global impacts, like sea-level
rise.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching hypothesis for this project is that
low frequency, high-latitude circulation variability is sensitive to multiple
processes, including anthropogenic, remote, and local climate forcings. Through
statistical and diagnostic analyses of historical, atmospheric data, and climate
model experiments from the Community Earth System Model (CESM) version 1 and 2
and model output from phase 6 of the Coupled Model Intercomparison Project
(CMIP6), the project will rigorously test this hypothesis while addressing
several knowledge gaps in Greenland hydroclimate research guided by three main
questions: 1) what natural climate and anthropogenic forcings associated with
local ocean-atmosphere processes are the strongest controls of the Greenland
region’s summer circulation variability and air temperature and moisture on
interannual-to-interdecadal time scales?; 2) how do large-scale circulation
variability and associated processes regulate weather-to-seasonal mean time
scale moisture over the Greenland region?; and 3) how reliable are CESM2 and
CMIP6 models in replicating observed circulation changes over Greenland and
associated impacts on temperature and moisture? Project outcomes will be shared
with the scientific community and the public through development of near-real
time online visualizations of moisture processes across Greenland and the
organization of a working group or hybrid workshop on atmosphere, ocean, and
cryosphere interactions around Greenland.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.