* 2246143
* CRII: SaTC: Toward Secure, Privacy-Preserving, and Efficient Crowdsourcing Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Weiping Pei, University of Tulsa
* Standard Grant
* Anna Squicciarini
* 04/30/2025
* USD 174,906.00

Researchers and the industry have widely used crowdsourcing systems in various
disciplines for large-scale data collection and analysis to conduct user
studies, improve machine learning performance, and accelerate product iteration.
However, today's crowdsourcing systems cannot adequately support requesters and
workers due to three main problems: inadequate quality or integrity of data,
privacy violations, and low efficiency of task completion. This project aims to
address these problems to enhance security, privacy, and efficiency in
crowdsourcing systems. The project's novelties are developing an advanced
quality control approach to increase data quality and integrity, a novel scheme
to detect and prevent privacy violations, and an intelligent framework to
improve efficiency. The project's broader significance includes: (1) addressing
the critical challenges of building secure, privacy-preserving, and efficient
crowdsourcing systems, (2) supporting crowd workers, including protecting their
privacy and assisting them to work in a cost-efficient way, and (3) assisting
job requesters in obtaining high-quality data that they can rely on to complete
their important studies and make important decisions confidently. The project
also contributes to increasing undergraduate involvement in research, including
integrating research outcomes into the curriculum and mentoring undergraduate
students in conducting research. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project enhances
security, privacy, and efficiency in crowdsourcing systems. First, the project
develops a subtask-aware and robust quality control approach to ensure data
quality and integrity. Second, the project investigates privacy risks to workers
and third parties in real-world crowdsourcing tasks and designs machine
learning-based schemes to detect and prevent privacy violations. Third, the
project designs and implements a framework based on artificial intelligence
techniques to assist workers in identifying and prioritizing crowdsourcing tasks
more efficiently. This project also integrates the abovementioned schemes into a
client-side browser extension that workers can use and a server-side model that
can be applied in crowdsourcing systems for large-scale
deployment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.