* 2246658
* Exploiting Physical and Dynamical Structures for Real-time Inference in Electric Power Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Oliver Kosut, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Aranya Chakrabortty
* 06/30/2026
* USD 360,000.00

This NSF project aims to improve the capabilities of modern electric power
systems. Recent years have seen a dramatic increase in solar and wind power
throughout the grid, including inside the distribution system. This increasing
penetration of distributed energy resources (DERs), which will only accelerate
over time, has tremendous benefits, but also brings challenges, as DERs are
substantially different from traditional large-scale generators. This project
brings transformative solutions to these challenges to improve the situational
awareness of the DERs throughout the system, by leveraging advanced high-
fidelity sensors as well as modern data science. The intellectual merits of the
project include methods to extract useful information from even a small number
of high-fidelity sensors; this information can be used to make rapid control
decisions to improve the stability of the overall system without relying on
traditional generators. The broader impacts of the project include mentoring of
graduate students and postdocs, in addition to undergraduate researchers,
including and especially underrepresented minorities, via the Arizona State
University (ASU) Summer Undergraduate Research Initiative
(SURI).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project studies three main problem areas: (i)
estimation of the topology of distribution networks that connect the grid edge
to the bulk network; (ii) faster detection and localization of forced
oscillations, which are typically caused by disturbances or devices failures and
can pose significant threats to power system operations; and (iii) learning the
parameters of DER dynamics, including inertia and damping, so as to maintain
refined dynamic models which can be used by system operators to assess and
ensure system stability. The project addresses these challenges via the unifying
framework of structure: the graphical structure of grid topology, sparsity in
the location of an oscillation source, and structure in dynamic models. The
project exploits these structural elements to develop new algorithms to extract
situational awareness from high-fidelity meters, especially Phasor Measurement
Units (PMUs). Project outcomes include theoretical results as well as numerical
experiments on the performance of these algorithms in realistic settings of
power systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.