* 2246791
* NSF-BSF: Explaining the Mismatch of Experiments and Simulations for Viscoelastic Flows
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Howard Stone, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 04/30/2026
* USD 319,942.00

Complex fluids are materials with suspended particles, which constitute a
microstructure that changes during flow and gives the material a viscoelastic,
or more generally, a non-Newtonian response, i.e., the material can behave as
both a viscous liquid and an elastic solid. For a wide variety of complex
fluids, such as polymer solutions, emulsions, etc., constitutive models are
available that relate the stress in the material to the strain and rate of
strain characteristic of the materials deformation and flow. However, the
results of numerical simulations are rarely compared quantitatively with details
of experiments. As a consequence, in spite of many decades of research, the
simulation toolbox has been verified, i.e., the numerical computer codes solve
the equations assumed to describe the materials, but the methodology has not
been validated, i.e., the solutions to the equations for the material behavior
do not generally reproduce the experimental observations made in channel flows,
which thus requires new understanding to identify appropriate equations. The
proposed research aims to provide a validation pipeline using a common
macroscopic description for dilute polymer solutions but now incorporating
different microstructural features of polymers. In particular, the pressure drop
versus flow rate relation in non-uniform channel shapes will be studied through
a combination of theory, simulations, and experiments. The outreach efforts
characterize the PI’s approaches to engaging with, teaching, and mentoring
future research scientists, including continuing an annual “holiday” science
lecture that has been delivered since 2002.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is no
shortage of examples of the flow of complex fluids in natural environments,
e.g., mucus, swimming cells in polymer-laden aqueous fluids, emulsions used for
home and personal care, and industrial applications, e.g., polymer processing.
There is also no shortage of developments in the numerical simulation of
viscoelastic flows using well-established constitutive equations, most of which
have parameters representing various physical effects. Nevertheless, even
reasonably well-characterized fluids, such as polymer solutions, produce
results, e.g., pressure drop versus flow rate in a non-uniform channel, that are
not well-predicted by well-known continuum-level numerical simulations. The
proposed research program will address this discrepancy by utilizing the
framework of the extended Oldroyd-B description of dilute polymer solutions,
including microstructurally inspired terms for finite polymer extensibility
(FENE), conformation-dependent drag as the microstructure is elongated, and
relative strain/rotation of the microstructure relative to the fluid. Theory,
simulations, and experiments will be integrated to study the pressure drop
versus flow rate relation in non-uniform channel shapes, while also
characterizing the conformation of the microstructure. The PI has a significant
track record in the broader impacts of research activities, including publishing
in leading journals in engineering and physics, linking fundamental research to
applications, hosting visitors from different disciplines and educational
institutions, leading professional development activities for undergraduate,
graduate, and postdoctoral colleagues, and encouraging participation of young
researchers from under-represented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.