* 2246822
* Developing Novel Triazole-Ruthenium Carbene Complexes (TA-Ru) for Challenging Olefin Metathesis Transformations
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Xiaodong Shi, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 06/30/2026
* USD 383,334.00

With support from the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Xiaodong Shi of the University of Maryland-College Park is developing
a new class of catalysts that enable challenging olefin metathesis
transformations to occur. Olefin metathesis is an important chemical reaction
that results in the formation of new carbon–carbon double bonds. While
metathesis transformations are being employed in chemical, materials, and
biological research, current catalysts are challenged by more those molecules
and reactions that require high temperatures. In contrast, the new catalysts
that are being developed by Professor Shi and his team show significantly
improved stability at higher temperature. As a consequence, these new catalysts
enable the synthesis of novel chemical structures that are not accessible using
the current suite of metathesis catalysts. These new molecular catalysts will be
applied to a number of problems and will not only advance fundamental chemical
research but will also impact other scientific areas and industries that rely on
the products that come from metathesis, e.g. biotech and pharmaceutical
industries, the chemical and material science communities/industries. In
addition to advancing the applicability of metathesis across several areas of
science, these studies will support the preparation of the next generation of
scientists by providing undergraduate and graduate students important training
in chemical synthesis and through the organization of meetings that are student-
oriented.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ruthenium-carbene metathesis catalysts are
broadly applicable in synthetic chemistry. While ruthenium catalysts generally
show good reactivity and functional group tolerance, they decompose over time
and/or they suffer from thermal instability. Professor Xiaodong Shi and his
research group have discovered that readily available triazole ligands impart
stability on Ru-carbene catalysts and consequently provide novel reactivity when
applied to olefin metathesis reactions. These new catalysts will be optimized
for transformations that have been difficult to carry out using the previously
reported catalysts. In efforts to better understand the role of the triazole
motif, mechanistic studies will also be pursued. In addition, complementary
synthetic studies will be pursued to convert the initial catalytic products to
value-added synthetic targets that will be useful for chemical biology and
medicinal and materials chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.