* 2246531
* Collaborative Research: Connecting the sequence logic of RNA splicing to nuclear localization
* BIO,MCB
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Oded Regev, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Matt Buechner
* 07/31/2026
* USD 522,131.00

In eukaryotic cells, mature messenger RNAs (mRNA) are generated from newly
transcribed pre-mRNA through an essential processing step called RNA splicing.
During splicing, parts of the pre-mRNA (known as introns) are removed, and the
remaining parts (exons) are joined together…but not every intron is removed from
every pre-mRNA. This collaborative project aims to understand the sequences in
pre-mRNA that determine which exons are removed in specific mRNAs. The PIs will
deploy high-throughput assays where millions of sequences are tested in
parallel, and analyzing the results using interpretable machine learning
techniques. This project will also reveal novel mechanisms contributing to
splicing decisions. Specifically, it will reveal the role that certain small
bodies next to the nucleus, known as “nuclear speckles,” play in RNA splicing.
In addition, the proposed research will provide substantial resources for the
development and dissemination of an interdisciplinary curriculum for graduate
and undergraduate education. The project will offer recruitment, involvement,
and career development of students and scholars from diverse backgrounds and at
different educational stages. It will increase the participation of
underrepresented groups in biological and computational research and education
via the training of underrepresented minorities and female graduate and
postdoctoral researchers. The project will also include outreach to high school
students and undergraduates from diverse backgrounds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;RNA
splicing occurs in a sequence-dependent manner following logic encoded in the
“splicing code”. Besides the conserved sequences (5’ and 3’ splice sites,
branchpoint) that are required for the splicing reaction, additional logic is
encoded in splicing regulatory elements. These sequence elements are recognized
by various splicing factor proteins, including SR proteins and heterogeneous
nuclear ribonucleoproteins (hnRNPs). SR proteins and hnRNP proteins regulate
splicing decisions in a sequence- and context-dependent manner. Specifically, SR
proteins tend to promote splicing if their binding motifs are in exons and tend
to repress splicing if their binding motifs are in introns; whereas hnRNP
proteins have the opposite effect. However, the mechanisms underlying context-
dependent regulatory effects remain to be fully revealed. Interestingly,
splicing factors exhibit distinct subcellular locations relative to nuclear
speckles; SR proteins are enriched in nuclear speckles, whereas hnRNP proteins
are uniformly distributed in the nucleoplasm. These observations lead us to
hypothesize that positioning of RNAs with respect to nuclear speckles serves as
a bridge between sequence features and splicing outcomes. This project will test
this hypothesis, and explore the mechanisms of splicing and the function of
nuclear speckles by combining two complementary approaches: (1) Identifying the
relationship between sequences and splicing outcomes using interpretable machine
learning-based analysis of massively parallel reporter assays (MPRA); (2)
Characterizing the relationship between sequences and positioning relative to
nuclear speckles through imaging RNA substrates, spliceosomal components, and
splicing factors. This research will reveal novel mechanisms contributing to
splicing decision, specifically through sequence-encoded intra-speckle RNA
positioning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is co-funded by the Cellular
Dynamics and Function and Genetic Mechanisms programs of the Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences Division.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.