* 2246314
* IRES Track I: Research opportunities in behavioral and ecological data collection at the Uaso Ngiro Baboon Project, Kenya.
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Corinna Most, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 05/31/2026
* USD 296,279.00

This International Research Experiences for Students (IRES) project will engage
four U.S. undergraduates and one U.S. graduate student in the study of wild
olive baboons (P. anubis) at the Uaso Ngiro Baboon Project (UNBP) in Kenya for 8
weeks during the summer. There, participating students will learn the methods of
behavioral and ecological data collection from senior UNBP researchers, and they
will also have the opportunity to develop their own research projects based on
their interests within the broad topics of baboon behavior and ecology. This
experience will benefit the participating students by training them in
behavioral and ecological data collection methods and by giving them the
opportunity to conduct fieldwork in a foreign country, which will greatly
increase their likelihood to succeed when pursuing graduate or professional
careers in fields related to animal behavior and ecological
monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As our closest living relatives, other primates
are the most common models for understanding the evolution of our own species.
In particular, olive baboons are highly intelligent, socially complex, and
behaviorally flexible animals that live in an ecological context similar to that
in which our own species likely evolved. The long-term data collected at the
UNBP have tracked the ways in which these animals can adapt – both behaviorally
and physiologically – to a rapidly changing anthropogenic environment, shedding
light on the complex interactions between ecology and behavior and contributing
to our understanding of how similar processes may have influenced human
evolution. Through this IRES, a new generation of researchers will develop their
own research projects at the UNBP, benefitting both from the mentorship of
experienced baboon researchers and from the decades of data available at this
site. The data collected by participating students will not only increase our
knowledge of baboon behavior and ecology, but also broadly inform conservation
practices that aim to ameliorate human-wildlife conflict and environmental
management strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.