* 2246700
* Addressing Problems in Tropical Atmospheric Dynamics Using Idealized Global Climate Models
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Isaac Held, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Varavut Limpasuvan
* 06/30/2025
* USD 399,999.00

A persistent gap in our knowledge of the climate system occurs in the tropical
atmosphere where motions on very small spatial scales play an outsized role in
the vertical transport of heat and water. These motions are very difficult to
incorporate into global climate models, resulting in uncertainty in climate
simulations. This project aims to advance our understanding of key fundamental
features of the tropical climate and address how different modeling approaches
to incorporate those motions affect these key features. The research strategy
entails creating climate models of differing complexity and with realistic
interaction between thermal radiation and water vapor. In these simulations, the
investigators will examine the time-averaged tropical rainfall distribution and
the organization of tropical rainfall on different frequencies and spatial
scales, as well as the potential for abrupt reorganization of the tropical winds
and rainfall as the climate warms. The research tasks will help train graduate
students and early career scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project follows a
distinctive approach to climate theory involving the construction and analysis
of a systematic hierarchy of climate models by peeling off successive layers of
complexity. The examined tropical dynamics include the position and structure of
the Hadley Circulation, convectively coupled waves, the Madden-Julian
Oscillation, and the susceptibility of the tropics to super-rotate. Deviating
from conventional wisdom, the project will initially concentrate on simulations
with no additional treatment of vertical heat and moisture fluxes, supplementing
what the model can produce on its own based on a horizontal resolution commonly
used for climate projections. This strategy will provide a benchmark to
facilitate the study of the diversity of model simulations with differing
treatments of fluxes or with much smaller grid size. The project will then
construct a model with greater flexibility in handling these vertical fluxes
than previously possible. The hierarchy approach with accessible results can
have great pedagogical values in communicating the fundamental concepts in
climate theory and climate change to the public.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.