* 2246347
* IRES Track 1: International Research Experiences in Learning based Connected and Autonomous Vehicles (CAVs) with Real-World Implementations
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Seta Bogosyan, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 03/31/2026
* USD 299,999.00

Future societies will depend more and more on artificial intelligence (AI) and
networked systems, and, in turn, on autonomous vehicles (AVs) and connected AVs
(CAVs) for many services and operations; i.e. transportation, urban logistics,
factory automation, smart farming/agriculture and disaster management, to name a
few. AVs and CAVs have strong potential to increase performance, safety, and
efficiency, and as a result, to contribute to societal well-being and enhance
economic growth. On the other hand, autonomous systems still fail to provide
generalizable responses to vehicle, sensor, road, and environment related
uncertainties, and need human intervention. Reinforcement learning (RL), an
emerging branch of machine learning (ML) and control, has a lot to promise for
autonomy with its capacity to address unpredictable changes in the system and
environment. However, the field still has many research gaps and also suffers
from the lack of practical research evaluation. Most AI based AV research is
performed in simulations, on simple platforms and for simplified cases that are
far from reflecting real-life uncertainties and convincing responses to changing
road conditions, especially at high speeds. This 3-year project will support
selected undergraduate and graduate students from US universities to tackle the
open challenges of fully autonomous vehicles within a cohort experience at
Istanbul Technical University (ITU) under the mentorship of subject-matter
experts from ITU, from KTH, and a US based autonomous bus company (ADASTEC
Corp). Eight US students (4 graduate, 4 undergraduate) will be funded each year
for a 10-week on-site, hands-on research experience at ITU, with each student
being in charge of his/her own level-appropriate project using ML/RL for one or
more of the vehicle autonomy layers; namely, for perception, localization,
motion planning, and trajectory tracking and associated practical tests on
actual vehicles (with safety drivers). The algorithm tests will be performed
around the ITU Campus within real-world scenarios. Each year, a different
student cohort will be selected for this unique research and professional
development opportunity, thereby contributing to the US leadership in the future
of vehicle technologies with a well-prepared workforce. Special recruitment
efforts are planned for broadening participation and recruitment of students
from underrepresented communities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The adaptive optimality
offered by RL provides increased performance and efficiency when compared with
classical control approaches that cannot handle unstructured dynamics, often
resulting in safe but highly conservative, low-performance solutions. Similarly,
because of its adaptability to changes in the environment and problem dynamics,
RL offers increased safety when compared with rule-based, heuristic approaches
often practiced in industries to address the needs of autonomous vehicles and
platforms. The student research projects for each layer of vehicle autonomy will
use RL based designs to address uncertainties and disturbances faced in real-
life, which have often been ignored in lab based AV research. In our
perception/localization projects, novel algorithms will be developed to estimate
sensing uncertainties to improve the performance of RL based motion planning and
dynamic object tracking. The trajectory tracking algorithms will be based on
Zero-Sum Games (ZSG) and online, model-free RL based control algorithms to
address disturbances and slip/slide effects, which is also a significant
research contribution. At the end of each research cycle, the modularly
developed algorithms will be integrated on an actual vehicle and tested
individually and in integration, first on the ITU vehicle-in-the-loop (VIL)
system, then on indoor RaceCars and finally, at the ITU Living Lab environment
for shuttle service scenarios.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.