* 2246582
* Laser lifted off III-Nitride and GaN circuits to enable next generation chargers, electric vehicle drives, and wearable electronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Asif Khan, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Prem Chahal
* 07/31/2026
* USD 500,000.00

AlxGa1-xN semiconductors have extreme properties such as high heat removal, high
temperature operation, and high current/voltage handling that are ideal for high
power compact electronics in electric vehicles. These extreme properties make
them excellent for low power applications such as wearables beyond traditional
silicon as validated by the emergence of GaN chargers in consumer electronics.
Further scaling of device performance with Al content is currently limited by
the wafers on which AlxGa1-xN active layer coatings are produced. By removing
the wafer and transferring ultrathin active coatings to application specific
engineered surfaces, can the full promise of AlGaN’s superior properties be
realized in ultra-compact devices? This question will be answered using a patent
pending laser liftoff (LLO) AlGaN transfer developed by our team to remove the
growth wafer. If successful, our work would transform power transistors for
electric vehicles and power grid applications and could lead to the first
practical wearable III-Nitride devices from this Nobel winning material system
that led to the 2014 Physics prize for the blue LED. Part of this work will be
performed by Engineering undergraduates in collaboration with the nation’s best
department of Exercise Science and could enable tech transfer of what could be
the first application of flexible III-N in healthcare.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
work will be performed in the following 3 thrusts.&lt;br/&gt;1. Characterizing
steady state and transient thermal performance of AlGaN channel transistors by
transferring/soldering to Cu heat sinks. This will eliminate the series
thermal/electrical resistances of the substrate, reducing thermal time constants
from the ms range to the us range. These are suitable for kHz-MHz switching
applications without significant temperature rise, a crucial requirement in
deep-scaled power electronics that can reach the ideal performance codified in
the Baliga Figure of merit.&lt;br/&gt;2. Piezoelectric sensing on flexible
substrates by transferring depletion mode high-electron mobility transistors
(HEMTs) to flexible polyethylene terephthalate (PET). By flexing the AlGaN
heterojunction, piezoelectric charge in the channel changes, an effect amplified
by the transistor Given the ~1A/mm drive we have obtained for LLO transferred
AlGaN/GaN transistors, and PET’s known high critical breakdown field &gt;5MV/cm,
we enable new functionalities previously not possible in flexible electronics.
We will mount this device on human participants to evaluate the viability of
wearable III-N heart rate sensors as a piezoelectric stethoscope.&lt;br/&gt;3.
Integration of visible III-N emitters and photodetectors in a single package
using a LLO pick and place approach to demonstrate a flexible III-N photonic
circuit. This will be used to develop an understanding of bandwidth limiting
defects induced by LLO and packaging in low-leakage circuits. Defect studies
will also inform the other case studies to determine the ultimate bandwidth and
power handling capabilities of AlGaN devices. A key issue is that of strain
relief induced damage from the highly traumatic laser liftoff and transfer
process. This is a problem that we have minimized through our preliminary
enabling research, although it is a key problem that will limit the viability of
this technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.