* 2246315
* IRES Track I: Design, Mechanics and Manufacturing of Active and Sustainable Composite Structures
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Junuthula Reddy, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 03/31/2026
* USD 300,000.00

The aim of this proposal is to develop an International Research Experience for
Students (IRES), organized by researchers under the auspices of the Center of
Innovation in Mechanics for Design and Manufacturing (CiMDM) at Texas A&amp;M
Engineering Experiment Station (TEES) at Texas A&amp;M University (TAMU) and
Bristol Composites Institute (BCI), UK. The project sends 6 U.S. undergraduate
and/or graduate students from diverse backgrounds per year to gain cutting edge
experience in the design, manufacture, and testing of advanced composite
materials (which are produced by combining two or more materials to obtain third
material with desirable functionalities) at BCI. Expertise in the development of
advanced sustainable composites is critical to building and maintaining US
competitiveness in this area which is critical to the US defense industry in
particular. These structures are poised to offer an attractive, energy and
material efficient, and sustainable way for manufacturing products ranging from
small-scale components (such as prosthetics and wearable sensors) to large-scale
structures (such as advanced air craft, civil infrastructure, wind turbines, and
so on). This IRES program offers a chance for the US to leverage its excellent
relationship with the UK and train a diverse group of students (and future
workforce) in an emerging area in a high-value industry with significant growth.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This TRACK 1 IRES site focuses on Design,
Mechanics and Manufacturing of Active and Sustainable Composite Structures at
the Bristol Composites Institute (BCI), University of Bristol, UK. The IRES
students will participate in different research projects built around this theme
based on challenges posed by our industrial partners and research questions
considered by our collaborators at BCI. The proposal builds on our collaboration
with BCI and under the auspices of the Center of Innovation in Mechanics for
Design and Manufacturing (CiMDM), Texas A&amp;M Engineering Experiment Station
(TEES) at Texas A&amp;M University (TAMU). Europe and the US have embarked on
major Research and Development initiatives in this area focused on the emerging
area of digital engineering of composites to address the difficulties of
managing complex and evolving technologies over their lifecycles. The IRES team
at TEES have been investigating novel digital modeling techniques (based on
nonlocal mechanics) for the multiscale modeling of the durability and fracture
of a broad range of engineered mesostructures. The BCI has focused on digital
engineering (integrated simulation-based design and manufacturing) of composites
and are considered world leaders in this field. Based on this complementary
approach and past collaborations, the PIs have crafted the student projects
focused on smart digital manufacturing of composites to optimize processes and
cost. The projects are: (1) design of smart composite materials and structures
for the development of composite systems with novel functionality; (2) bio-based
natural fiber composites and circular life cycle design for the development of
recyclable composites; (3) health monitoring and composite strength and
durability studies focused on increasing the durability and resilience of
composites; and (4) smart digital manufacturing of composites to optimize
processes and cost. Specific research challenges in each of these four areas
will be posed in consultation with our industry partners NCC (design and
prototype development), Vestas (Wind turbines), Airbus(Aircraft), and Rolls
Royce (composites for fan blades).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.