* 2246664
* Dynamical and Spatial Asymptotics of Large Disordered Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Lingfu Zhang, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Wilmer
* 06/30/2026
* USD 97,750.00

This project will study the asymptotic behaviors of several stochastic models in
probability theory, in terms of long-time dynamics and static spatial limits.
These models find wide applications in various disciplines, including condensed
matter physics, material science, computer science, and biology, in the study of
objects such as quantum particles in disordered media, the growth of bacterial
colonies, traffic flow, and the kinetic theory of gases. A focus is to
understand universality, the phenomenon where microscopically different
probabilistic models produce the same limiting behavior. This project also
contains educational components, including curriculum development and supporting
K-12 extracurricular math programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific models to
be investigated fall into three categories. The first is the Anderson model
described by the lattice Schr√∂dinger equation with i.i.d. random potentials. The
main objective is to mathematically establish the localization phenomenon, where
wave packets do not spread. The principal investigator (PI) plans to carry out
comprehensive studies of this model under reduced regularity assumptions. The
second theme of this project is the Kardar-Parisi-Zhang (KPZ) universality,
which describes the scaling limit of various random growth processes. In the
past quarter-century, enormous progress has been made on those with exact-
solvable structures. The PI will use geometric and probabilistic methods to
study the asymptotics of several such exactly-solvable models, including local
environment limits and scaling limits under large deviation, and a limiting
random geometry termed the directed landscape. The ultimate goal is to extend
KPZ universality beyond exact-solvability. The third topic concerns Gibbs
samplers, which are Monte Carlo Markov Chain (MCMC) algorithms used to sample
high-dimensional distributions. The focus is on the continuous state space
setting, where tools to analyze time evolution are relatively limited. A
particular instance is Kac's walk from kinetic theory, whose order of mixing
time was only determined in recent years. The PI plans to develop a general
framework to understand the mechanism behind the evolution of these Gibbs
samplers, and prove predicted cutoffs for them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.