* 2246907
* Probabilistic and Extremal Combinatorics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Tom Bohman, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 07/31/2026
* USD 102,360.00

This research project is an investigation of discrete mathematical objects like
networks and codes. Extremal combinatorics is focused on developing a better
understanding of discrete mathematical objects that optimize interesting or
desirable properties, while probabilistic combinatorics studies discrete
mathematical objects that are generated by a series of random choices. These two
research directions are intimately related as randomized algorithms are a
remarkably powerful tool for the construction of interesting discrete
mathematical objects. Furthermore, randomness is a major theme of the work on
extremal problems for discrete structures as a deep understanding of the ways in
which deterministic objects mimic their randomized counterparts often leads to
major progress. This research has the potential to benefit society through the
development of new algorithms for computational problems on large networks, new
methods for analyzing existing network algorithms, and new codes and
communication protocols. The project also provides training opportunities at
both the undergraduate and graduate level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is
in the broad areas of probabilistic and extremal combinatorics. The work in
probabilistic combinatorics is focused on very sharp concentration of global
parameters of the binomial random graph and problems regarding the decomposition
of the edge set of the uniform random graph into cliques or bicliques. The work
on sharp concentration in the binomial random graph is motivated by a recent
result of the investigator and a doctoral student that establishes 2-point
concentration of the independence number of the binomial random graph over a
broad range of the probability parameter. The comprehensive understanding of the
extent of concentration of the independence number of the binomial random graph
is one of the goals of this part of the research program. This project also
includes further study of the fascinating lonely runner conjecture and some
problems on Ramsey numbers for hypergraphs and posets. While the structures that
we consider in these two contexts are not necessarily random, we expect the
interplay of structure and randomness (i.e. pseudorandom properties of discrete
structures) to play a major role. The ultimate goal of this research is to find
new methods that are broadly applicable in discrete
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.