* 2246491
* Degenerate diffusions in finite and infinite dimensions: smoothing and convergence
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* David Herzog, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Wilmer
* 07/31/2026
* USD 245,420.00

Dynamics that evolve randomly in time are used to describe the behavior of
financial markets, turbulence, and complex biological systems. Furthermore, they
play a key role in big data algorithms. In many of these contexts, randomness
enters the system only through a limited number of directions in space. This
sparsity of randomness and the often high or infinite-dimensional nature of the
equations lead to numerous mathematical challenges, from obtaining basic
structural properties of to establishing finer aspects of the dynamics. This
project will explore how the limited randomness interacts with nonlinearity to
produce smoothing, leading to criteria for the existence of solutions and
equilibria. The work will focus on fluid models with random forcing terms, where
very little is known about such behavior. Finer properties of the stochastic
dynamics will also be studied, especially how fast the system converges to
equilibrium as certain parameters in the system are removed. The aim in this
context is to understand the anomalous dissipation phenomenon in fluids. The
planned work will involve postdoctoral researchers, graduate students, and
undergraduate students. Further synergistic activities will include an online
cross-university research reading group and a probability reading group at Iowa
State University. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project encompasses
several topics at the interface of stochastic analysis and dynamical systems.
Diffusions with degenerate noise in both high and infinite dimensions will be
studied. A key goal is to understand how noise interacts with nonlinearities to
produce smoothing, in the sense that the dynamics belongs to an improved Sobolev
space for positive times, and convergence, in the sense that the system settles
into a unique statistically steady state for large times. Such understanding is
fundamental for deducing basic structural properties of solutions (e.g. large-
time existence/ergodicity in the relevant topology), yet it is absent in many
important models in turbulence and statistical mechanics. Finer properties of
such systems (e.g. classification of irregular points, the meaning of
"hypoellipticty" in infinite dimensions, and the anomalous dissipation
phenomenon) will also be studied. Many of the equations to be investigated are
physical models (e.g. the two-dimensional stochastically forced and damped Euler
equations or second-order Langevin dynamics), while others are simplified models
to help build understanding in the motivating equations. This work will build on
previous research of the awardee by developing methods to analyze the systems
for both large and bounded values of the phase space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.