* 2246804
* Collaborative Research: Structure and properties of geofluids and their impact on fluid migration in subduction zones
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Ikuko Wada, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Panero
* 05/31/2026
* USD 234,181.00

Magmatism plays a vital role in transporting matter and energy from the Earth’s
deep interior to the surface. While some eruptions are explosive, others erupt
without major explosive behavior, leading to different natural hazards for each
eruptive style. These distinct eruption styles are controlled by the fundamental
physical properties of magma, particularly viscosity, and density. The viscosity
of magma is highly dependent on the atomic-scale structure of the magma,
influenced by magma composition, temperature, pressure, and the presence of
dissolved gasses such as water vapor. In this study, the researchers aim to
obtain fundamental physical constraints on the structure and viscosity of magma
at conditions relevant to the Earth’s interior. We will combine the
experimentally derived physical properties of magma and fluids with numerical
simulations to predict how magmas migrate from the Earth’s subducting plates. It
is the migration of this material that ultimately leads to eruptions at the
surface, but the complex role of viscosity in magma transport makes it difficult
to trace material from its source in the interior to the surface. The project
will provide training for the next generation of Earth Scientists at various
stages of their career, including high school, undergraduate, and graduate
students, as well as post-doctoral scholars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although
extensive research has been done to constrain the elastic and transport
properties of fluids and melts at conditions relevant to the Earth’s interior,
the combined effects of pressure, temperature, and dissolved water remain poorly
constrained at the conditions of the upper mantle where these melts are
produced. This research will couple lab- and synchrotron-based experimental data
to pressures up to 20 GPa with first-principles molecular dynamics (FPMD)
simulations, with the objective to determine the local melt structure, and fluid
and melt viscosity to high pressures and temperatures. This work will quantify
the structure and properties of aqueous fluids with dissolved albite, in
addition to albite and basaltic melts with and without water. The results will
provide insight into how pressure, temperature, and composition affect the
structure and viscosity of polymerized aluminosilicate melts at mid-mantle
depths and illuminate the causes of observed pressure anomalies on viscosity.
The resulting viscosities will be integrated into two-phase flow models in the
slab-arc system and the upwelling region above the mantle transition zone to
assess the pathways of melt migrations through state-of-the-art geodynamical
models. These models will assess how the pattern of fluid migration changes with
slab age and subduction rate, slab thermal structure, and the distribution and
volume of fluid sources in the subducting slab. The resulting work will assess
the impact of fluid volumes due to melting and whether melting alone is
sufficient to focus melts into a narrow region beneath volcanic
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.