* 2246545
* Genetic and physiological mechanisms of a fitness trade-off across environments
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Brian Dilkes, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 06/30/2027
* USD 314,681.00

Organisms in temperate zones, when exposed to cool autumn temperatures, undergo
cellular and metabolic changes which increase survival through freezing. These
responses are likely to be energetically costly, requiring appropriate
adjustments for conditions days to months in the future. Too little will not
prepare for freezing, too much may inhibit growth and reproduction. The trade-
off between the costs and benefits of adaptation to seasonality can limit where
native species and crops can thrive. Climatic variability threatens the
capacities of organisms to “predict” the future environment and will contribute
to extinction risks for native species and reduced crop production. Yet, we do
not know how most organisms acclimate for winter, and even less about the costs
of such acclimation. The proposed research will, for the first time, connect our
understanding of adaptation and trade-offs from genes and metabolism to
performance in contrasting natural environments. The study system has a
foundation of over a decade of field experimental and climate data, and both
natural and engineered variants of a gene that regulates cold acclimation and is
hypothesized to underlie differences in survival and reproduction across
contrasting climates. This focal regulatory gene responds to cold in many plant
species, and the costs of acclimation are directly important for climate
resilience of native species and for improving agronomical varieties. Broader
impact activities for middle and high school students on organismal responses to
climate change will be developed, including a “Data Nugget” module to promote
students’ quantitative skills by answering scientific questions using real data.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fitness trade-offs across environments are key drivers of
biological diversification. The ultimate, but yet unrealized, goal in
understanding the genetic basis of fitness trade-offs is to identify the full
causal chain connecting naturally occurring sequence polymorphisms, molecular
and organismal phenotypes, and fitness in the contrasting environments in which
the organisms evolved. The proposed work uses locally adapted ecotypes of
Arabidopsis thaliana from Italy and Sweden, for which cold-acclimated freezing
tolerance loci are hypothesized to underlie genetic trade-offs. A naturally
occurring polymorphism in a transcription factor encoding gene CBF2 was
identified as responsible for a major freezing tolerance locus. The proposed
experiments will test the hypothesis that CBF2 mediates a genetic trade-off
across environments, and determine the genetic and metabolic mechanisms by which
this occurs. Genetic stocks include Near Isogenic and mutant lines in multiple
ecotypic backgrounds that contain, or mimic, the loss of function cbf2 allele
found in the Italian ecotype. Proposed experiments will quantify growth rates,
flowering phenology, lifetime fitness, genome-wide gene expression, and
untargeted metabolomics in conditions simulating the natural environments. These
conditions are based on site-level climate data and recapitulate differences in
relative fitness of the ecotypes at the native sites. This is an unparalleled
integration of detailed studies of the genetic, molecular, and physiological
mechanisms of an adaptive phenotype in a system with extensive information about
local adaptation in the native environments. Training will be provided for
undergraduates and postgraduates who will also participate in education outreach
activities with middle and high school students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.