* 2246682
* Finite Models for the Kakeya Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Zeev Dvir, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 05/31/2026
* USD 409,200.00

The classical Kakeya needle problem asks to determine the smallest area in the
plane needed to rotate a unit length line segment (or `needle’) around
completely. Modern variants of this old problem turn out to be central to
understanding various types of phenomena in areas ranging from analysis, partial
differential equations, combinatorics, number theory and even computer science.
The last two decades saw tremendous progress on this family of problems with the
introduction of several influential techniques, which have later found use in
attacking other hard problems. Despite this exciting progress, several core
issues remain unsolved even today. The goal of this project is to find ways to
make progress on those hard instances of the Kakeya problem in finite settings
where existing techniques fail. The problems the PI will study are rooted in
combinatorics but have applications in other areas, including in computer
science. One of the goals of this project is to further strengthen these
connections by finding new applications and expanding on known ones. Graduate
students will be trained as part of this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific research goals of this project are grouped into four main topics: (1)
High-dimensional variants of the finite field Kakeya problem. The PI and co-
authors made significant progress in the past few years on these variants but
many important open problems still remain. In particular, reducing the field
size and understanding better the newly discovered connections to linear hash
functions. (2) Arithmetic progressions variants of the Kakeya problem. These
variants are notoriously difficult and could potentially lead to the resolution
of the Kakeya conjecture over the reals. We identify several ‘intermediate
difficulty’ variants of these problems in the hope that these could lead to the
development of new techniques. (3) Abstract Kakeya problems: We describe an
abstract framework for studying Kakeya-type problems and suggest a potential
connection to Locally Decodable Codes (codes important in theoretical computer
science). (4) Finally, we describe a novel reinterpretation of finite Kakeya
type problems as relaxations of integer optimization problems and suggest that
these could be studied using tools from real
optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.