* 2246464
* Travel: Doctoral Consortium at the 22nd International Conference on Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems
* CSE,IIS
* 04/15/2023,07/31/2023
* Ferdinando Fioretto, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Roger Mailler
* 07/31/2023
* USD 25,000.00

This grant supports travel for select students participating in the Doctoral
Mentoring Consortium (DMC) at the 22nd International Conference on Autonomous
Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (AAMAS 2023) will be held in London, England, May
29 - June 2, 2023. This is the premier international conference for researchers
in agents and multi-agent systems (MAS) across a fully international research
community. This consortium is oriented on research and career development for
students who have identified their PhD topics and are just embarking on that
independent research. The central activities for the DMC include opportunities
for students to present and discuss their work with their peers; interaction
with an identified group of senior researchers for advice on Ph.D. research, a
career panel to discuss career choices in industry and academia, small group
activities led by assigned mentors, and a great deal of opportunity for
interactions with the international research community in AAMAS, which might
lead to future collaborative activity. In addition, the DMC includes a tutorial
program with full-day and half-day tutorials that will provide detailed
overviews of specific subfields by leading researchers in the field.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sponsoring student travel to AAMAS conveys many benefits
beyond the DMC program. The sponsored students have full access to a well-
developed AAMAS workshop and conference program covering a diverse range of
research areas in this community. This is an opportunity for students to engage
in discussion with scientists from around the world and to explore new research
directions and topics. AAMAS is the major international conference that will
figure prominently in the research careers of students who remain involved in
agents and MAS. Students gain valuable research insights from the exchange of
technical ideas in this broader venue. In the process, they make valuable
connections with potential collaborators from around the world. As intelligent
software and embodies systems become more prevalent, it is clear that advances
in intelligent agent technology will have significant impact in virtually any
domain imaginable, including such national priorities as health and well-being,
e-commerce, and national defense.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.