* 2246678
* RAPID: Modeling of COVID-19 transmission in cruise ships and evaluating the impact of mitigation measures
* BIO,DEB
* 11/15/2022,10/31/2023
* Pinar Keskinocak, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 10/31/2023
* USD 178,288.00

This project focuses on modeling the spread of COVID-19 in cruise ships and
evaluating the impact of interventions commonly used in community guidelines,
such as masking and distancing. Many travel and hospitality services have been
heavily disrupted during the COVID-19 pandemic, as the densely populated
congregated settings contribute to virus spread across individuals from various
geographic areas and subpopulations. The development and implementation of
guidelines to control the spread of disease and ensure the safety of travelers
and crew members, as well as the populations they interact with during and after
completing their travels, has been an ongoing effort. The understanding of what
combinations of interventions are most effective in preventing or slowing down
the disease spread will facilitate data-driven recommendations for cruise ship
travel and for similar close-quarters settings for COVID-19 and other infectious
diseases. In addition, this project will support the training of graduate
students who are interested in careers in public
health.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this project include: (i)
Developing mathematical models to analyze the spread of COVID-19 on cruise
ships, considering the unique interaction dynamics among passengers and crew.
(ii) Evaluating the effectiveness of various interventions, individually or in
combination, including ones not previously used, by testing a wide range of
model scenarios. The results will provide insights and recommendations for
public health policy and decision-makers and the modeling framework can inform
other modeling activities that rely on similar data
streams.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project was funded in collaboration with the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.