* 2246050
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: Safeguarding Next-Generation Emergency Services (NG-9-1-1) over Cellular Networks: From Design to Practice
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Li Xiao, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 06/30/2026
* USD 870,000.00

The next-generation 9-1-1 (NG-9-1-1) services are IP-based systems that supports
all types of emergency communications, e.g., voice, video, and text. The
globally deployed 5G/4G cellular networks with ubiquitous coverage are the most
accessible vehicles for emergency services. However, the security of IP-based
cellular emergency services is still largely unexplored. Since 911 services are
critical to our society, it is extremely important to eliminate potential
vulnerabilities and ensure their security. This project aims to safeguard
NG-9-1-1 services over cellular networks from their designs to operations. The
project's novelties are to systematically uncover insecure design defects,
operational slips, and implementation flaws of cellular emergency services while
ensuring sustainable security through a multi-disciplinary approach. The
project's broader significance and importance are to extend the state-of-the-art
emergency service security research to a new frontier by exploring novel methods
that can help perform innovative emergency service modeling, vulnerability
analysis, data collection/mining, and testing automation solutions. The project
also aims to contribute to nation's future workforce by training students in
critical areas such as network security, wireless and mobile systems, and
machine learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project comprises three research
thrusts: (1) to develop new techniques for discovering design flaws of cellular
emergency services. This thrust will build a novel multi-level emergency service
verifier that adopts and applies model-checking techniques to formally examine
diversified cellular emergency service specifications, requirements, and
regulations efficiently; (2) to create new techniques that can analyze and
identify both implementation issues and potential operational slips of emergency
services. A software-defined-radio NG-9-1-1 service platform will be developed.
A comprehensive testing dataset will be built to cover both abnormal and normal
use scenarios; and (3) to build an NG-9-1-1 service testing platform that allows
automatic checking and follow-on re-examination of discovered vulnerabilities to
ensure sustainable security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.