* 2246031
* (Semi)algebraic Geometry in Schrödinger Operators and Nonlinear Hamiltonian Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Wencai Liu, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 08/31/2026
* USD 270,908.00

The Schrödinger equation is fundamental in quantum mechanics as it describes the
behavior of particles, such as electrons, in a physical system. This project
aims to develop mathematical tools to investigate various phenomena observed in
solid-state physics, condensed matter physics, and optics. The mathematical
understanding of these phenomena could lead to numerous applications, such as
the design of quantum computing and quantum communication devices, and the
development of novel semiconducting materials. Research training opportunities
will be provided for both undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective is to explore both linear and
nonlinear Hamiltonian systems through various mathematical tools such as
(semi)algebraic geometry, mathematical physics, and dynamical systems. The
project will focus on three main areas. The first area will center on analyzing
spectral transitions, the hierarchical structures of eigenfunctions, quantum
dynamics, and spectral gaps of quasiperiodic operators. The second area will
involve combining methods from algebraic geometry with analysis tools to study
the irreducibility of Bloch and Fermi varieties, and the inverse spectral
problems of periodic graph operators. Finally, the project will develop new
techniques from semi-algebraic geometry and perturbation theory to study the
quasi-periodic and almost periodic in time solutions of nonlinear Schrödinger
and wave equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.