* 2246790
* Kardar-Parisi-Zhang Universality Class, Integrable Differential Equations, and Spin Glass
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Jinho Baik, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 08/31/2026
* USD 408,722.00

This project is about how sometimes complex and random interactions between the
constituents in a large probabilistic system may lead to simple and universal
behaviors. Here universality means that these properties are attained for a
large class of such systems. A few concrete classes of probabilistic models and
their fundamental properties will be investigated, especially when the system
sizes become large. This project will help improve our understanding of the
scopes and limitations of the universality of probability models. Many parts of
the project will be carried out with graduate students and young researchers,
helping their professional development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In concrete terms,
the Kardar-Parisi-Zhang (KPZ) universality class models will be studied as well
as their connections to integrable differential equations, and spin glass
models. Of particular interest will be the multi-time distributions of KPZ
universality class models on the ring domain, to understand and broaden the
relations between the KPZ models and integrable differential equations, and to
study the fluctuations of the spherical Sherrington-Kirkpatrick model perturbed
by a deterministic field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.