* 2246631
* Testing SIDM with Realistic Galaxy Formation Simulations
* MPS,PHY
* 11/01/2022,10/31/2023
* Ferah Munshi, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Keith Dienes
* 10/31/2023
* USD 216,115.00

This award funds the collaborative research activities of Professor Ferah Munshi
at the University of Oklahoma.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most of the matter in our
Universe resides in an unknown component, dark matter. We have learned this
primarily by studying the gravitational interactions of galaxies. Therefore,
astrophysical measurements are a compelling way of directly studying the
properties of dark matter. The nature of dark matter remains one of the most
important questions in physics. Gravitational evidence points to dark matter
that is "cold", meaning that it moves slowly and therefore is probably a heavy
particle. This is the Cold Dark Matter (CDM) model. However, decades of
experimental effort to detect such a heavy particle have not yet yielded
conclusive evidence. Also, the CDM model has faced challenges matching the
observed properties of dwarf galaxies (galaxies smaller than our Milky Way).
These problems have inspired alternative dark-matter models. One alternative
model that may work well is Self-Interacting Dark Matter (SIDM). SIDM and CDM
should yield different distributions of mass within dwarf galaxies, but this has
not been modeled in detail. As part of her research, Professor Munshi will use
state-of-the-art computer simulations to model dwarf galaxies with both the CDM
model and the SIDM model. Data from these simulations will be evaluated against
data from real galaxies in order to constrain the nature of dark matter. This
research advances the scientific leadership of the United States in the
understanding of dark matter. Moreover, this project will train future
scientists, with the goal of diversifying the US technical workforce. An
expanded and diversified scientific workforce helps to ensure that the US
remains a leader in innovation and economic growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
technically, the proposed research will result in a suite of high-resolution,
state-of-the-art simulations of galaxy formation within the SIDM paradigm. SIDM
preserves the large-scale success of CDM, while opening up the possibility of
altering the small scales in testable ways using galaxy observations. The group
will use the N-Body+SPH code ChaNGa to run a series of simulations. First will
be "zoom" simulations of individual dwarf galaxies in order to test whether CDM
of SIDM can reproduce the diverse range of rotation curves observed in real
galaxies. These galaxies will be run in both CDM and SIDM. Second will be
studies of "zoom" volumes that contain dozens of dwarfs from 1000 solar masses
to 10^9 solar masses in order to directly compare the observed shapes of
galaxies with those predicted in CDM vs. SIDM. Analytic models have shown that
an SIDM model with an interaction cross-section of ~3 cm^2 g^-1 can reproduce
the full range of galaxy rotation curves. This research will test this model
across a range of galaxy simulations for the first time. The broader-impacts
component of this project builds on the successful Pre-Major in Astronomy
Program (Pre-MAP) at the University of Washington by establishing a Pre-Map-like
first-year seminar at the University of Oklahoma through an existing
"Introduction to Research" class, and will expand the program to include
training more relevant to physics research in addition to astronomy. This
program will not only develop a mentoring relationship between students and
members of the Physics and Astronomy Department, but also utilize cohort-
building activities to develop the students into a peer-support network for each
other. Finally, this program will introduce the students to basic research tools
and involve them in original research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.