* 2246855
* FET: Small: Hybrid Electrical, Ionic, and Biocompatible Artificial Synaptic Transistors
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Dmitry Kireev, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 09/30/2026
* USD 600,000.00

Traditional computing systems have fundamental drawbacks that limit the
capability of data storage and processing. Unlike conventional systems, the
human brain operates through electrochemical processes, enabling parallel
computing and efficient data storage. This project aims to overcome limitations
in traditional computing systems by exploring the potential of bioelectronic
neuromorphic computing. While progress has been made in developing brain-
inspired neuromorphic hardware, there remains a gap between these artificial
architectures and biological systems. To address the gap, the project focuses on
creating hybrid bioelectronic neuromorphic computing systems that integrate
artificial synapses with live neuronal networks. This novel technology holds
immense promise across multiple domains. In neuroscience, it offers an
artificial platform for studying synapse responses to electrical and ionic
signals. In computing, it enables efficient processing of unstructured data,
emulating the brain's capabilities. Moreover, in biomedical applications, it
facilitates seamless integration between biological systems and computers,
opening doors for advanced bioelectronic hybrids. In the long run, these devices
could be used as brain implants, allowing the replication of brain behavior and
the development of next-generation prosthetic devices for treating
neurodegenerative diseases like Parkinson's and Alzheimer's. The impact of this
research will be further broadened through graduate student training; year-round
involvement of undergraduate students in the research, set up so they can
significantly contribute to the project; leadership efforts in developing and
leading a program to prepare undergraduates in electrical engineering for
graduate school; and dissemination of educational videos to increase awareness
and interest in this interdisciplinary area.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators propose the design of novel
artificial synaptic devices and arrays based on graphene transistors to meet the
necessary criteria for seamless integration and response to biological signals.
Building upon recent innovations, the team has developed artificial synaptic
transistors using fully biocompatible materials, including bilayer graphene and
Nafion-based compounds. These transistors also exhibit significantly low
switching energy. The project's key objectives are scaling the graphene
artificial synaptic transistors to biologically-relevant sizes and investigating
individual device response and array behavior. The devices will be engineered to
respond to both electrical and ionic signals, specifically potassium (K+) and
sodium (Na+) ions. The devices' channel conductance, which corresponds to memory
states, will be manipulated by applying electrical pulses to the Nafion gate.
This process facilitates the movement of protons through the Nafion body,
leading to controlled changes in conductance. A comprehensive approach combining
data-driven multidimensional modeling and experimental array testing will be
used to validate the functionality and performance of the devices and their
arrays as artificial neural networks. Through a combination of modeling and
experimental validation, the project aims to develop a cutting-edge neuromorphic
system that closely emulates the properties of mammalian
neurons.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.