* 2246387
* IRES Track I: Integration of Innovative Structural Solutions and Data-Enabled Planning Strategies for Infrastructure Resilience in an Evolving Climate (INSPIRE)
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Alice Alipour, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 03/31/2026
* USD 300,000.00

Large parts of North America and Europe are exposed to natural hazards, such as
floods, earthquakes, and windstorms. In recent decades, population growth and
economic development in hazard-prone regions have highlighted the need for
resilient civil infrastructures that can efficiently serve communities with a
variety of essential services, especially in the aftermath of extreme events. To
help students become future leaders who can address the challenges faced by
civil infrastructures in the 21st century, systematic research and educational
activities toward achieving infrastructure resilience are critical. Resilience
is described as the capacity of communities to continue to function under
stresses that include both episodic natural disasters and slow-moving
deteriorations due to aging mechanisms. Despite the variety of efforts made in
this domain to date, the current training programs often lag in equipping
students with the latest knowledge and skillsets required at both component and
system levels. This has formulated the main motivation for establishing the
INSPIRE Site, as synergistic activities and international exchanges are key to
preparing a diverse group of students capable of integrating innovative
structural solutions and planning strategies for infrastructure resilience,
especially in an evolving climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The INSPIRE Site will
provide unique international research and educational experiences for a broad
spectrum of undergraduate and graduate students in collaboration with the Swiss
Federal University of Technology (ETH ZÃ¼rich) and Swiss Federal Laboratories for
Materials Science and Technology (Empa) in Switzerland. The objective is to
provide students with a global perspective and a suite of opportunities for
professional growth through meaningful international cooperative research
training, networking, and mentoring in the fields related to advanced structural
solutions and data-enabled planning and management for infrastructure
resilience. The students will conduct individual projects and team-based
investigations focused on assessing the condition of civil infrastructures and
developing effective solutions to improve their condition state, considering
various safety and performance aspects. This international partnership will have
significant broader impacts, strengthening institutional capacity among a
diverse group of stakeholders through collaborations across academic, industry,
and international partners. Through various educational, mentoring, outreach,
and evaluation activities, the INSPIRE Site will ensure a caring and supportive
environment, especially for broadening participation in the critical domain of
civil infrastructure resilience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.