* 2246686
* Collaborative Research: Experimental and computational constraints on the isotope fractionation of Mossbauer-inactive elements in mantle minerals
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Bin Chen, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Wendy Panero
* 06/30/2026
* USD 274,905.00

Isotope compositions of deep-earth minerals provide crucial constraints on the
earth’s internal structure and chemical evolution. The isotope compositions of
deep-earth minerals are controlled by a process named isotope fractionation, in
which different isotopes redistribute between different minerals under various
pressures and temperatures. There are three conventional ways to constrain
equilibrium isotope fractionation in deep-earth minerals, namely theoretical
calculation, mass spectroscopy, and nuclear resonance scattering. However, each
method has its own challenges. Theoretical calculation is limited by physical
approximations used in the model and has to be benchmarked by experiments; mass
spectroscopy has difficulty in determining the attainment of equilibrium and is
time-consuming; and nuclear resonance scattering can only be applied to the few
Mössbauer-active elements. This proposal describes a novel multidisciplinary
study on the isotope fractionations of deep-earth minerals that are difficult to
be constrained by conventional experimental approaches, through collaborative
and synergetic efforts by combining state-of-the-art X-ray spectroscopy with
theoretical calculations. The researcher's approach is experimentally
benchmarked, time-efficient, directly reflects the equilibrium isotope
fractionation, and can be applied to nearly all elements. They aim to answer the
following questions with their proposed study: 1) How do the Mössbauer-inactive
elements in deep-earth minerals redistribute with pressure, temperature, and
crystal structure? 2) How to constrain the fractionation of Mössbauer-inactive
elements in deep earth solid solutions efficiently? and 3) How does vibrational
anharmonicity affect the isotope fractionation in mantle silicates? The project
will support three early to mid-career researchers to continue their research at
the University of Hawaii at Maona (Zhang and B. Chen) and Purdue University (M.
Chen). Through this project, the team will develop both experimental instruments
at a national user facility and open-source codes for computation, and the
research suite will be available to domestic and international researchers in
earth sciences and beyond. Undergraduate assistants and postdoc scholars will be
involved in this project. This project is also committed to establishing the
career development pathways for the involved early-career researchers, pushing
for the gender and racial equality in geoscience, and broadening the
participation in STEM of traditionally underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fractionation of the isotopes of
constituent elements of mantle minerals at high P-T conditions are considered
the ramifications of the differentiation of the Earth, offering crucial clues
for the mantle’s composition and chemical evolution. Previous studies on the
isotope fractionation of Mössbauer-inactive elements between minerals were
either measured using mass spectroscopy in which the attainment of equilibrium
requires additional caution, or estimated from theoretical calculations without
corroboration from experiments. The researchers have demonstrated that the
reduced partition function ratio (β-factor) of tetracoordinated Si can be
constrained by theoretical-calculation-calibrated in-situ high-T SXD
experiments. In this proposed project, they will extend the method to determine
experimentally constrained β-factors of hexacoordinated Si in non-quenchable
deep-earth minerals for the first time. They will also tackle challenges to
establish an efficient approach to determine β-factors in solid solutions by
theoretical calculations, which are to be benchmarked by SXD experiments and
thus allows them to investigate the isotope fractionation of hexacoordinated Ti
in deep-earth minerals. Their proposed combined approach circumvents direct
theoretical modeling of solid solutions, which significantly reduces
computational costs. Using the combined approaches of experiments and
theoretical modeling, the correction to Si β-factor in hydrous phyllosilicates
induced by the vibrational anharmonicity will be investigated. The proposed
experimentally benchmarked machine learning framework to establish a highly
accurate yet efficient model will allow them to provide reliable estimations of
Si β-factor in anharmonic mineral systems. Though they only propose to study
select Mössbauer-inactive elements (Si &amp; Ti) in this proposal, the same
approach can be extended to other elements such as C, O, Mg, and Ca. All the
three proposed tasks will build the foundation for a complete landscape of
isotope distribution in mantle minerals, and will enhance understanding of the
Earth’s isotopic composition and in turn its chemical evolution. This project is
jointly funded by Cooperative Studies of the Earth's Deep Interior (CSEDI) and
the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.