* 2246145
* CRII: HCC: Interactive Natural Language Technology for Supporting Writers in Structuring and Revising Documents
* CSE,IIS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Kenneth Arnold, Calvin University
* Standard Grant
* Cindy Bethel
* 06/30/2025
* USD 175,000.00

CRII: HCC: Interactive Natural Language Technology for Supporting Writers in
Structuring and Revising Documents&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Written communication
and documentation empower collaboration, decision-making, and execution. It is
challenging to write documents that are well structured and serve the needs of
readers. Tools like Grammarly help fix errors in grammar within single
sentences. But they are not designed to help structure paragraphs or documents
to serve an audience. Although AI systems (such as ChatGPT) can help writers,
they generate text that is not in the authorâ€™s own words. The content that comes
out can be uninformative, not useful, or effectively plagiarized. These problems
mean that many organizations now limit the use of generative technology in
content that they publish. This project explores how computer systems can help
writers structure their documents. The system would not generate words for
writers. Instead, it helps writers craft well-structured documents in their own
words. The project will explore how to add features to word processing
applications. These features will help writers organize their thoughts and
structure their writing. The features may also help predict what questions and
confusions that readers might have. The research team is a diverse group of
undergraduate students in various majors. They will improve their skills in
building tools that use artificial intelligence (AI). These tools will help
people improve their writing and communication.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
project seeks to study how human writers can interact with intelligent systems
during the revision stage. This stage occurs between the initial composition and
the final editing for mechanics. The researchers have already prototyped several
possible interactions. The team will begin by completing the implementation of
these interactions. The team will then refine and test those implementations.
Testing will include simulated and authentic revision contexts. Participants for
these evaluations will be mainly university students and faculty. Participants
will perform typical writing tasks expected for classes and publications. The
perspectives of both the writer and of the reader will determine success.
Evaluation of writer experience will result from post-task interviews and
analysis of interaction logs. Evaluation by readers may include measures of
accuracy, structure, and originality. The research will use pre-trained deep
neural networks for initial prototypes. This is the same approach that powers
ChatGPT. Data collected from experiments with writers will help the researchers
improve language technology. They may use prompt engineering, fine-tuning, or
other approaches. This project should produce fundamental knowledge about how
generative AI systems can help writers. The project also should produce
practical open-source tools to improve communication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.