* 2246335
* IRES Track I: Development of the Neutron Optics Parity and Time Violation Experiment in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* William Snow, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 07/31/2026
* USD 294,784.00

This IRES Track I proposal will send three cohorts of six U.S. undergraduate
students and one U.S. graduate student to Nagoya University, Japan for research
and development experiments in conjunction with the existing Japan/US ``Neutron
Optics Parity and Time Reversal EXperiment'' (NOPTREX) collaboration. The goal
of these experiments is to investigate the physical mechanism responsible for
the conversion of antimatter into matter in the early universe. This is one of
the outstanding questions in particle and nuclear physics and cosmology, because
the Big Bang theory requires matter and antimatter to have been created in equal
parts, although now, we do not observe significant quantities of antimatter in
the visible universe.&lt;br/&gt;Five collaborating institutions: University of
Kentucky, Indiana University, Berea College, Eastern Kentucky University, and
Western Kentucky University will recruit participants from their respective
institutions to work together as a student team/cohort. Three of the
institutions operate nuclear physics accelerator facilities with neutron sources
for student training, and the other two possess outstanding undergraduate
physics programs that draw undergraduates from Appalachia. An innovative aspect
of this proposal is that participants will be recruited during the summer prior
to the international experience and will receive extensive training with their
advisor at their home institution before travelling to Japan. This personalized
academic year-long training will prepare the students to make meaningful
contributions in a highly technical field and give them extra time to study the
Japanese language and culture.&lt;br/&gt;The program will directly train a new
generation of talented physicists skilled at working in international
collaborations and conducting team-based science. The small scale of the NOPTREX
experiment and its use of techniques from many subfields of physics lends itself
to hands-on student participation and the development of a broad understanding
of physical principles and experimental techniques. Special consideration will
be given to women, Appalachian, first-generation, and underrepresented
minorities. Students chosen for the program will enjoy a rich intellectual
research experience using the most advanced instrumentation currently available
and will gain world-class skills in precision measurements with low-energy
neutrons in an international collaborative setting. As a result, the program
will strengthen intellectual and cultural ties between the nuclear science
programs of the US and Japan both for the immediate future and in the rising
generation of nuclear physicists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific goal of
the NOPTREX collaboration is to conduct a new type of sensitive search for time
reversal symmetry violation in polarized neutron transmission through polarized
nuclei. The discovery of a new source of time reversal violation in neutron-
nucleus interactions would uncover new physics beyond the Standard Model of
particle physics and could elucidate the origin of the baryon asymmetry of the
Universe. This experiment exploits special properties of low energy neutron-
nucleus resonances, which can act as a natural amplifier of parity and time
reversal violation. The design of the experimental apparatus directly embodies
and exploits the principle of motion-reversal symmetry to conduct a sensitive
search. The Japanese Spallation Neutron Source (JSNS) at the Japan Proton
Accelerator Research Complex (J-PARC) is well-suited to host this experiment and
will be an ideal backdrop for an international research experience for our
students. Several measurements toward the NOPTREX goals have already been
completed both at J-PARC and Los Alamos National Laboratory (LANL).&lt;br/&gt;An
innovative aspect of this proposal is the extensive individualized, academic-
year training for each student prior to conducting nuclear physics research in
Japan. It builds on the highly collaborative work environment centered around
both the US multi-institutional team-based R&amp;D experiments at LANL and the
international collaborative experiments being performed at J-PARC. Each US
institution contributes specialized hardware expertise and will provide
personalized training to IRES participants during the full academic year to
prepare them for specific tasks during their research in Japan. Participants
will learn collaborative skills and bond as they share their progress with each
other and their Japanese mentors in weekly collaboration video conference
meetings during the academic year. Cohort building, scientific training, and
cultural awareness will be consolidated during two in-person
collaboration/training meetings before travel to Japan.&lt;br/&gt;The students
will perform 10 weeks of summer research at Nagoya University under the
supervision of Professors Hirohiko Shimizu, Masaaki Kitaguchi, and Takuya
Okudaira, with the aid of one US graduate participant. Student research will be
integrated in their Fundamental Neutron Physics research group, which is the
largest in Japan. Students will test experimental hardware using the low energy
neutron test facility at Nagoya University. They will take a short trip to
J-PARC and analyze data collected on the ANNRI beamline at J-PARC. This program
is underpinned by our longstanding Japan/US collaborative relationship and our
solid record of training students who have worked on the project and conducted
NOPTREX research in Japan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.