* 2246746
* Classification and invariants for Borel equivalence relations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Assaf Shani, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2026
* USD 163,146.00

A common thread through mathematics is the problem of classifying a collection
of objects up to some notion of equivalence. A successful classification of
these objects would be a simple list of properties, which are easy to observe,
so that two objects which have the same properties will in fact be equivalent. A
central aim of this project is to further develop the theory of "Borel
equivalence relations". This is a field of study which provides a rigorous
framework to analyze the complexity of various classification problems in
mathematics and to determine when a successful classification is possible or
not. This project will expand the theory, develop new methods, and apply these
to study various classification problems in mathematics. The PI will work with
undergraduate and graduate students, through teaching, directed reading,
advising, and mentoring. The PI will also be involved in organizing conferences
and seminars.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop and expand general
techniques to determine when certain classifying invariants are possible for a
given classification problem. The analysis of classifying invariants will be
facilitated by various techniques coming from axiomatic set theory, including
symmetric models of set theory and cardinal characteristics of the continuum.
Specifically, the PI will further develop the relationship between symmetric
models of set theory, in which the axiom of choice fails, and Borel equivalence
relations which are "classifiable by countable structures". This relationship
will be applied to settle several problems about such equivalence relations and
to further analyze their structure up to Borel reductions and Borel
homomorphisms. Furthermore, generalized frameworks of classifying invariants,
beyond "classification by countable structures", will be studied. These allow
for a meaningful investigation of the possible classifying invariants for
classification problems which were previously considered
unclassifiable.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.