* 2246372
* NSF IRES Track I: Filling the gaps in WaSH research through field-based student research experiences in Malawi
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Ayse Ercumen, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 03/31/2026
* USD 299,999.00

This IRES project aims to provide transformational international experiences to
U.S. students as they participate in rigorous and critically needed on-the-
ground water, sanitation, and hygiene (WaSH) research in Malawi. This is a
mutually beneficial project that will provide invaluable experiences for
students from NC State University and University of Louisville, who will be
exposed to interdisciplinary thinking, problem-solving, and leading-edge, field-
based research in WaSH. These students are future leaders in science,
engineering, and policy. Their understanding of the global challenge of water
and sanitation and the local contexts of communities is crucial to their
envisioning effective and innovative solutions not just in Malawi and the U.S.,
but all over the world. WaSH issues directly affect public health and the
environment; transformative research has the potential to increase the quality
of life of billions of people affected by lack of access to water and
sanitation. In Malawi, this research would increase safe water and sanitation
services in underserved communities, and help the country meet UN Sustainable
Development Goal 6. This project also strengthens research capacity in Malawi by
expanding our university partners’ range of field-based research topics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program maximizes our long-standing partnership and
collaborative research with WaSH researchers at Mzuzu University (MZUNI) and the
Malawi University of Science and Technology (MUST). The program will support the
research experience in Malawi of a total of 23 undergraduate and graduate
students over three years (6-7 NC State University and 1 University of
Louisville student every year). The intensive research in Malawi is for 8 weeks,
but each student will be engaged in the IRES program before and after the
international experience, for a total of 16 months. Vibrant interdisciplinary
collaborations among the students (coming from engineering, environmental
science, natural resources, and economics) and among the Malawi mentors and
their students will be ensured through joint research, cultural, and service
activities. The overall research goal of this IRES project is to collaboratively
address WaSH research gaps in Malawi, through field-based student research
experiences, beyond traditional (mainstream) research topics in water and
sanitation. Addressing these gaps will increase WaSH research in Malawi, add
dimensions to current research foci, and help bridge the acknowledged
countrywide gap in sanitation and water-related human capacity. This research
will also advance the global thinking and agenda on effective WaSH approaches
beyond Malawi. The overall training goal is to provide transformational research
experiences to NC State University and University of Louisville students,
leading to graduates who: (1) will engage in interdisciplinary thinking,
problem-solving, and research in WaSH; (2) are globally aware and culturally
competent; (3) can leverage their field experience working with diverse
communities to develop context-adapted solutions; and (4) will view these
solutions through a holistic lens, considering equity, sustainability, and long-
term benefits and impacts of their research. We will achieve these goals
through: (1) co-designed research activities (with an emphasis on both field-
and lab-based research in Malawi) that maximize the strengths and expertise at
the partner universities and research sites; (2) individual- and cohort-based
training with emphasis on learning outcomes; (3) cultural activities and a
service learning project for the IRES students in partnership with their peers
in Malawi; and (4) a continuous monitoring and evaluation program that will
provide summative and formative assessment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.