* 2246289
* CAS: Metal-oxo and Metal-peroxo Complexes in Oxidative Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* John Groves, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Tong Ren
* 05/31/2026
* USD 440,000.00

With the funding from the Chemical Catalysis Program of the Division of
Chemistry, Professor John T. Groves of Princeton University and his research
group will develop and study catalysts to enable energy-efficient chemical
transformations such as C-H activation to better access high added-value
chemical products. More than 95% of chemical industry products derive from a
small slate of molecular building blocks that are relevant to more than 30% of
the GNP of the United States. It is the central thesis of this project that
recent conceptual advances in oxidative chemical and biochemical catalysis, and
the interplay of emerging experimental techniques and modern theory, offer
unprecedented opportunities to develop inexpensive, earth-abundant transition
metals as catalysts for these selective processes. The project combines
knowledge of biocatalysis used by microorganisms with insights derived from
synthetic systems to provide a conceptual basis to understand these processes.
Broad application of this chemistry will have high impact on the nation’s and
the world’s chemical and energy economies. The Groves group will continue to
serve as an effective training ground for graduate students and postdoctoral
research associates, especially women and members of under-represented groups in
science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Professor Groves aims to develop
new methods for the catalytic oxygenation, fluorination and halogenation of C-H
bonds. The development of novel and efficient oxidative processes requires a
thorough understanding of the mechanisms of metal-mediated atom transfer by
observing the unitary processes of catalysis, also including a range of metal-
halogen species, and elucidating the nature of their reactions with organic
substrates. In particular, the proposed research strives to elaborate a
conceptual basis for heteroatom rebound catalysis, which can be dissected in a
manner similar to hydrogen atom transfer. The project will integrate small
molecule chemical catalysts with insights from metalloenzymes and biocatalytic
processes. Nature employs iron proteins to achieve C-H hydroxylations and
halogenations. Through analogy, the redox chemistry of Fe, Mn, Co and other
abundant transition metals will add significantly to our fundamental
understanding of reactive metal species, of the utility of new kinetic probes,
and likely afford a deeper understanding of electronic structure and of the
power of computation. In the end, this work is expected to offer opportunities
to realize a detailed quantitative and predictive understanding of oxidative
catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.