* 2246579
* Conference: Participant Support for Fifteenth International Conference on Fracture; Atlanta, Georgia; 11-16 June 2023
* ENG,CMMI
* 12/01/2022,11/30/2023
* Richard Neu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Wendy C. Crone
* 11/30/2023
* USD 20,000.00

This award provides complimentary registration for 50 students and postdoctoral
fellows studying in the US to attend the 15th International Conference on
Fracture (ICF15), which will be held 11-16 June 2023 in Atlanta, Georgia, hosted
jointly by the Georgia Institute of Technology and University of Arkansas. The
objective is to broaden the participation from graduate students, postdoctoral
fellows, participants from underrepresented communities and women, and
undergraduate students that aspire to learn more about the field of fracture and
fatigue. Consideration in the selection process will be given to the inclusion
of members of underrepresented groups, diversity of institutions that the
participants represent, and diversity of programs within engineering. The aim is
to grow the pipeline of US researchers interested in fracture and fatigue, which
are topics that have applications in several fields including safety of
mechanical, civil, and aerospace systems, improvements in health and quality of
life, and homeland security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The International Conference
on Fracture is held quadrennially in different cities around the globe since
ICF1 in 1965 in Sendai, Japan. It is considered the worldâ€™s premier conference
in the field of fracture in engineering materials and structures. Fracture in
structural materials and components is a highly interdisciplinary topic and at
the heart of the field of mechanics of materials, drawing upon researchers from
mechanical, aerospace, biomedical, civil, materials engineering, and from the
sciences. This conference brings together researchers from across the nation and
internationally to share their research findings, foster and develop new
collaborative ideas, and advance the professional development of a new
generation of scientists and researchers to address problems where fracture
impacts society. The conference will include 21 symposia across all areas of
fracture where the most recent and novel research will be
presented.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.