* 2246646
* Collaborative Research: Linking microplastic decomposition rates in soils to their microbe-mineral associations using carbon stable isotopes and microspectroscopy
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Benjamin Bostick, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jonathan G Wynn
* 06/30/2026
* USD 119,311.00

Plastics use has skyrocketed globally since the mid-1950s due to a combination
of their utility and low price. A large fraction is for single-use applications.
Consequently, more than 25 million metric tons of plastic are annually discarded
into terrestrial environments. Bio-based plastics produced from readily
renewable carbon sources (i.e., corn) are increasingly being used as substitutes
for legacy plastics sourced from fossil fuels. Bio-based plastics are
advantageous because their carbon is converted from atmospheric CO2 instead of
petroleum. Furthermore, some of these plastics are designed to biodegrade in
bioactive environments. All plastics are broken down in the environment by
chemical and physical processes into smaller microplastics (less than 5 mm in
size) that may become accessible to microorganisms and utilized for their life
function or survival. The fate of microplastic residues depends on their
degradation in the environment. This research tracks the degradation of
microplastic particles of polylactic acid (PLA, a bio-based plastic) and
polyethylene terephthalate (PET, a petroleum-based plastic) in soils, where
their slow decomposition can lead to plastic accumulation. The research exploits
unique carbon isotopic ‘tags’ naturally inherent or artificially introduced to
plastics to quantify decomposition with imaging and microbial community analysis
to identify how degradation is occurring. The main goal of the work is to
monitor the transferal of the isotopic tags to microbial biomass, and
eventually, the carbon dioxide and/or methane gas microbes produce or “exhale”.
The research is important because it will expand society’s limited understanding
of how plastics impact soil health and function, and natural earth processes
(i.e., carbon cycling) given plastics’ potential to alter the natural emission
of climate warming gases like carbon dioxide and methane in soil systems.
Bringing the science of microplastics to a diverse community is a priority of
the research team. The project involves and supports secondary, undergraduate,
and graduate level students that will be co-mentored by a multidisciplinary
faculty team. Students will be involved in research objectives and trained in
communicating science to the public. Importantly, students will gain experience
across three increasingly related fields for solving the plastic pollution
crisis: geochemistry, analytical chemistry, and polymer/green
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microplastic decomposition occurs through
synergistic abiotic weathering of the plastic and key enzymatic and/or microbial
interactions. Due to their acclimation to anthropogenic waste, it is
hypothesized that the soil microbiome will assimilate and mineralize
microplastics, and that natural soil processes like physical mixing and chemical
hydrolysis will promote the integration of soil plastics within aggregates and
affect the overall assimilation and mineralization of soil organic carbon and
plastics by the soil microbiome. The hypotheses will be tested in controlled
soil microcosms by utilizing naturally abundant and isotopically labeled
(synthesized) polymers that are experimentally degraded and exposed to soils and
their native microbiome. Isotopic labels offer an approach to identify
assimilation and/or mineralization since they will separate these and other
competing processes and/or those that may be impractical to measure in a short
period. The incorporation of the plastics’ isotope label will be monitored via
phospholipid fatty acid biomarkers and final mineralization gases (i.e., carbon
dioxide and methane) using isotope ratio mass spectrometry. Spectroscopy based
approaches (i.e., synchrotron-based scanning transmission X-ray microscopy and
near-edge X-ray absorption fine-structure spectroscopy) will account for the
plastics’ reactivity and association with soil aggregates. The combination of
stable isotopic, spectral, and isotopic mass balance approaches will establish a
fundamental understanding of plastic decomposition, and include a modeling of
their assimilation and mineralization, transformation to lower weight products,
and final conversion to carbon dioxide and methane in soils. This research will
further basic science understanding of physical, chemical, and biological
processes in soils and address a topic of great current practical interest in
environmental geochemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.