* 2246313
* Sustainable Housing &amp; Protective Building Materials: Masonry as a Link Between Accessible Construction, Energy, Human Comfort and Mosquito Control in Rural Tanzania
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Elizabeth McCormick, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 03/31/2026
* USD 299,997.00

Studies indicate that climate change impacts will dramatically increase
vulnerabilities in rural communities where those living off the land are at
increasing risk from extreme weather events such as heat waves, famine and
drought. Additionally, more than 80% of the world is at risk from at least one
vector-borne disease, and Malaria is a leading cause of death in the developing
world. However, most research in this field addresses this public health crisis
in the form of pesticides, chemical interventions and genetically modified
mosquitos with little consideration for the role of the built environment,
particularly in limited resource settings. Recent efforts to make housing more
protective, however, often lead to dwellings that have reduced air transmission
and provide substandard air quality and interior comfort conditions.
Additionally, modern, sustainable buildings can be technologically complex and
prohibitively expensive. The brick, however, is the most commonly used building
material in the world and one third of the world’s population lives in buildings
which are totally or partially made from earth. By studying the material aspects
of this humble material in tandem with the synergistic relationships of heat,
energy, emissions, water, information and resources that make up a city’s public
services, a novel brick has the potential to become a greater part of the urban
resiliency and public health strategy. Working collaboratively in the classroom
and abroad, U.S. engineering and architecture students will design innovative
ways to reconceive modular earthen materials to challenge existing norms of
construction and material science. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This multidisciplinary
proposal joins faculty mentors from four diverse specialties – architecture,
engineering, entomology, and social anthropology – to address the significant
impact of the domestic environment on public health and resiliency in rural
Tanzania. U.S. student researchers from architecture and engineering will work
collaboratively to explore the capability of masonry construction materials made
from accessible, low-impact resources to control the transfer of heat, moisture
and mosquitos in rural housing in Tanzania, exploring the intersection between
design, disease and a rapidly changing climate. The primary objectives of this
IRES effort are to (1) develop strategies for accessible and immediately
deployable modular building materials in rapidly developing, hot-humid regions
afflicted by mosquitoes, (2) expand the role of climate-adapted building
materials with the potential for mosquito protection to support the resiliency
and public health efforts of rural communities, and (3) provide community-based
research and design experience for U.S. students in a hands-on context that
promotes skill development, application of technical knowledge and professional
development in an interdisciplinary environment with complex relationships of
culture and science in a rapidly changing climate. This interdisciplinary group
of students will work with local materials and regional experts to develop
prototypes for low-cost buildings and construction technologies that improve
occupant comfort while reducing the potential for intrusion of disease-carrying
mosquitos. Though this project focuses on one mosquito-stricken country, it is
our hope that the pathogen host interaction and thermal mitigation strategies
would be applicable to other tropical regions, benefiting those who are likely
to be most impacted by rapid development in a changing
climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.