* 2246075
* Novel Synthetic Methods
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Vladimir Gevorgyan, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 07/31/2026
* USD 496,032.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Vladimir Gevorgyan and his graduate and undergraduate students at the
University of Texas at Dallas are developing mild, efficient, and selective
reaction methodology for synthesizing organic molecules. In particular, the
Gevorgyan group is developing organic chemistry methodology to convert readily
available feedstock chemicals that have an abundance of Carbon–Hydrogen (C–H)
bonds into other, more highly valued chemicals that contain new bonds that are
more commonly found in medicines and materials (Carbon–Oxygen (C–O),
Carbon–Nitrogen (C–N), Carbon–halogen (C–X), Carbon–Carbon (C–C), Carbon–Boron
(C–B), etc.). To carry out these transformations, Professor Gevorgyan’s team is
developing reaction methodology that is free of costly and potentially toxic
and/or explosive reagents. In addition to providing new and effective routes to
building complex molecules and materials of importance, the broader impacts of
the proposed work include outreach activities that are aimed at recruiting
undergraduate students, including underrepresented minority students, into
research where their potential and career possibilities will be
enhanced.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the Gevorgyan team is developing
new mild methods for the generation of carbon- and heteroatom-centered radicals
and unlocking their reactivity. The approach under development relies on novel
donor-acceptor (DA) complexes capable of the reduction of electrophilic
intermediates using single electron transfer (SET). Their work is being carried
out using visible light initiation leading to the generation of a precursor
radical that undergoes atom transfer (AT) or hydrogen atom transfer (HAT) to
generate transposed radicals. These new radicals can then engage in a number of
diverse synthetic transformations, including C(sp3)−H bond functionalization
reactions. The factors favoring the efficient formation of DA complexes, as well
as SET, AT, and HAT processes, will be investigated under this award. It is
believed that these methods, when fully developed, will not only deepen our
understanding of electron-transfer chemistry, but they will also substantially
broaden the tools that are available for the synthesis and late-stage
modification of complex molecules and drugs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.