* 2246187
* CRII: CIF: Sequential Decision-Making Algorithms for Efficient Subset Selection in Multi-Armed Bandits and Optimization of Black-Box Functions
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Ardhendu Tripathy, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Alfred Hero
* 04/30/2025
* USD 174,982.00

Unlike fixed decision-making algorithms, sequential decision-making (SDM)
algorithms are often more efficient in the number of samples needed to solve a
problem. Obtaining additional samples can be expensive and time-consuming.
Consequently, SDM algorithms have been used in a wide range of applications
ranging from recommender systems and automated drug discovery to the tuning of
parameters in engineering design models. This project will develop new
algorithms that enhance the applicability of SDM and improve its efficiency.
Performance guarantees for the algorithms will be obtained and they will be
tested in real-world data experiments. The project outcomes can lead to
increased use of SDM in industry sectors such as e-commerce and drug design. The
project will provide research opportunities for a diverse group of students and
the knowledge gained will be integrated into the university’s graduate
curriculum and will broaden the K-12 outreach activities undertaken by the
investigator.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is organized under two
problem frameworks: subset selection and black-box optimization. In the first
problem of subset selection, the objective is to select a good subset among many
alternatives. This objective is formulated as a subset selection problem in
multi-armed bandit models. The project will develop SDM algorithms that obtain a
good subset using the gaps between consecutive arm means. This removes the need
to specify a parameter that defines the good subset. The SDM algorithms will
exploit arm features in linear multi-armed bandit models and the theoretical
analysis will obtain sample complexity bounds for the proposed algorithms. In
the second problem of black-box optimization, such arm features are not
available, and partition-based optimization methods are often used. This project
will develop SDM algorithms that adapt the partitioning scheme to the black-box
function being optimized. Convergence to the optimal value will be ensured and
their practical performance on benchmark simulations will be measured. The
outcomes of the project will be communicated in papers and the developed code
will be made publicly available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.