* 2246773
* Conference: Permutation Patterns 2023 and 2024
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Alexander Woo, Regents of the University of Idaho
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 04/30/2025
* USD 17,700.00

The 19th International Conference on Permutation Patterns will be held July 3-7,
2023, at the University of Burgundy in Dijon, France. The 20th International
Conference on Permutation Patterns will be held in June 2024, at the University
of Idaho in Moscow, ID. These are part of a series of annual conferences on
permutation patterns that have been held annually since 2003 (with virtual
substitutes during the Covid pandemic), rotating mostly between many different
institutions in North America and Europe. Each year the conference features two
plenary talks and around thirty-five contributed talks, both giving researchers
the opportunity to present and discuss their results and giving newcomers to the
study of permutation patterns a broad perspective on the subject as a whole. The
conference provides an opportunity for collaboration between junior and senior
researchers as well as between researchers from all parts of the world, and
there will be time set aside for open problems to be discussed by the entire
community. The conference attracts broad participation, including significant
numbers of women and of faculty from primarily undergraduate institutions. This
award supports travel to the conferences by student and early career
participants from the United States.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conferences will
feature research on permutation patterns and their applications. Permutation
patterns is an interdisciplinary area with roots in both theoretical computer
science and combinatorics. Major themes include the structural properties of
permutation classes, asymptotic behavior from both enumerative and probabilistic
points of view, extremal questions, algorithmic and decidability questions, and
automated theorem proving and discovery. There are applications to other areas
of mathematics and computer science as well as to biology. The website for the
conference series is http://permutationpatterns.com, and specific information
about the 2023 conference can be found at
http://2023.permutationpatterns.com&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.