* 2246157
* CRII: RI: Immune-Inspired Learning Foundations of Neural Network General Robustness
* CSE,IIS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Ren Wang, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Rebecca Hwa
* 04/30/2025
* USD 174,922.00

Driven by rapid advances in neural networks (NNs), artificial intelligence has
achieved remarkable success in many fields. However, small perturbations
invisible to humans can be purposely added to inputs to cause NNs to make
incorrect predictions. What is more, attackers can even customize different
perturbation strategies to bypass existing NNs' learning methods and defenses.
Thus, one open question is how to make NNs more robust to multiple types of such
adversarial perturbations. Humans have a highly evolved immune system that can
defend against multiple threats, even those never encountered before. Inspired
by the powerful immune system, this project aims to infuse key immune system
principles into NNs to improve their general robustness, that is, their
capability to defend against multiple types of perturbations. The research
outcomes will benefit fields that demand robust NNs, such as public health and
autonomous driving. Furthermore, this project is planned to support cross-
disciplinary education and research projects (involving machine learning and
biology) for both undergraduate and graduate students, with outreach activities
to high schools and particularly students from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To reduce the substantial gap between existing
machine-centric robust learning frameworks and robust immune models, this
project focuses on incorporating into neural network design three robust immune-
system components to help neural networks defend themselves against various
attacks and continuously harden themselves. The proposed research consists of
three aims. The first aim is to develop an immune-inspired population-point
hybrid optimization that can effectively search for robust solutions and
maintain the searching efficiency via a self-adversarial mode connectivity
strategy. The developed technique will improve existing point-based learning
approaches, which easily become trapped in bad local minima. The second aim
considers neural network learning from a robust immune consensus perspective
that incorporates stochasticity into learning, allowing NNs to capture global
feature information. The third aim expands the first two aims by allowing NNs to
adapt to unforeseen types of adversarial attacks with an immune-system-inspired
lifelong learning regime consisting of a warm start defense strategy and
knowledge distillation-based memory model update. This research effort will
enable a new understanding of and a design framework for robust machine
learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.