* 2246485
* Uniformization and Rigidity in Metric Surfaces and in the Complex Plane
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Dimitrios Ntalampekos, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Jan Cameron
* 06/30/2026
* USD 239,774.00

In this project, the PI aims to develop techniques for the deeper understanding
of fractals; that is, objects whose shape is not smooth and potentially have
cusps and wrinkles, or objects with possibly self-similar repeating patterns.
Such objects appear in nature as coastlines, mountainous landscapes, river
networks, lightning bolts, snowflakes, growth models of plants and crystals, and
soap films. The questions the PI plans to study have applications whenever
storage of three-dimensional information (landscapes, faces, human brain
surface) in a two-dimensional image is desired without loss of information.
While in the case of smooth objects (the opposite of fractals) the corresponding
mathematical theory is well understood, this is not the case for fractal
objects, which require the development of new techniques. Another focus of this
project is on rigidity problems, asking whether it is possible to deform a
fractal object that is made out of a flexible material into another fractal
object, with controlled distortion. Also, fractal sets appear sometimes as
boundaries of otherwise smooth objects; another rigidity problem concerns
whether these fractals are removable, in the sense that their presence can be
ignored for transformation purposes. Rigidity problems on fractal sets have
applications in mathematical problems that require "gluing" together two
functions, or two dynamical systems, or two surfaces, and could result in the
better understanding of dynamical systems in physics. This project will also
incorporate the training and professional development of graduate students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main focus of the project is on two interrelated types
of problems on fractals: uniformization and rigidity problems. The
uniformization problem asks for geometric conditions on a fractal metric space
so that it can be transformed to a smooth space with a well-behaved
transformation that preserves the geometry, such as quasiconformal or
quasisymmetric maps. Major progress has been made recently towards the
quasiconformal uniformization problem with the involvement of the PI. The
current project expects to develop an analytic theory for two-dimensional
surfaces of locally finite area under no other assumption; the classical
approaches in the field of analysis on metric spaces require instead several
additional and restrictive geometric assumptions. Specifically, the PI will
study the quasiconformal classification of non-smooth surfaces, the embedding of
fractal surfaces in Euclidean space, the uniformization of 2-dimensional spheres
of infinite area, and potential theory on fractal surfaces. Regarding rigidity
problems, the PI will work on the problem of conformal removability, which asks
whether a given compact subset of Euclidean space is negligible from the domain
of a conformal map. The PI in recent works has displayed several new examples of
removable and non-removable planar sets and has found a striking connection
between the problems of uniformization and removability. Moreover, the PI has
identified a new general class of sets that he conjectures to provide a
characterization of removable sets. The PI will study this conjecture, as well
as several related removability and rigidity problems in complex dynamics,
geometric group theory, and circle domains.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.