* 2246781
* Infinitary Combinatorics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Dima Sinapova, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2026
* USD 317,099.00

Set theory is the study of the foundations of mathematics. Many natural
mathematical questions are independent of the usual mathematical axioms. The
most famous example is the continuum hypothesis (CH), which is the statement
that any infinite set of real numbers is either countable or has the same size
as all the reals. This became Hilbert's First Problem. The first breakthrough
was in 1940 by Kurt Godel, who showed that CH cannot be refuted by the standard
mathematical axioms, known as ZFC (Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory with the axiom of
choice). Then in 1964 Paul Cohen invented the method of forcing and used it to
show that the continuum hypothesis is actually independent of ZFC. In other
words, neither CH, not its negation is a logical consequence of the ZFC axioms.
Since Cohen's work, modern set theory investigates ZFC constraints (i.e. "what
is necessary") versus relative consistency results obtained by forcing (i.e.
"what is possible"). Both questions are addressed by infinitary combinatorics,
the study of infinite objects in mathematics. This study generates many projects
and research training opportunities for graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will focus on using forcing and large
cardinals to investigate properties of infinite objects. The main motivation is
analyzing ZFC-constraints against consistency results. The project will center
on analyzing combinatorial principles, such as the tree property, stationary
reflection and square principles, and their relation to cardinal arithmetic,
especially singular cardinal arithmetic. The tree property and stationary
reflection are compactness type properties that follow from large cardinals.
Compactness is the phenomenon where if a certain property holds for every
smaller substructure of a given object, then it holds for the object itself. On
the other hand, square properties are canonical instances of incompacntess that
hold in Godel's constructible universe L and are at odds with large cardinals.
This project will analyze their interplay and interaction with cardinal
arithmetic.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.