* 2246248
* IRES Track I: Development of New Ligands and Reactions in Catalysis
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Olaf Wiest, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 07/31/2026
* USD 300,000.00

This project will support research two U.S. graduate and three U.S.
undergraduate students from the University of Notre Dame to perform research in
four of Germany's leading research groups at the University of Heidelberg in the
area of catalysis of 16 and 10 weeks, respectively. They will work in the
general area of catalysis, which is a key technology in the chemical,
pharmaceutical and materials industry as indicated by the fact that ~80% of all
chemical products are made using catalysis. As such, the development,
investigation and application of novel catalytic reactions is essential for an
economically competitive and environmentally sustainable society. The University
of Heidelberg is one of the world leaders in this area as indicated by 19
chemistry Nobel Prize Awardees associated with the University of Heidelberg. The
participating students will be exposed to an environment that promotes
scientific and personal growth through interactions with world-class faculty and
networking with one of the most important economic and scientific partners of
the US. A unique feature of the program is the long-term and well-structured
exchange partnership between the University of Notre Dame and the University of
Heidelberg that ensures that the participating students will gain the skills and
experience to thrive in today's international, interconnected world of science
and business.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The students will perform research in four
areas that cover a wide range of computational/theoretical, organic, inorganic
and materials chemistry, providing a comprehensive training environment for the
students in the area of catalysis, the unifying concept of the project. Each
topic is supervised by a mentor in Heidelberg who is a leader in their
respective field: (i) Computational Chemistry of Materials and Excited States
(Dreuw), (ii): Reaction Mechanisms involving Metalloradical Reactivity (Gade)
(iii) New gold-catalyzed reactions for sustainable chemistry (Hashmi) and (iv)
Metal surface catalysis in the of bottom-up generation of graphene nanoribbons
(Tegeder). Working together with the groups of these leaders, the students will
explore a number of innovative concepts such as novel methods for the
calculation of excited states, including circular dichroism; the unusual
reactivity of 3d metal complexes in T-shaped geometry, the use of gold catalysis
to add value to biomass-derived chemical feedstock to improve the sustainability
of organic synthesis and the targeted chemical synthesis of the carbon
nanoribbons that have unique material and catalytic properties. Taken together,
the studies explore different fundamental and applied aspects of catalysis using
a rigorous structure- and mechanism- based approach that combines computational
and experimental methods in a synergistic fashion.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.