* 2246846
* Combinatorial Representation Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Brendon Rhoades, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2026
* USD 218,577.00

This project is in combinatorial representation theory and studies objects which
remain invariant under certain linear symmetries. The study of these invariant
(or symmetric) polynomials (and their "co-invariant" counterparts) has a long
history in mathematics. It has facilitated a computational and combinatorial
understanding of objects in algebraic geometry, knot theory, and module theory.
This project seeks to extend this program from polynomials to differential
forms, objects which play a key role in multivariable calculus but whose
combinatorial significance is only now becoming appreciated. The combinatorial
aspects of this project can be understood and worked on by students with
relatively little mathematical background, which opens research possibilities
for undergraduates and incoming graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
central problem in this proposal is a remarkable conjecture of the Fields
Institute Combinatorics Group on the structure of the superspace co-invariant
ring of the symmetric group. The PI will use graded symmetric group modules
(developed in collaboration with Haglund, Shimozono, and Wilson) and a
generalization of the flag variety (defined in collaboration with Pawlowski) to
study the superspace co-invariant ring. In joint work with Wilson, the PI is
developing a version of orbit harmonics which is adapted to the study of
superspace quotients. The PI is also (in joint work with Reineke and Tewari)
developing a combinatorial understanding of the Donaldson-Thomas invariants of
quiver representation theory via orbit harmonics. An ultimate guiding light of
this project is a beautiful conjecture of D'Adderio, Iraci, and Vanden Wyngaerd
on a quadruply-graded symmetric group module coming from differential forms on
two copies of n-space. A resolution to this conjecture would generalize Haiman's
results on the diagonal co-invariant ring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.