* 2246894
* Uniformization of Surfaces and Mapping Problems in Metric Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Matthew Romney, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Jan Cameron
* 05/31/2026
* USD 148,072.00

Classical geometry and calculus largely concern functions and spaces that change
smoothly. However, objects in the real world are usually not smooth. One of the
insights of modern mathematics is that many non-smooth objects can be studied
and understood just as thoroughly as their smooth counterparts. Even more, such
study tends to clarify and simplify previously known classical theory. Research
in geometry, in both the smooth and non-smooth settings, typically involves
curvature—a measure of the “bending” of a space—as a fundamental notion. The aim
of this project is to understand the structure of geometric spaces in maximum
generality, without relying on curvature and other standard assumptions. Such an
undertaking has intrinsic interest and is also motivated by neighboring subjects
such as complex dynamics and geometric group theory where these spaces naturally
arise. Non-smooth geometry also arises in a variety of applied fields, including
theoretical computer science and data science. This project also incorporates a
range of questions that will provide opportunities for undergraduate
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is rooted in the classical
uniformization theorem developed by Klein, Poincaré and Koebe, among others,
which states that any smooth surface can be mapped conformally onto a surface of
constant curvature. This theorem gives a simple yet comprehensive picture of the
geometry of surfaces and is the culmination of a large portion of 19th century
mathematics. The project has two main goals: first is to develop versions of the
uniformization theorem for potentially non-smooth metric spaces: to determine
when one space can be mapped to another under a map with good geometric
properties, such as a quasiconformal, quasisymmetric or bi-Lipschitz map. This
continues earlier work of the principal investigator using a novel polyhedral
approximation scheme as the main method. This approximation scheme has further
potential applications which will be explored. The second goal is to investigate
a variety of additional problems related to the different geometric classes of
maps. These include the factorization of bi-Lipschitz maps and extensions of
Lipschitz and quasisymmetric maps. These questions capture fundamental aspects
of metric spaces and maps between them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.