* 2246983
* Limit Theorems in Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Dmitry Dolgopyat, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Tyson
* 06/30/2026
* USD 438,654.00

This project develops methods to carry out precise computations of statistical
quantities associated with chaotic behavior of deterministic dynamical systems.
Deterministic systems with unstable behavior appear in a wide range of
applications, ranging from atomic to planetary scales. In many cases the
instability is caused by exponential divergence of nearby trajectories. Long
time behavior of such systems cannot be predicted exactly unless the initial
conditions are known precisely, and consequently it is necessary to use
statistical descriptions of the orbits. The project also addresses simple models
of mixed dynamical behavior where systems exhibit features associated with both
regular and stochastic behaviors. Such models occur as paradigmatic examples
explaining more complicated phenomena. In addition, the project provides
opportunities for research training and mentoring of graduate students. The
principal investigator will also disseminate results through lectures and
expository writing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on the statistical
properties of dynamical systems. It consists of four parts. First, precise
asymptotics in limit theorems for dynamical systems will be considered. Sharp
limit theorem estimates have recently been shown by the principal investigator
and others to have applications in dynamics. A local limit theorem for non-
autonomous systems will be studied. The principal investigator plans to classify
obstructions to classical asymptotic expansions, and to develop new tools
applicable in cases where the classical expansions fail. A second topic to be
considered is exponential mixing. Sharp limit theorems for exponentially mixing
systems will be studied through an exploration of geometric structures in the
associated phase space. Next, the principal investigator will study flexibility
of statistical properties through the construction of dynamical systems with
exotic properties. A final topic under consideration is averaging theory. The
principal investigator has previously made several contributions to the study of
averaging for systems with hyperbolic fast motion. These techniques will be
investigated further with an eye towards extensions to the setting of quasi-
periodic fast dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.