* 2246411
* 2023 Water Disinfection, Byproducts, and Health: Challenges of Disinfection and Oxidation Processes to Provide Safe Drinking Water in a Changing World
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2023,09/30/2023
* John Sivey, Gordon Research Conferences
* Standard Grant
* Mamadou Diallo
* 09/30/2023
* USD 10,030.00

This NSF award will partially support the 2023 Gordon Research Conference (GRC)
and Seminar on “Water Disinfection, Byproducts, and Health” that will be held at
Mount Holyoke College in July 29-Aug 4, 2023. The GRC and seminar will discuss
the latest advances in drinking water disinfection research. The conference will
feature research leaders, policy experts, and practitioners while also providing
a venue for graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and early-career scientists
to network, learn, and collaborate. The GRC will include a special session
dedicated to discussing issues pertaining to diversity, equity, and inclusion in
environmental science and engineering. A seminar will precede the conference and
will expand opportunities for graduate students, postdoctoral fellows, and
early-career scientists to present their work and to participate in career
mentorship with senior scientists. NSF funding will enable the conference
organizers to support increased participation of students and early-career
scientists from underrepresented groups in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Water
disinfection is effective in preventing waterborne diseases; however, the
disinfectants used can react with dissolved organic matter and halide ions to
form potentially toxic disinfection byproducts (DBPs). Water disinfection
processes can be impacted by a host of global issues, including water
contamination, water scarcity, land use patterns, and climate change.
Consequently, balancing microbial risks from pathogens and chemical risks from
DBPs poses technical challenges that require interdisciplinary collaboration and
innovation. This Gordon Research Conference (GRC) and Seminar will feature and
discuss innovative research on chemical, microbiological, toxicological, and
engineering aspects of water disinfection. The overarching goal is to advance
the science and technology associated with the safe and effective disinfection
of drinking water. The GRC will cover five areas of importance: (1) Microbial
and chemical quality of drinking water and health implications, (2) detection of
novel DBPs and their toxicity, (3) mechanisms of DBP formation, (4) exposure to
DBPs and epidemiological consequences, and (5) development of novel drinking
water strategies and regulatory guidelines. As with the conference, the seminar
will feature lectures with dedicated time for in-depth discussions, and engaging
poster sessions, as well as time for informal gatherings. Collectively taken
together, the GRC and Seminar will be catalysts for scientists and engineers
from different disciplines to gather, converse, and form collaborations to
devise creative solutions to global water challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.