* 2246399
* Combinatorics, Algebra, and Geometry of Simplicial Complexes
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Isabella Novik, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2026
* USD 96,914.00

This project is devoted to the study of polytopes, as well as simplicial and
polytopal complexes. Polytopes are geometric objects that include polygons,
pyramids, cubes, octahedra, and their higher-dimensional analogs. They have been
looked at and studied since antiquity; at present, they play a role in such
diverse areas of pure and applied mathematics as optimization, statistics,
combinatorics, representation theory, symplectic geometry, to name just a few.
Using polytopes as building blocks and gluing them along their faces, one
creates polytopal complexes. If the polytopes used are line segments, triangles,
pyramids, and their higher-dimensional generalizations, one obtains a special
class of polytopal complexes known as simplicial complexes. These objects appear
naturally in robotics, discrete geometry, and topology, since they provide a
simple way to approximate continuous spaces, such as manifolds, by discrete
objects. Simplicial complexes are also useful in describing patterns of
intersections of sets. Specifically, patterns of intersections of convex sets
have applications in such subjects as neuro-biology (e.g., in the study of
neurons which are simultaneously active in response to some stimulus). This
research project aims to deepen our understanding of various aspects of
polytopes and simplicial complexes. The award will also provide support of
research training for graduate students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The primary aim
of this project is to gain new insights and enhance our understanding of
combinatorial, algebraic, geometric, and topological invariants of simplicial
complexes and polytopes through the study of their face numbers, face rings, and
stress spaces, and, in the process, to develop new tools to achieve this.
Specifically, research on this project will attack several fundamental questions
related to (1) the upper bound type problems originated in but going far beyond
the classical upper bound theorem for spheres, (2) the lower bound type problems
for simplicial complexes, especially simplicial spheres, with an additional
structure such as flagness, and (3) finding new construction techniques to
produce many simplicial polytopes and spheres with interesting extremal
properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.