* 2246911
* CRII: OAC: A computational framework for multiscale simulation of cardiovascular disease progression connecting cell-scale biology to organ-scale hemodynamics
* CSE,OAC
* 10/01/2022,08/31/2023
* Amirhossein Arzani, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 08/31/2023
* USD 55,119.00

Developing computer models of cardiovascular disease growth requires an organ-
scale model of blood flow, a cell-scale model of cell biology, and a framework
to couple these models. Such computer models could help predict cardiovascular
disease by simulating spatial and temporal patterns of disease growth. To
develop these models, we need a software infrastructure that integrates modeling
techniques from multiple disciplines. This project will develop software for
this purpose and will apply the software to the calcific aortic valve disease
(CAVD) problem, which is prevalent in aging adults. The project will also help
to understand the interaction between the fundamental biological and mechanical
processes involved in CAVD. The project leverages existing resources at Northern
Arizona University to perform outreach activities targeting underrepresented
minority students in the region. The outcome of this study will contribute to
advancing the national health and improving our scientific understanding of the
interaction between different processes in cardiovascular disease.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the past two decades, significant advances have
been made in the development of organ-scale patient-specific computational
models of cardiovascular disease. These models often focus on a specific spatial
and temporal scale and their goal is to quantify biomechanical biomarkers of
cardiovascular disease growth. However, quantitative information about disease
growth over long time scales is missing in these models. The goal of this
project is to 1) Develop a software platform for multiscale two-way coupling
between organ-scale biomechanics and cell-scale systems biology models. 2) Apply
the computational framework to study the long-term spatial and temporal
progression of CAVD. The organ-scale model will be based on continuum solid and
fluid mechanics models, and the cell-scale model will be based on systems of
differential equations. The developed software infrastructure could be applied
to patient-specific data to model disease progression patterns. This will enable
the development of transformative models that advance our knowledge of
cardiovascular disease. The project will train highly interdisciplinary
researchers at the interface of software development, biomechanics, and biology.
Outreach activities will promote STEM participation by demonstrating the beauty
of computer science and engineering blended and applied to biomedical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.