* 2246853
* CAS: Computational and Experimental Mechanistic Approach to Understand and Develop Asymmetric Fe-Catalyzed Cross-Couplings with C(sp3) Fragments
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Osvaldo Gutierrez, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 03/31/2026
* USD 575,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms-B (CSDM-B)
and the Chemical Catalysis (CAT) programs, Osvaldo Gutierrez of the Department
of Chemistry at Texas A&amp;M University will use a mechanistic-driven, multi-
technique approach to design and develop asymmetric multicomponent Fe-catalyzed
cross-coupling reactions involving stabilized carbon-centered radicals. The
long-term goal of this work is to develop iron-catalyzed multicomponent cross-
couplings to the level of palladium and nickel-based systems in terms of
synthetic applications and mechanistic understanding. The project lies at the
interface of organic synthesis and computational chemistry and is well-suited to
train the next generation of organic chemists at all levels. In parallel to this
research activities, Dr. Gutierrez will continue to evolve initiatives aimed at
increasing the number of underrepresented minorities in science, technology,
engineering and mathematics (STEM) fields by integrating education, research,
and outreach through partnerships with the Alliance for Diversity in Science and
Engineering (ADSE), TED-style talks, and expansion of on-going collaborative
research and educational programs with the community
colleges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of inexpensive, sustainable, and
selective catalysts that can directly convert simple chemical “building blocks”
to high-value chiral compounds remains a grand challenge in chemical synthesis.
In this vein, there has been surge in the development of new iron-catalyzed
cross-coupling reactions due to iron’s higher abundance in the earth’s crust,
lower cost, and less toxic properties in comparison to most transition metal
counterparts. However, in contrast to nickel- and palladium-based systems, the
use of iron complexes capable of controlling enantioselectivity in catalytic
carbon-carbon bond formation remains extremely rare. In this project, the
Gutierrez research group will use a mechanistic-driven, multi-technique approach
to design and develop asymmetric multicomponent Fe-catalyzed cross-coupling
reactions involving allyl-and alpha-heteroatom bearing radicals. Efforts will
include continuing to perform both high-level quantum mechanical calculations
and experiments to accelerate reaction and catalyst design. There are
potentially significant long term scientific broader impacts related to
sustainable chemistry, particularly through the development of earth abundant
transition metal catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.