* 2246878
* Quantifying the Role of Heterogeneity in Mechanisms of Chemical and Biological Processes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Anatoly Kolomeisky, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Ryan Jorn
* 07/31/2026
* USD 530,000.00

With support from the Chemical Theory, Models and Computational Methods program
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Anatoly Kolomeisky of William Marsh Rice
University is investigating the effects of heterogeneity in various chemical and
biological processes. It is known that identical chemical reactions will never
produce the same products at the same times â€“ there will be always some
distributions of completion times. Similarly, genetically identical biological
cells under the same conditions will never have the same numbers of relevant
biological molecules (proteins, DNA, RNA, lipids, etc.). The origin of such
divergence is the reality that chemical and biological processes have a random
nature and occur in fluctuating environments. Current quantitative analysis of
chemical and biological processes, however, neglects the possibility of such
variations in properties, mostly due to the lack of proper theoretical methods.
Professor Kolomeisky will explore the hypothesis that the divergence in chemical
properties not only can be fully accounted for but also might be used as a
powerful tool in probing the microscopic mechanisms of underlying chemical and
biological processes. Professor Kolomeisky will provide opportunities for high
school and undergraduate students from underrepresented groups to participate in
this research and to gain valuable training and experience for their future
careers. Outreach activities will also include the presentation of chemical
shows in local schools, co-organization of an undergraduate chemistry research
symposium, public lectures, and continued collaboration with science writers in
order to disseminate the obtained knowledge to a general public. The broader
impacts of this project will include a multidisciplinary training program for
young researchers of different levels that will prepare them better for future
technological and industrial challenges.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this award,
Professor Anatoly Kolomeisky and his research group aim to develop a
comprehensive theoretical framework to understand the role of heterogeneity in
chemical and biological processes by generating quantitative models for several
specific phenomena. The scientific program will be pursued by combining
analytical models such as chemical master equations and mean-field chemical-
kinetic methods, numerical calculations, machine learning and data analysis, as
well as Monte Carlo, and full-atomic and coarse-grained molecular dynamics
simulations. Obtained theoretical results and predictions will be compared with
experimental observations to modify and improve theoretical models. Specific
projects will include: (i) investigation of the mechanisms of catalysis by
analyzing dynamics of chemical reactions; (ii) understanding and optimizing the
function of antimicrobial peptides; (iii) studying the role of heterogeneity in
the dynamics of cancer initiation; and (iv) investigating mechanisms of cell
lysis. The strategy will be to build simple yet quantitative analytical models
that are consistent with all experimental data, clarify the molecular picture of
underlying processes, provide clear testable predictions for future experiments,
all the while not violating basic laws of chemistry and physics. Successful
completion of the proposed work will advance knowledge of fundamental chemical
and biological processes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.