* 2246036
* CRII: HCC: Cross-Team Collaboration to Create Accessible Software for People with Disabilities
* CSE,IIS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2025
* Anne Ross, Bucknell University
* Standard Grant
* Cindy Bethel
* 06/30/2025
* USD 174,607.00

Software now impacts nearly every aspect of daily life. Accessibility failures
in software can therefore create barriers to essential services such as banking,
education, communication, and travel for people with disabilities. This project
contributes to improving software accessibility; work that benefits society by
progressing science, advancing national welfare, and supporting education and
diversity. Social justice and legal imperatives mandate that software be
accessible for people with disabilities. However, large-scale analyses,
lawsuits, and advocacy organizations show that accessibility failures occur
frequently. Such failures include low contrast colors, buttons on websites that
are too small, and software being unusable with assistive technology. Software
creation is a collaborative process between multiple roles such as accessibility
specialists, designers, developers, and testers. The process involves social and
technical factors with a range of opportunities for accessibility to be
integrated or lost. By studying software creation teams, this research will
identify current accessibility practices throughout the software creation
process. The resulting insights will highlight best practices and offer guidance
for improving collaborative tools and organizational structures. These insights
will be shared with the research and industry community through papers,
presentations, and other educational media. This project will help improve
collaborative software creation tools, education, and company practices to
improve software accessibility, thereby helping ensure everyone has equitable
access to services that are increasingly mediated through software.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will reach those goals through three main
steps. First, the research team will interview people across software creation
roles to understand current collaboration and accessibility techniques from
multiple perspectives. Next, researchers will observe multi-role teams
collaborating in the workplace during various points in a software project's
lifecycle. Researchers will perform inductive thematic analysis on the collected
data; iteratively working through transcripts, field notes, and artifacts (e.g.,
emails, white boarding, designs) to identify themes. In the final phase,
researchers will run focus groups with people across software creation roles to
gather feedback on identified themes and extend those themes into actionable
implications for improving collaborative tools and organizational structures.
Results will be disseminated to multiple audiences through academic
publications, industry-focused documentations and presentations, and publicly
available educational material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.