* 2246299
* Collaborative Research: IRES Track I: Artificial Intelligence and Human Designer - Research Experience in Singapore (AIHD Singapore)
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Mohsen Shahandashti, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 08/31/2026
* USD 150,000.00

Although data analytics and artificial intelligence (AI) have touched almost
every aspect of human life, design work processes have not fully benefited from
these enormous opportunities. A better understanding of the dynamics of the
design process can create long-lasting positive impacts on the
architecture/engineering/construction (AEC) industry that has traditionally
suffered from chronic productivity problems in the United States. This project
will recognize and enable the development of computational and collaboration
competencies as essential 21st century skills for the workplace. Emergent
applications of AI in the design and construction workplaces make it vital for
planning to train computationally fluent AEC professionals for the future
workforce. As technology becomes more embedded into AEC systems, we expect that
the criticality of computational fluency will rise. This research will provide
an unprecedented opportunity for U.S. students to participate in the
transformative rethinking of the design development process. It also sets the
ground for training them for a promising, multidisciplinary career in design
management, productivity assessment, AI, and design computing, while promoting
intellectual cross pollination among these fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed IRES AIHD-Singapore project will provide a unique ecosystem for U.S.
students to study design transformation through the lens of data analytics and
AI. IRES students will take ownership of a research project with researchers in
internationally top-ranked universities in Singapore and form a global network
of scholars to make substantial impacts on scientific and technical communities,
and disseminate results via publications, conference presentations, and released
open-source code. The U.S./Singapore faculty mentors will organize a set of
cultural and professional activities before, during, and after the six-week
internship at the AIHD-Singapore IRES site to enrich the students’ experience.
This project will establish an international network dedicated to educating and
mentoring U.S. undergraduate students in AI and human designer collaboration.
The international collaboration is expected to promote students’ deeper
understanding of design workflow in a data-rich environment where human
designers benefit from AI to enhance design performance. The proposed
professional and cultural workshops aim to address the critical shortage of data
science talent in the U.S. AEC industry. The proposed collaboration among
U.S./Singapore universities enhances the likelihood of the successful creation
of a research community dedicated to developing a better understanding of how
human designers can benefit from capabilities offered by big data and AI
technologies in emerging collaborative design platforms. Students will engage in
socio-cultural activities designed to expose them to Singaporean culture and
history that provide context for fostering international scientific
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.