* 2246597
* I-Corps: Developing a Face Mask Coated with Metal Oxide Nanostructures to Reduce the Spread of COVID-19 and other Airborne Diseases
* TIP,TI
* 12/15/2022,05/31/2024
* Zeeshan Habeeb, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 05/31/2024
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a protective face mask to reduce the spread of the virus that
causes COVID-19 and other airborne diseases. The proposed technology is based on
a surface coating that repels droplets containing viral particles. The treated
mask may reduce spread by limiting the transformation of fluids that are passed
on through cough or contact. Target customers include those that provide
services in a medical environment such as hospitals, doctors, clinicians,
pharmacies, as well as key manufacturers of face mask products.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of face
masks coated with a hydrophobic surface to reduce the spread of viruses
including the virus that is the causative agent of COVID-19. The proposed
technology may repel droplets containing viral particles while significantly
reducing exposure time. The proposed technology is based on coating low-
dimensional metal oxide nanostructures on fabric face masks. The goal is to coat
fabric face masks on the outer surface with metal oxide nanowires synthesized
using hydrothermal techniques. Surface coverage, density, thickness, and aspect
ratio of metal oxide nanostructures will be optimized to hydrophobically repel
the virus particles. Static and dynamic contact angle measurement tools will be
employed to characterize the surface interactions of water and fabric face
masks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.