* 2246456
* I-Corps: A Lightweight, Low-Cost, Liquid-Metal Cooling Vest for Prolonged Cooling
* TIP,TI
* 01/01/2023,06/30/2023
* Fernando Gómez-Baquero, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 06/30/2023
* USD 50,000.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of a personal cooling system for high-heat work environments such as
shipyards, foundries, boiler workshops, and mining and construction sites where
workers are exposed to heat exhaustion. Additional potential markets exist in
medical, sports, emergency response, military, and animal care fields. The
product will compete in the global personal cooling garment market.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development of a
conduction-based, cooling cycle technology using highly thermally conductive
fluidic metal, gallium alloy. Gallium alloy is liquid at room temperature and is
commonly known as liquid metal (LM). Due to its fluidic nature, LM can be pumped
into a microfluidic channel using a low-power pump. Also, LM is 28 times more
conductive (16.5W/m·K) than water, which helps absorb heat in a second by
conduction, unlike the convection-based cooling cycle. Conventional
refrigeration cooling cycles require a high power-consuming compressor to reduce
heat transfer time. Low power conduction-based heat transfer along with
microfluidic LM flows allow the LM to be used as the primary coolant in the
novel personal cooling system. The outcome is a lightweight, low-power, low-
cost, LM wearable personal cooling system that can provide day-long high
cooling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.