* 2246481
* Comprehensive Eulerian models for electrostatic phenomena in polydisperse gas-particle flows
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Manjil Ray, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Shahab Shojaei-Zadeh
* 06/30/2026
* USD 409,993.00

Solid particles in motion in a gas form a gas-particle flow, often encountered
in the food, pharmaceutical, and chemical industries. In this flow type,
particles repeatedly collide with other particles or walls and become
electrically charged. Such charged particles can accumulate in parts of the
systems used to produce and process them, degrading performance or preventing
correct operations. They can also cause sparks, leading to explosions, such as
those that happen when emptying corn silos, with serious safety implications for
workers and infrastructure. This award will develop computer models to better
predict when electric charge accumulates on solid particles and how it affects
the behavior of gas-particle flows. These predictions will allow hazardous
conditions or situations adverse to the process under consideration to be
mitigated at the design stage, potentially reducing design costs, and improving
system performance and safety. Graduate and undergraduate students will be
trained as part of the award, contributing to education and workforce
development. In addition to disseminating the results through scientific
publications and conferences, a short course targeting the relevant industry
sectors will be organized to facilitate knowledge
transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A comprehensive Eulerian multiphase model for
electrostatic charging in granular and gas-particle flows will be formulated.
Kinetic theory closures for the hydrodynamic properties and electrostatic
charging will be derived, accounting for finite contact time, consistently with
the constitutive contact charge model. The experimentally observed normal
distribution of charge saturation, currently assumed constant in most
computational models, and the dependency of charge saturation on the local
temperature and pressure value will be incorporated into the model. Wall
boundary conditions accounting for the effect of electric force will be proposed
to enable the correct description of charged particles at solid surfaces.
Multiphase RANS closures will be formulated to account for the effect of
turbulence on particle charging, enabling the application of the newly
formulated model to regimes with higher gas flow rates and turbulent behavior,
such as those encountered in fluidized bed risers and pneumatic conveying.
Validation against experiments and direct numerical simulations from the
literature will be performed to establish and demonstrate the predictive
capabilities of the newly developed model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.