* 2246920
* SaTC: EDU: Inculcate a culture of preparedness against AI security threats to pervasive robotic systems
* EDU,DGE
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Sudip Mittal, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* ChunSheng Xin
* 05/31/2026
* USD 399,978.00

Robotics, automation, and related Artificial Intelligence (AI) systems have
become pervasive, resulting in concerns related to security, safety, accuracy,
and trust. With growing dependency on physical robots that work closely with
humans, security is becoming increasingly important because cyber-attacks could
lead to privacy invasion, critical operations sabotages, and bodily harm. The
current shortfall of professionals who can defend such systems demands
development and integration of new curricula. This project is creating a new
curriculum with the scaffolding necessary to engage students at the
junior/senior university level who are majoring in robotics, AI, and security
related fields. More than 500 students are being directly served by this
educational initiative at Mississippi State University. The project also
indirectly impacts students across the nation at institutions in which faculty
choose to integrate the modules developed for this project. On a broader scale,
this project intends to increase public scientific literacy and engagement,
especially in rapidly advancing fields such as cybersecurity, robotics, and AI.
This is a significant societal benefit as it will improve the preparedness and
well-being of individuals in a technologically advanced society and contribute
to development of a diverse, globally competitive STEM
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is developing seven self-contained
and adaptive modules on “AI security threats to pervasive robotic systems”.
Topics will include: 1) introduction, examples of attacks, and motivation; 2)
robotic AI attack surfaces and penetration testing; 3) attack patterns and
security strategies for input sensors; 4) training attacks and associated
security strategies; 5) inference attacks and associated security strategies; 6)
actuator attacks and associated security strategies; and 7) ethics of AI,
robotics, and cybersecurity. Course modules are evaluated to determine their
impact on students. Workshops and tutorial sessions at conferences are used to
expand the project’s impact and provide students and enthusiasts with hands-on
experience. A two-day training workshop for external faculty further enables
dissemination of the modules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.