* 2246616
* Structure and Statistics of Disordered Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Erik Bates, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Wilmer
* 04/30/2026
* USD 260,000.00

A recurring challenge in modeling complex networks is to predict macroscopic
outcomes from knowing only the microscopic rules of a system. Examples range
from the global level (social networks, economic networks) to the cellular level
(immune networks, neuron networks), and can be virtual rather than physical
(signal processing, artificial intelligence). Probability theory can analyze
these systems by harnessing the predictive power of the aggregate effect of more
and more random variables, otherwise known as disorder. To make effective use of
this theory, mathematicians and other practitioners must be able to both infer
qualitative large-scale structure from more easily measured system statistics
and identify the relationship between these statistics and the parameters
governing the model. This project will pursue these objectives for two classes
of disordered systems: spin glasses and random growth, both of which are of
continuing interest in physics, computer science, and engineering. The project
will include research training opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students and also outreach efforts to elementary and secondary students.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Among the proposed investigations are (1) establishing
Parisi-type formulas for the limiting energy of so-called multi-species and
vector-spin models, by using techniques from functional analysis and PDEs; (2)
determination of the phase diagram of these same models, by performing
variational calculus on the obtained Parisi formulas; (3) producing new
estimates on the size of fluctuations in growth interfaces associated to first-
and last-passage percolation, by adapting tools from stochastic analysis; and
(4) studying the phenomenon of quenched localization in directed polymers, by
leveraging untapped connections to spin glass theory. This rigorous mathematical
work will be aided by experimental computer
simulation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.