* 2246632
* Measure Transportation And Notions Of Dimensionality In High Dimensional Probability
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,06/30/2023
* Yair Shenfeld, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Wilmer
* 06/30/2023
* USD 137,778.00

High dimensional probability is a mathematical theory which aims to explain the
behavior of systems with very large number of degrees of freedom. Such systems
are of utmost importance in the physical sciences and in a world where social
media and communication networks constantly generate huge data sets. This
project aims to develop theoretical tools in high dimensional probability via
two methods. The first method will exploit the intuition that in many practical
situations, although the system contains numerous degrees of freedom, the
relevant information is contained in a much smaller set of variables. The
project will aim to quantify this intuition by developing the notion of
intrinsic dimensionality. The second method aims to represent a given complex
system as the transformation of a much simpler system. The project also includes
educational efforts, including mentoring undergraduate and graduate students,
and the dissemination of the work in professional meetings and to the public.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The long-term goal is to improve understanding of high-
dimensional probability measures via two approaches. The first approach is to
develop an original concept of intrinsic dimensionality in the context of
functional inequalities. The notion of dimension plays a crucial role in
functional inequalities via the curvature-dimension condition, but it ignores
the fact that the measures of interest can live on lower-dimensional spaces.
This omission can lead to inefficient functional inequalities; this project
hopes to bridge this gap. The second approach is to develop new measure
transportation methods based on stochastic processes and probabilistic flows.
For example, Lipschitz transport maps provide a powerful way to transfer
functional inequalities from simple source measures to complicated target
measures. Only a few such Lipschitz transport maps are known to exist, which
limits the applicability of the transport method. The project will utilize the
tools of stochastic analysis and renormalization group methods to build
transport maps with desirable regularity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.