* 2246149
* CRII: FET: Ferroelectric FET based flexible circuits and system design
* CSE,CCF
* 02/01/2023,01/31/2025
* Sumitha George, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Sankar Basu
* 01/31/2025
* USD 174,999.00

Current computing systems face major challenges in dealing with applications,
having rapidly increasing data storage and processing requirements. This implies
the need for efficient and dense data storage. A multi-level cell (MLC) is a
memory cell capable of storing more than a single bit of information in a single
device, and thus can be used for dense efficient storage. However in
conventional computing systems, data stored in memory needs to get transferred
to computing units for processing, resulting in excessive power dissipation and
delay. Therefore, there exists a need for a computing paradigm that limits data
movement, does efficient data transfer and handles the challenges associated
with MLC memories. This project investigates the incorporation of emerging
technology designs into existing Complementary Metal Oxide Semiconductor (CMOS)
based computing systems to satisfy the above-mentioned requirements. Learnings
and insights developed from this project will be incorporated into computer-
engineering undergraduate and graduate courses. Investigator will also involve
students from underrepresented groups and undergraduate students in this
project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigator chooses an emerging device
technology called ferroelectric field-effect transistor (FeFET), and the project
will focus on two specific research tasks. The first task will develop circuit
components amenable to traditional single-level cell and dense multi-level cell
(MLC) memory architectures. MLC cells store multiple bits by exploiting a
particular device property and MLC data to binary conversion requires complex
peripheral circuits. This project aims to design compact flexible peripheral
circuits by leveraging the threshold voltage programmability of FeFETs. In the
second task, investigator will utilize the structural features of FeFET to
design flexible multi-directional data access memories and caches. Applications
exhibiting row-column directional preferences such as matrix operations and
database operations will especially benefit from a flexible directional access
system as it limits the unnecessary data transfer from memory to processing
units. Investigator will also explore the reuse of flexible peripherals for in-
situ computing to further limit the data transfer and to increase the computing
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the
Foundations of Emerging Technology (FET) program of CISE/CCF Division, and the
Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.