* 2246739
* Geometric Combinatorics in Polytopes and Spheres
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Hailun Zheng, University of Houston - Downtown
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 05/31/2026
* USD 86,712.00

A polytope is the convex hull of finitely many points in the space. The ancient
Greeks studied polytopes such as the Platonic solids as they are ideal to model
nature. In modern days, scientists have found many applications of polytopes in
diverse fields such as optimization and computer science. This research project
focuses on the combinatorial “invariants” of polytopes. For example, count the
number V of vertices, E of edges, and F of facets of an arbitrary 3-dimensional
polytope. Then no matter which polytope we choose, we always end up with getting
the identity “V-E+F=2”. The goal of this research project is to develop new
methods to study various invariants of polytopes and spheres that arise from
face numbers or other combinatorial data. These tools may further extend our
understanding of the interplay between combinatorics, algebra, and geometry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the central conjectures in geometric combinatorics
was the g-conjecture; that is, to characterize the face numbers of simplicial
polytopes and spheres of all dimensions. This conjecture was only proved very
recently, and its resolution requires deep results from other fields such as
commutative algebra and algebraic geometry. This project is dedicated to new
methods to study polytopes and manifolds with particular geometry or topology.
One goal is to investigate various combinatorial models such as the Stanley-
Reisner ring and the stress spaces, and how the algebra translates into
combinatorial relations among the face number. Another goal is to investigate
how preset geometry and topology (for example, central symmetry) affects the
combinatorics of polytopes or polyhedral complexes, and vice versa. The project
has applications to computer sciences and the PI also plans to develop lecture
notes and work with students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.