* 2246606
* Collaborative Research: Parabolic Monge-Ampère Equations, Computational Optimal Transport, and Geometric Optics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Jun Kitagawa, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2026
* USD 228,693.00

This project is centered around the development of theoretical tools which will
lead to efficient numerical methods for solving the optimal transport problem,
which is a mathematical problem that seeks to minimize the total cost of
transporting mass from one location to another. The theoretical study of this
problem has advanced greatly in recent years, and the results obtained have been
applied successfully to a number of disciplines outside of mathematics, such as
the design of lenses with specific reflection properties in Physics, modeling
the atmosphere near the earth's surface in Geology, and creating optimal
assignments in Economics, among others. This litany of applications makes the
development of effective computational tools an ever more urgent matter, and it
is important to have tools that can be mathematically guaranteed to exhibit
outstanding performance. The project will develop novel computational methods
based on nonlinear partial differential equations and establish rigorous
mathematical results about these equations in order to guarantee desirable
performance of the corresponding numerical algorithms. The work of the project
involves individual and collaborative research by the Principal Investigators
(PIs), and research mentoring of graduate and undergraduate students, with
appropriate problems having been identified for students. The PIs will also
engage in outreach through co-supervising an undergraduate team in 2024 through
the Lafayette College Summer REU program and in 2025 through the Summer
Undergraduate Research Institute in Experimental Mathematics program at Michigan
State University. Both programs aim to recruit students from schools with
limited opportunities for undergraduate research, with an eye toward recruitment
of students from traditionally underrepresented groups in the mathematical
sciences.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project develops the theoretical foundations
for establishing existence and characterizing long-time behavior of solutions to
a class of degenerate-parabolic fully nonlinear partial differential equations
(PDE) in singular settings. These PDE are time-dependent variants of the
classical Monge-Ampere equation. Significant progress has been made over the
last few decades in developing a theory of classical solutions for time-
dependent Monge-Ampere equations with smooth data and Dirichlet boundary
conditions. By comparison, the theory of generalized solutions for such
evolutionary equations is severely underdeveloped, especially in the context of
optimal transport and geometric optics, where the natural boundary condition is
a non-standard one. The current project will create a theoretical foundation for
viscosity and weak solutions of a class of degenerate parabolic, fully nonlinear
equations of Monge-Ampere type with oblique boundary data. The work will also
establish quantitative rates of convergence for such equations; this will
provide a promising numerical method for the design and construction of
reflector surfaces arising in engineering problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.