* 2246990
* Collaborative Research: Exploring the Landscape of Rural Mathematics Education
* EDU,DRL
* 12/01/2023,11/30/2027
* Daniel Heck, Horizon Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Jennifer Noll
* 11/30/2027
* USD 380,433.00

The goal of the project is to understand the current conditions, challenges, and
resources that pertain to mathematics education in rural areas in the United
States. The project team will conduct a national survey of rural middle school
mathematics educators and administrators with follow-up interviews to understand
the current trends in instructional practices and curriculum materials, the
resources in rural communities that support mathematics education, and the
challenges faced by rural mathematics educators. Following the survey and
interviews 10 rural middle schools will be recruited to participate in a
professional development (PD) model aimed at supporting rigorous forms of
mathematics curriculum and instruction will be implemented. The project team
will study the ways in which rural mathematics educators respond to the
implementation of the PD model to understand the resources or constraints that
facilitate or impede the uptake of rigorous mathematics instruction. The project
team will then engage in dialogue with a range of partners in rural mathematics
education contexts, including state and regional education policy makers, to
generate a set of recommendations for enhancing the rigor of mathematics
instruction in rural areas. The Discovery Research preK-12 program (DRK-12)
seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers, through
research and development of innovative resources, models, and tools. Projects in
the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education and prior
research and development efforts that provide theoretical and empirical
justification for proposed projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a four-phase
research study with the goal of understanding the current conditions,
challenges, and resources that pertain to middle school mathematics education in
rural areas in the United States. The first phase will be a national survey of a
representative sample of teachers, teacher leaders, and administrators who are
responsible for mathematics education in rural areas. A sub-sample of the survey
respondents will be recruited for follow-up interviews to develop deeper
understandings of the insights that emerge from the surveys. Ten rural middle
schools will be recruited to participate in professional development. Schools
will be selected in part based on an expressed interest in enhancing their
efforts to implement rigorous mathematics curriculum and instruction, which is
defined in this project along three dimensions: eliciting and responding to
student thinking; positioning students as sources of mathematical authority; and
using complex, authentic, high-demand tasks. These dimensions are supported by
empirical literature from the U.S. and from countries with strong records of
mathematical achievement. This three-part synchronous online professional
development model was developed from a prior research project and has already
been effectively implemented in rural settings. The purpose of implementing the
professional development model will be to better understand how the resources
and constraints in rural settings impact the uptake of efforts to implement
rigorous mathematics curriculum and instruction. The final phase of the project
will convene groups of state and regional partners, including personnel from
state departments of education and other groups of educators who support rural
education, to engage in dialogue and ultimately produce a set of recommendations
designed to enhance rural mathematics education. A mixed methods approach to
data analysis will be employed. Survey data will be quantitatively analyzed and
results will be nationally representative of rural areas. Interviews and
observations will be qualitatively analyzed using a priori coding based on prior
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.