* 2246371
* IRES Track 1: Soft Matter Research Experience for North Carolina Graduate Students in Dresden
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Joseph Tracy, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 07/31/2026
* USD 300,000.00

“Soft matter” refers to soft materials that are easily mechanically deformable,
such as polymers, colloids, and biomaterials. Research in soft matter will
broadly impact society by addressing challenges in medicine, electronics,
energy, sustainability, agriculture, and manufacturing. Soft matter has
potential to provide unprecedented capabilities, at lower cost, and with reduced
environmental impact. International exchange of students in this International
Research Experiences for Students (IRES) project will advance soft matter
research through sharing ideas and experimental capabilities and will promote
the U.S. students’ professional development through participation in an academic
cohort and conducting research abroad. Cohorts of PhD students from North
Carolina State University (NCSU), Duke University, and University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill (UNC) will participate in 10-week summer research
experiences in soft matter at the Dresden University of Technology and
associated research institutes (TUD+). The cohort of North Carolina (NC)
students will have pre-departure activities in NC and will travel and live
together in Dresden, Germany, where they will conduct research with different
hosts but will have a common academic and social program. This project further
aims to catalyze development of long-term collaborations between NC and Dresden
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dresden has a dynamic research environment
that has received massive investment since German reunification and is welcoming
to visiting researchers. Several research clusters and centers throughout TUD+
support large-scale programs in soft matter. Hosts at TUD+ will prepare brief
descriptions of research projects for IRES students. An initial group of 17
hosts spanning all areas of soft matter have expressed interest in hosting IRES
students. The hosts will be vetted by the principal foreign collaborator and
will provide office and lab space, supplies and equipment for research,
mentoring, and training for the research project. PhD students from NCSU, Duke,
and UNC will be selected based on their academic preparation, letter of
recommendation, essays articulating their interest in the IRES experience, and
matching with the available research projects. Participation of underrepresented
groups will be promoted by contacting local chapters of science and engineering
societies for underrepresented groups at NCSU, Duke, and UNC. The IRES cohort
will live together and have a weekly research meeting. At the end of the summer,
the IRES students will present their results in a research symposium. Several
outings around Dresden and a brief trip to Berlin to visit selected scientific
and cultural institutions and historical sites will educate the cohort about the
broader societal and historical context in which scientific research is
conducted and its importance to economic prosperity and political
stability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.