* 2246252
* IRES Track 1:International Research Experience in Functional Nanomaterials in Japan
* O/D,OISE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Lynn Rathbun, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 03/31/2026
* USD 299,973.00

Research in the 21st century is a global enterprise. Whether collaborating
internationally in academia or managing a team of engineers as part of a global
research or manufacturing operation, the ability to communicate and collaborate
across cultures is critical. The skills and confidence necessary to succeed in
this multicultural environment are not taught in any undergraduate or graduate
science/engineering curriculum. Here, communication is much more that language.
English is the universal language of science, but even within that context,
there are considerable cultural aspects to effective interaction and
collaboration. To be effective contributors in this global scientific
enterprise, students must add these additional dimensions to their education.
This program addresses the need to expose US undergraduate science and
technology students to the international nature of modern research at a critical
early stage in their careers. This is accomplished through a focused summer
research program in an international setting, with the goal of developing
Globally Aware Scientists. Over the course of this program, fifteen students
will be supported for an immersive research experience focused on functional
nanomaterials at the National Institute for Materials Science in Tsukuba, Japan.
This program is built on the base of a very successful program that has been
conducted in various forms since 2008. Prior programs have been demonstrated to
be extremely effective in developing the Globally Aware Scientists that are
needed for successful international research
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program supports summer research
experiences in nanotechnology for five U.S. undergraduates each summer for an
advanced international research experience. Student participants will be working
with senior scientists at the National Institute for Materials Science (NIMS) in
Tsukuba, Japan. The program is a cooperative effort between the U.S. National
Nanotechnology Coordinated Infrastructure (NNCI), represented by Cornell, and
the Advanced Research Infrastructure for Materials and Nanotechnology (ARIM)
represented by NIMS. These are, respectively, the national networks of advanced
university nanotechnology laboratories in each country, making them natural
partners. These research projects will be drawn from the ongoing research
portfolio within the Research Center for Functional Materials of the National
Institute for Materials Science, one of the leading materials research
facilities in the world. Specific projects include development of improved
thermoelectric materials (Dr. Mori), and development and characterization of new
oxide and nitride materials for sensors and electronics (Dr. Ohsawa). Within the
area of chemistry/sensor technology, students will explore micromechanical
structures for artificial olfaction (Dr. Yoshikawa) and photonic crystals as
chemical sensors (Dr. Iwanaga). Within the Life Sciences area, participants will
develop nano-textured surfaces as scaffolds for stem cell growth (Dr. Guoping
Chen) and study the effect of surface structure and chemistry on cell function
and differentiation (Dr. Nakanishi).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.