* 2246893
* Rational Dynamics on Complex Surfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Jeffrey Diller, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Tyson
* 04/30/2026
* USD 403,098.00

The project involves research on dynamical systems of several complex variables.
Dynamical systems are processes that can be modeled mathematically by a set of
states that evolve over time according to fixed rules. Dynamical systems are
ubiquitous in science and engineering, arising in the context of weather
prediction, macroeconomics, mechanics, and neural networks, to name just a small
selection of application domains. Topics of interest in this area include making
predictions about the future state of a system based on present conditions,
understanding how sensitively future states depend on initial states, and
characterizing the full array of eventual states. Dynamical systems given by
polynomial or rational formulas constitute an important and interesting special
class and are a focus of study in this project. Such systems are natural from a
mathematical standpoint, and also arise in various scientific and mathematical
applications including interior point methods in linear programming,
thermodynamics, and root-finding algorithms. The study of rational dynamics in
several complex variables draws on tools and techniques from a range of
mathematical areas, and advances in multivariable complex dynamics in turn yield
new insights in those areas. In addition to the expected research advances, the
project contributes to the development of human resources via the support of
doctoral students and STEM outreach activities at the Riverbend Community Math
Center, a local non-profit organization devoted to working with K-12 mathematics
students and teachers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves the dynamics of
rational mappings in the setting of several complex variables. One major thrust
of the proposed work concerns the difficult problem of constructing measures of
maximal entropy for rational maps on complex projective surfaces. Of particular
interest are rational maps on complex surfaces that do not admit algebraically
stable models. It is anticipated that any such map must preserve additional
geometric structure, such as a fibration onto a curve or an invariant
meromorphic canonical form. Progress towards this conjecture is an important
goal of the project. In addition, the project aims to develop analytic tools
tailored to such structures, with an eye towards producing invariant currents
and measures, as were previously constructed in the setting of algebraically
stable maps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.