* 2246583
* Chemical Imaging of Metal Surfaces at the Solid-Liquid Interface: Effects of Grain Structure on Electrocatalytic Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Steven Baldelli, University of Houston
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 05/31/2026
* USD 454,547.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
and the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Programs in the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Steven Baldelli from the University of Houston is using
highly sensitive surface techniques to understand how molecules react on
polycrystalline electrodes. Chemical reactivity of analytes adsorbed to an
electrode depends on the underlying crystallinity of a surface as well as its
adjacent grains. Studying these effects require the use of methods that reveal
surface crystallography, depend on the electrode surface electronic state and
symmetry, and impact local vibrational information about the adsorbed molecules.
By controlling the system electrochemically, Professor Baldelli and his students
will map surface chemistry and link it to underlying crystallography to develop
a physical understanding of how crystalline domains influence heterogeneous
catalysis. Graduate, undergraduate, and high school students will be mentored
and collaborate through this research. Students will develop skills related to
instrument building, data analysis, and spectral and microscopy image
interpretation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses in situ sum frequency
generation vibrational spectroscopy/microscopy (SFG) to probe molecules adsorbed
to an electrode while second harmonic generation microscopy (SHG) assists in the
determination of the electronic state and symmetry of the electrode. Because SHG
anisotropy is related to surface crystallography, the combination of these
techniques results in the generation of correlated maps of surface chemistry and
underlying crystallography. Surface reactivity is then interrogated using cyclic
voltammetry with sub-micron resolution under reaction conditions. In so doing,
impacts of adjacent grains in a polycrystalline surface are evaluated. Broader
impacts of this work have the potential to advance surface sensitive
spectroscopy and microscopy tools that could advance the chemical and physical
understanding of how the electrode influences heterogeneous
electrocatalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.