* 2246144
* CRII: FET: New Theoretical Foundations for Quantum Walks with Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2025
* Avah Banerjee, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 02/28/2025
* USD 175,000.00

In principle, quantum algorithms can perform certain computational tasks faster
than any known classical algorithms. However, the postulates of quantum
mechanics underpinning quantum algorithms, create unique challenges that need to
be overcome in order to expand their applications. This project investigates the
power and limitations of quantum walks, which is a quantum analogue of classical
random walks. Quantum walks have been used in state-of-the-art quantum
algorithms; from finding a marked vertex in a graph to simulation of quantum
systems. Despite this, the dynamical behavior of the “quantum walker” is not
well understood, which can be highly non-trivial due to its wave-like
interference properties. This makes it difficult to effectively guide the
propagation of the “quantum walker” when the underlying geometry of the search
problem is complicated. The primary aim of this project is to develop
mathematical and algorithmic tools to broaden our understanding of quantum
walks. Through education, curriculum development and outreach activities, the
project will also contribute towards training an interdisciplinary cohort of
students in quantum computing. Further, this project will foster research across
mathematics (group and representation theory, simplicial homology, graph
theory), physics (scattering theory, quantum walks) and computer science
(property testing, subgraph finding). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expanding the
applications of quantum walks poses several challenges. First, it is difficult
to derive analytical expressions for the resulting distribution of certain
important classes of quantum walks, even on highly symmetric graphs. This is due
to the presence of destructive interference. Second, we do not have a good
understanding of when quantum walks can lead to super-polynomial or exponential
speedup. Third, apart from a few carefully constructed examples, we do not know
how to apply quantum walks to find or detect non-trivial subgraphs of a given
graph. To overcome some of the above obstacles, this project undertakes a
systematic study of quantum walks as a generative model for non-trivial
distributions on vertices and edges of graphs and their higher dimensional
extensions such as simplicial complexes (SC). The resulting theory will be used
in testing certain properties of and finding complex sub-structures within these
objects. More specifically, the following topics will be investigated: dynamics
of quantum walks on non-abelian Cayley graphs and SCs with certain cohomologies,
applications of quantum walks for property testing and search problems on SCs,
and connection between scattering quantum walks and the symmetries of the
underlying graph.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.