* 2246856
* Studies on Shape and Property Altering Polysubstitution Cascades
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Patrick Harran, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 06/30/2026
* USD 579,743.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Patrick Harran of the University of California, Los Angeles is
studying the development of fluorinated peptidomimetics, molecules that mimic
the properties of naturally occurring peptides. Cyclic peptides and their
surrogates are valuable in research in that they serve as leads in drug
discovery, as probe compounds in chemical biology and as building blocks for
materials science. Harran and co-workers are developing new synthetic tools to
create a previously unknown class of fluorinated cyclic peptide composites. They
are both studying the three-dimensional structure of these constructs and their
physical properties. Their methods platform is able to generate new molecules
systematically, and it has the potential to drive many collaborative studies in
the future. This project spans a broad range of chemical disciplines from
synthesis to chemical biology to medicine and the outcomes will affect the
chemical, pharmaceutical, and materials industries. Consequently, this work is
well suited for training and educating young scientists who will go on to
careers in these STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics)
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Harran research team at UCLA has discovered
that peptides containing combinations of cysteine, tyrosine, histidine, and
serine residues react with octafluorocyclopentene (OFCP) in relative rate
controlled polysubstitution cascades. These multi-stage reactions convert
linear, unprotected substrates into polycyclic products in a single flask at
0-25 ˚C without the use of catalysts or heavy metals. The chemistry is
generating a wealth of previously unknown heterocyclic ring systems. Under this
award, functional group compatibilities, ring size tolerances and the manner in
which relative rate differentials govern efficiency will be examined. The
stability, solubility and conformational behavior of macrobicyclic products will
also be studied. Initiating reaction cascades from branching positions will be
tested as will variants designed to generate a new class of fluorinated
‘pseudo’-biaryls. Lastly, methods to augment the scaffolding abilities of OFCP
with molecular inserts to facilitate additional macrocyclizations via transient
reactive intermediates will be explored. The overarching goal of this work is to
develop technology that will enable the synthesis of new membrane permeant
structural mimics of the major protein surface loop types observed in the
Protein Data Bank. If successful, the OFCP-stapling chemistry being developed
herein will provide an enabling tool of potentially wide utility in chemical
biology. particularly for the burgeoning cyclic peptide
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.