* 2246339
* IRES Track I: Portable Point-of-Care Testing Device  for Pathogen Detection
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Sangjin Ryu, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 07/31/2026
* USD 294,217.00

This IRES project will provide an annual cohort of six US students with the
opportunity to conduct research for eight summer weeks at Toyohashi University
of Technology (TUT) in Japan. The overarching theme of the project is to develop
portable point-of-care testing (POCT) devices for efficient detection of
infectious pathogens including the coronavirus. Participating students will be
recruited with an emphasis on underrepresented groups from the University of
Nebraska-Lincoln (UNL) and local universities in Nebraska including native
Indian tribal colleges. As pre-departure preparation trainings, students will
participate in a science communication workshop focused on technical writing,
virtual meetings with TUT mentors on research activities, and cultural and
language lessons. Participating students will not only receive high-quality
professional training and exposure to world-class researchers and state-of-the-
art research facilities, but also experience a multicultural and
interdisciplinary environment. In addition to research activities, participating
students will visit Japanese world-leading companies such as Toyota and Yamaha.
This project serves the national interest by (1) promoting the progress of
science in pathogen detection and POCT technology, (2) advancing the national
health and securing the national defense by developing innovative and efficient
POCT devices for pathogen detection, and (3) engaging U.S. students in
interdisciplinary and multicultural research and thus increasing the likelihood
of their choice of STEM career.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the wake of the COVID-19
pandemic, the significance of quick and accurate detection of coronavirus cannot
be overemphasized. Although conventional detection methods can provide reliable
and accurate results, there has been a pressing need for a compact, affordable,
and easy-to-use tool that can rapidly detect coronavirus as well as other
infectious pathogens with high levels of sensitivity and reliability at the
point of care. POCT devices can be a solution for this urgent societal need, and
this project aims to develop POCT devices by integrating a CMOS optical sensor
and microchannel devices. Integrating microchannels for liquid sample pumping
and guidance with a CMOS sensor in a portable case with other electronic
components poses various research challenges. In overcoming the challenges in an
integrated design approach, this project seeks to address the following research
question: how can the microfluidic and CMOS components be optimized separately
and integrated into a portable device? Participating students will research key
parts of a portable POCT device separately based on respective research
expertise of mentors, and then they will integrate their solutions at the system
level of the device. This holistic and multifaceted research approach will (1)
advance current knowledge of pathogen detection and portable POCT technology and
(2) pave a way toward commercializable portable POCT
devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.