* 2246704
* Asymptotic Problems in Random Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Yuri Bakhtin, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Wilmer
* 05/31/2026
* USD 110,000.00

Precise long-term predictions are impossible for most noise-driven random
dynamical systems. However, their long-term statistical properties often can be
understood. Improving this understanding is the main goal of this project. For
some systems in this class, the long-term statistics do not depend on the
initial conditions, and for some systems, certain information about the initial
conditions is retained over long times. The project aims at describing these
behaviors for complex random dynamical systems used to model phenomena in
physics: random growth models, front propagation, fluid dynamics models, polymer
chains interacting with disordered environments. For noisy systems with multiple
stationary regimes such as nonlinear reaction networks, the project aims at
studying patterns of random switching between those regimes. The project’s
educational and dissemination components include supervising graduate and
undergraduate participation in the research and organizing and speaking at
seminars and conferences. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first part of the project is
to develop the ergodic program for Hamilton-Jacobi equations with random
Hamiltonians and related systems in random environments. The basic objects will
be minimizers of Lagrangian action, that is, directed polymers given by the
traditional Gibbs formalism and generalized Hamilton-Jacobi polymers in a random
potential. This circle of problems includes finding random dynamic attractors
for solutions in various settings, with or without boundary conditions, studying
the associated infinite one-sided minimizers and polymer measures. In the second
part, small random perturbations of dynamical systems with multiple
instabilities organized into heteroclinic networks will be studied, with the
focus on the emerging metastability picture with polynomial transition times
between different regimes of heteroclinic cycling. The third part of the project
will study patterns of nonergodic averaging for systems with multiple invariant
measures supported on manifolds of various dimensions that display
metastability, that is, the dynamics is not dominated by one invariant
distribution but intermittently switches between various regimes, spending long
times in each of them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.