* 2246724
* Collaborative Research: Mathematical and experimental analysis of the interaction between competitors and a shared predator - from patches to landscapes
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* James Cronin, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Zhilan Feng
* 07/31/2026
* USD 205,944.00

Ecologists today are faced with a most pressing concern: ensuring long-term
survival and coexistence of species in the face of habitat loss and
fragmentation. An innovative aspect of this project is the close integration of
experimental and mathematical analyses to investigate impacts of habitat
fragmentation, interspecific competition, and predation on coexistence of
species at patch and landscape levels. This research will provide a more
comprehensive understanding of the complex relationships that drive ecological
systems and contribute to the development of effective conservation strategies.
Two important questions regarding biology of interacting species are considered:
1) do predators affect the relationship between density and prey emigration,
Allee effects and local or regional stability of prey species? and 2) does the
presence of predators affect occurrence or strength of competition-dispersal,
competition-reproduction or dispersal-reproduction tradeoffs and therefore
coexistence of competitors? The project will also provide significant
contributions towards analysis of mathematical models created to study this
behavior via development of new tools to better understand model dynamics.
Project results will be disseminated to the ecological and mathematical
communities through various media including peer-reviewed mathematical and
ecology journals and talks at national conferences. This project will involve
training of graduate and undergraduate students through mentorship of
independent research projects and PI-hosted workshops, with a session geared
toward high-school students/teachers that focuses on illustrating value and
applicability of mathematical models and ecological experiments to address
societal problems. Moreover, an app that estimates key dispersal parameters from
field data will be created and made publicly
available.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project combines reaction-diffusion models,
mathematical analysis, and experimental research to investigate how habitat
fragmentation, conditional dispersal, interspecific competition, and predation
influence population dynamics and species coexistence at single patch to
landscape scales. The project will involve the study of diffusive Lotka-Volterra
competition and predator-prey systems with nonlinear boundary conditions
designed to model how density dependent emigration (DDE) affects the dynamics of
species at different spatial scales and experiments with two Tribolium flour
beetle species and a shared natural enemy to measure DDE relationships and life-
history tradeoffs under predation pressure. The Investigators will develop and
analyze mathematical models based on the experimental data to explore effects of
DDE on coexistence, invasion, and pattern formation. This project is expected to
be novel and significant by providing (1) much-needed experimental evidence that
interspecific competitors and predators affect boundary behavior namely, the
strength and form of DDE, and important life-history tradeoffs linked to species
coexistence; (2) the first theoretical framework for the effects of conditional
dispersal on the population dynamics and coexistence of competing species and a
shared predator in fragmented landscapes; and (3) a significant contribution
toward the analysis of systems of elliptic boundary value problems with
nonlinear boundary conditions, to better understand model dynamics. Results from
this study are expected to be applicable to conservation programs and reserve
design. Specifically, this model framework can be used to investigate how Allee-
like effects can arise from context-dependent dispersal to affect minimum patch
sizes, carrying capacities, density-area relationships, species-area
relationships, and multiple stable states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
jointly funded by the MPS Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS) through the
Mathematical Biology Program, the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR), and the BIO Division of Environmental Biology through the
Population and Community Ecology Cluster.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.