* 2246035
* CRII: OAC: Building Explainable Computer Architecture with Simulation and Visualization Techniques
* CSE,OAC
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Yifan Sun, College of William and Mary
* Standard Grant
* Juan Li
* 04/30/2025
* USD 175,000.00

Computing systems are getting more and more complex to achieve high performance.
On the one hand, different devices are combined in one heterogeneous platform so
that specialized applications (e.g., artificial intelligence) can execute more
efficiently. On the other hand, the scale of devices and systems is getting much
larger. The heterogeneity and the massive scale of computing systems make it
challenging for researchers to understand, interpret, and explain the behavior
of each hardware component that participates in application execution. The lack
of explainability of existing computer architectures can potentially lead to
functional bugs, performance drawbacks, security vulnerabilities, and
reliability problems. This project advocates the importance of building
Explainable Computer Architecture by enhancing computer architecture simulators
and developing visualization tools that help analyze performance issues. The
research outcome of this project reduces the barriers for students, especially
students from underrepresented groups, to participate in computer architecture
design, development, and research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project initiates
the Explainable Computer Architecture research direction, which can accelerate
innovation in computer architecture research and design. This project
contributes to a universal data format and instrumentation library for computer
architecture simulators to collect execution traces for visualization purposes.
Additionally, this project develops a novel data visualization tool for network-
on-chips system performance analysis, facilitating the identification of
performance issues in large-scale and highly-coupled computing systems.
Moreover, this project delivers an educational game, based on the simulator and
the visualization tool developed in this project, to support K-12 computer
science education. Finally, using a research-through-design approach, the
experiences learned from this project guide the community to design future
``easier-to-explain'' computer architectures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.