* 2246006
* Collaborative Research: CUE-T: Broadening Participation in Computing via Active Learning Strategies in Multi-Institution Online Synchronous Learning Environments
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2027
* Edward Jones, Florida Agricultural and Mechanical University
* Standard Grant
* Huihui Wang
* 05/31/2027
* USD 219,873.00

Due to the COVID pandemic, most U.S. Institutions of Higher Education (IHEs)
transitioned in-person classes to online classes. Such a transition provides
fertile ground for research into improving undergraduate STEM education in
computing fields, specifically in broadening participation for underrepresented
students and improving learning outcomes. There are ongoing challenges in
attracting and retaining marginalized students to computing, specifically women
from all races and ethnicities and Black and Hispanic males. This project
intends to explore the impact of combining inclusive and equitable active
learning approaches in computing courses in online synchronous learning
environments (OSLEs) across multiple institutions with a Learning Assistant
model. The proposed approach has the potential to improve student learning
outcomes and retention rates in computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project's
primary goal is to explore the impact of integrating inclusive and equitable
active learning approaches in computing OSLEs and sharing resources across
multiple institutions on students' learning outcomes, engagement, and retention.
The project team plans to use a mixed-methods experimental design to investigate
four research questions focusing on conducting professional development, using
active learning approaches on student learning outcomes and retention rates,
sharing courses across institutions, and broadening participation in computing.
This project will be conducted at six institutions, including two Hispanic
Serving Institutions, two Historically Black Universities, and two small
universities. This proposed project has the potential to significantly impact
equity in computing in both academia and industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.