* 2246330
* IRES TRACK 1: US-Ghana Student Research Experience: Understanding and conceptualizing threats and solutions of onsite sanitation and sea level rise on coastal groundwater resources
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Joseph Zume, Shippensburg University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 05/31/2026
* USD 291,818.00

In coastal areas, the quality of groundwater systems that support millions of
people is increasingly threatened by saltwater encroachment as sea level rises
in response to a warming climate. For coastal populations in the developing
world, where the use of onsite sanitation is prevalent, the risk of groundwater
cross-contamination from septic systems presents an added challenge. Throughout
Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA), peri-urban communities commonly lack access to potable
water, compelling households to rely on shallow groundwater, sourced largely
from hand-dug wells. Similarly, these communities also lack access to improved
sanitation facilities, resulting in a proliferation of onsite systems, such as
septic tanks and pit latrines. Routinely, groundwater wells end up too close to
toilet facilities, heightening the risk of groundwater cross-contamination. The
risks to human health from this dual threat are not in doubt. However,
contaminant migration pathways in subsoil media, as well as the factors that
drive contamination, are often complex and site-specific. Hence, a litany of
physical, chemical, and biological parameters, and physiographic factors, must
be well understood to conceptualize and advance sustainable solutions.
Relatedly, the need for a trained, globally competent scientists and engineers
who can address current and future water challenges has never been greater. This
project will address both needs by; (1) undertaking high-impact water quality
research to broadly assess impacts of saltwater intrusion and on-site sanitation
facilities on coastal groundwater quality in Cape Coast, Ghana, a location that
typifies the dual challenge, and 2) strengthen the professional preparation of
US students as future, globally engaged water resources scientists and
engineers. Faculty at Shippensburg University (SU) and University of South
Florida (USF) will work collaboratively with their counterparts at the
University of Cape Coast (UCC), in Ghana, to bring three cohorts of US students
(grad and undergrad) to Ghana and engage them in transformational learning
experiences via research in water quality, sanitation, and climate change. This
project will strategically recruit underrepresented minority groups, including
females, as an incentive to broaden their participation in international STEM
research and enhance their standing in STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will address three major
themes:&lt;br/&gt;1. Effects of onsite sanitation on groundwater quality: To
explore the vulnerability of shallow groundwater to onsite sanitation, student
participants will conduct both field evaluations and laboratory analyses of
groundwater samples for specific chemical and microbial contaminants. They will
evaluate existing sanitation infrastructure (e.g., size of septic system &amp;
number of users per household), calculate septic system densities, collect GPS
coordinates of wells and septic systems, perform soil tests, and assess other
pertinent factors to help characterize and attribute sources of
vulnerability.&lt;br/&gt;2. Effects of sea level rise on groundwater quality:
Although evidence of saltwater intrusion into wells has been reported for some
of the communities closest to the coastline, it is not clear how far inland the
saltwater has encroached. The US students will work collaboratively with their
UCC partners, to determine the spatial extent of saltwater intrusion in the
area. They will conduct in-situ measurements of wells for
salinity/conductivity/TDS, test water samples in the laboratory, and perform
spatial statistical analyses on their results.&lt;br/&gt;3. Education: An
important component of this project is a proposed annual water, sanitation, and
hygiene (WASH) Fair. The different cohorts of US students will collaborate with
their local partners, mentors, and local high school (HS) students (and their
teachers) to implement a WASH fair, which&lt;br/&gt;will become an annual event
providing WASH advisory services to the local communities beyond the life of
this project. The project also has another outreach component where the US
students will engage with community members for knowledge sharing. They will
collaborate with Ghanaian HS teachers to develop a local program for HS students
to continue routine well water monitoring into the
future.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overall, the project will give US students first-
hand experiences with the critical water quality conditions in a developing
country context, and enhance their interdisciplinary, problem-solving, and
collaborative skills. Through their interactions with local researchers and
communities, the US students will further gain knowledge of the social-cultural
underpinnings that complicate water quality challenges in the developing world
and how to propose solutions from a global context.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.