* 2246814
* Toward High Intensity Forbidden EPR Transitions In Bimetallic Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Joseph Zadrozny, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Francis D'Souza
* 06/30/2026
* USD 450,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms B Program of
the Chemistry Division, Professor Joseph Zadrozny of the Department of Chemistry
at Colorado State University is developing new classes of dinuclear transition
metal complexes to probe forbidden electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR)
spectroscopic transitions. The goal of this research is to exploit the
characteristics of these dinuclear species to understand how molecular structure
can assist in violating EPR selection rules to enable high intensity
transitions. The specific transitions being explored may yield new capabilities
for bioimaging techniques that use EPR transitions. The research project spans
the interface of inorganic and physical chemistries with synthetic and
spectroscopic analyses as a key part of the work. The broader outreach goals for
the program will be to create an easy-to-access lesson for synthetic chemists to
approach the selection rules of EPR. This plan will follow the pedagogical
strategies commonly employed for more common techniques, e.g. UV-vis
spectroscopy, and as such aims to be a cornerstone in bringing new chemists into
the EPR arena.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The longer-term goal for the work is to
enable low-frequency EPR transitions at high magnetic field, which would permit
the chemical sensitivity of EPR imaging to be integrated with MRI. The singlet-
to-triplet transition of two-spin systems is a promising way to realize such an
EPR transition, because of its unique field dependence. Yet, the transition is
forbidden and therefore weak hence, chemical design strategies for molecules to
override the EPR selection rule and increase signal intensity are needed.
Dinuclear metal complexes have a plethora of magnetic interactions that could
potentially violate the EPR selection rule, but experimental tests of the
efficacy of these violations have yet to be performed. This work will study the
singlet-to-triplet transition in a variety of dinuclear metal complexes to
explore how exchange coupling, hyperfine coupling, and relative spin orientation
all contribute to the intensity of the forbidden
resonance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.