* 2246428
* Green Chemistry for Valorization of Commodity Chemicals via pi-Allylmetal Intermediates
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Michael Krische, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 06/30/2026
* USD 548,423.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Michael J. Krische of the University of Texas at Austin is developing
catalytic methods for the conversion of abundant chemical feedstocks to value-
added products that are relevant to the pharmaceutical and agrochemical
industries. A prominent feature of the research is that it will include the
generation of so-called 'chiral' compounds in an enantioselective manner, i.e.
with high levels of control of the 'handedness' of the molecule. Whereas large
volumes of waste often accompany the preparation of structurally complex
compounds, the proposed methods minimize byproduct generation, thus reducing
chemical waste at the source. Education, training, and career development
activities for students from the undergraduate to graduate levels are proposed
and these activities are anticipated to foster the participation of individuals
belonging to groups traditionally underrepresented in STEM (science, technology,
engineering and mathematics). As part of a longstanding collaboration, graduate
student trainees involved in the funded project will participate in summer
internships at Genentech, thus benefiting from career development experiences in
both academic and industrial settings. To further extend the broader impacts of
this award, and because women remain significantly underrepresented in
pharmaceutical and agrochemical sciences, Professor Krische will continue to
organize the biennial “Women in Catalysis and Synthetic Chemistry” symposium, a
popular event that attracts a diverse cohort of
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this award at the University of Texas-
Austin, the Krische lab aims to further extend the chemical space accessible to
functionally distinct chiral pi-allyliridium and pi-allylruthenium catalysts
previously developed in the laboratory. While nearly all enantioselective
allylic substitutions exploit low-pKa pronucleophiles, the pi-
allyliridium-C,O-benzoate catalysts of interest here are base-tolerant at high
temperatures enabling direct use of high-pKa pronucleophiles in combination with
inexpensive inorganic carbonate bases. alpha-Olefins are abundant feedstocks
(100 M tons produced per year), yet their atom-efficient conversion to useful
chiral products often requires mass-intensive oxidants (e.g., benzoquinone) or
photochemical promotion. By contrast, hydrogen auto-transfer reactions catalyzed
by novel iodide-bound pi-allylruthenium complexes holds promise for atom-
efficient allylic C-H functionalizations of alpha-olefins to form
enantiomerically enriched products. In addition, related ruthenium and iron
catalysts will be used in byproduct-free hydrofunctionalizations of butadiene
(&gt;12 M tons produced per year). The proposed catalysts are chiral-at-metal-
and-ligand, and a special feature of the catalyst design resides in defining
metal-centered stereogenicity for optimal asymmetric induction. The project has
the potential to yield fundamental advances in the practice and theory of
transition metal-catalyzed transformations that are likely to benefit the
sustainable manufacture of societally-relevant materials from simple chemical
feedstocks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.