* 2246547
* Collaborative Research: Spectral Discrimination of Single Molecules with Photoactivatable Fluorescence
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Francisco Raymo, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Francis D'Souza
* 08/31/2026
* USD 401,929.00

With support of the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms-B (CSDM-B) and
Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Programs of the Chemistry Division,
Fran√ßisco M. Raymo of the Department of Chemistry at the University of Miami and
Yang Zhang of the Department of Textile Engineering at North Carolina State
University are developing a new class of synthetic dyes with photoactivatable
fluorescence for bioimaging applications. The goal of this research is to
exploit the unique properties of these innovative fluorescent dyes to
investigate cellular processes with unprecedented resolution and, ultimately,
contribute invaluable chemical tools to elucidate the fundamental factors
responsible for normal cellular functions and disease inception. The project
lies at the interface of organic and physical chemistry with long-term
implications in biology and medicine. The proposed activities are an optimal
training ground for undergraduate, graduate students and postdoctoral associates
as well as involve the participation of high-school students in intensive
laboratory experiences through established outreach programs available at both
institutions. The project will also involve participation of members of
underrepresented groups at both institutions and collaborative outreach efforts
at a local community college.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is
to generate a library of cell-permeable and bioconjugatable synthetic dyes with
photoactivatable fluorescence and resolved single-molecule emission spectra.
Their design is based on a photochemical mechanism to activate
borondipyrromethene (BODIPY) fluorescence with green light as developed by the
team in prior funding cycles. Their realization demands the synthesis,
structural characterization, ensemble/single-molecule spectroscopic analysis and
imaging of four series of photoactivatable BODIPYs, differing in the ring-fusion
pattern of their polycyclic chromophoric scaffold and/or nature of their
substituents, in two parallel project components. One is aimed at resolving the
spectral position and/or band shape of the photoactivated fluorescence to
differentiate the single-molecule emission spectra sufficiently for structural
discrimination with statistical confidence. The other is aimed at introducing
hydrophilic groups and targeting ligands on the chromophoric platform to label
selectively and track simultaneously intracellular proteins. The overarching
scientific goal is to ultimately engineer of a unique combination of structural,
photochemical and photophysical properties into innovative molecular constructs
to enable the unprecedented high-throughput multiplexed single-molecule tracking
of proteins in live cells.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.