* 2246905
* Forcing, inner models, and large cardinals.
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Itay Neeman, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2026
* USD 240,000.00

This project seeks to contribute to our understanding of structural properties
of the universe of mathematics. Our knowledge of mathematics comes through
deduction from axioms. This knowledge is inherently incomplete, in the sense
that there is a wide range of questions that can never be answered, either
positively or negatively, from the standard axioms. Set theorists study these
questions, to see how they relate to each other, and how they relate to a
backbone of additional axioms, called large cardinal axioms, that assert strong
reflection properties for very large sets. This project explores some of these
questions through three interrelated aspects. The first involves a property of
cardinal numbers that can be viewed as a remnant of a large cardinal axiom. This
property has been studied since the 1970s, and work on it has been driving
substantial developments in the area of consistency proofs. The second involves
the interactions between combinatorial properties of the line of real numbers,
and the size of the set of real numbers. In both these aspects, proofs that the
relevant principles can hold use large cardinal axioms. The third aspect is to
study the large cardinal axioms themselves, to develop specific models for these
axioms, and to further strengthen the known connection between some of these
axioms and properties of the line of real numbers. The overall purpose in all
cases is to further our understanding of what is, and what is not, possible in
the universe of mathematics. This project will support the development and
training of graduate students in mathematical logic at UCLA. In addition this
project builds on previous work of the PI at the undergraduate level. The PI
plans to help talented UCLA undergraduates acquire graduate level knowledge in
mathematical logic, and continue to graduate studies.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project deals with three
interrelated areas in set theory: (i) the tree property; (ii) consistency proofs
with large continuum; and (iii) large cardinals and inner models, in the region
of Woodin cardinals and of supercompact cardinals. In connection with (i), the
project is particularly concerned with forcing the tree property at regular
cardinals, above the first uncountable cardinal, in increasingly large
intervals. The ultimate goal is to see whether the tree property on some of
these cardinals can prevent the property from holding on other cardinals, or
whether it is consistent that the tree property holds at all these cardinals. We
are very far from an answer to this question, but there has been some impressive
progress in recent years and this project seeks to build on this progress in
order to push the boundaries further. In connection with (ii), the project is
particularly concerned with some of the central structural consequences of the
proper forcing axiom (PFA), for example Todorcevic's open coloring axiom and
p-ideal dichotomy. This project seeks to determine whether these principles are
consistent with large continuum, meaning larger than its size under PFA. The
ultimate goal is to develop a robust framework of consistency results with large
continuum, or determine actual mathematical obstacles for such frameworks. In
connection with (iii), the project is particularly concerned with descriptive
set theoretic applications of inner models theory at the level of Woodin
cardinals, and with pushing the theory of inner models to the level of
supercompact cardinals. The former should lead to solutions for some of the more
intractable, still open, questions in descriptive set theory under determinacy.
The latter should help with our understanding of a key level of the large
cardinal hierarchy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.