* 2246400
* Collaborative Research: IRES Track I: Post-hurricane recovery of island freshwater lenses: Understanding the impact of social and hydrological dynamics
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Zoi Dokou, University Enterprises, Incorporated
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 08/31/2026
* USD 96,093.00

The goal of this project is to provide international collaborative opportunities
to six students per year to explore broader climate change challenges related to
freshwater resilience of small islands through a six-week long international
research experience in the island of Grand Bahama. The project will advance our
current understanding of the combined role of social and hydrological dynamics
on post-hurricane recovery of freshwater resources on small sub-tropical
islands. A group of U.S. students from diverse backgrounds will work closely
with mentors and students from the University of the Bahamas, Grand Bahama
Utility Company, the Bahamian Forestry Unit, and faculty from four US
Universities (California State University, Sacramento, University of Wyoming,
Oberlin College, and Rutgers University), comprising a diverse,
interdisciplinary team of social scientists, hydrologists, soil scientists, and
plant experts. Students will learn how to study local, global, and intercultural
issues, understand and appreciate different perspectives, and interact with
individuals from different cultures and backgrounds. The experiences gained
through this international collaboration will be key to student's future success
in an increasingly global economy, and will further the development of a
diverse, globally competitive workforce, able to address cross-cutting
challenges in socio-hydrology. This project will also have a positive impact on
students from the host Institution, gaining research experiences and training
that they would otherwise not have access to. Beyond the impacts on students,
local water management authorities will benefit from the generation of new data
and modeling tools and the project will help inform local communities about
climate and social challenges and their role on the sustainability and
resilience of their water resources, which is anticipated to increase their
involvement and level of adaptation to climate change mitigation
strategies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite the recognized importance of socio-
hydrology in increasing our understanding of the interactions between water and
human systems, interdisciplinary student training addressing the cross-cutting
nature of socio-hydrology is not common. This project will investigate the
importance of socio-hydrological dynamics on post-hurricane recovery of
freshwater resources of small sub-tropical islands by collecting, integrating,
and analyzing unique information on the social and hydrological processes that
are identified as the main drivers of post-hurricane recovery of water resources
in Grand Bahama. Our research will generate new data and knowledge on the
relative importance and compound role of social and hydrological factors and
will ultimately contribute to increased water resources sustainability and
resilience of small islands under a changing climate. Students will participate
in field campaigns to collect groundwater and soil salinity, groundwater levels
and soil moisture data on various locations on the island. In addition,
infiltration experiments will be conducted to assess salt build-up on the soil
and its impact on the infiltration capacity of the soil. The above data will be
used to improve the calibration and validation of an existing island scale model
groundwater flow and salt transport modeling. This model will simulate FWL
recovery under various recharge scenarios based on climatic projections. Soil
salinity data will also be used to assess the loss in plant/forest biodiversity
and changes in forest structure post-hurricane. Sociological investigations of
community member’s perceptions on water management in Grand Bahama will also be
conducted through focus groups and interviews. In addition to individual
projects, the international research opportunity will culminate in an annual
interdisciplinary research project that provides insights into the socio-
hydrological dynamics of FWL recovery after storm induced salinization events.
Students will present their research findings at an annual project Virtual
Symposium, communicate their research beyond the program through outreach
projects and scientific publications and gain important writing and presentation
skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.