* 2246961
* Quotienting by Quasisymmetrics: Combinatorics and Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Vasu Tewari, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2026
* USD 151,165.00

Algebraic combinatorics is a field of mathematics originating from the dynamic
interplay between discrete combinatorial objects and abstract algebraic notions.
This interdisciplinary aspect makes for an extremely fertile field of
investigation with applications to theoretical computer science, economics,
statistics, computational biology, and other subjects of mathematics. A crucial
component to answering questions in this area involves distilling hard-to-
understand geometric or algebraic information into hands-on combinatorial data
which has the added benefit of casting new light on the original context. This
project applies tools from combinatorics and geometry to study classical
algebraic constructions such as quotients of polynomial rings. The PI will
develop combinatorial tools and techniques to gain insight, with the long term
goal of developing a firmer grasp on positivity questions in algebraic
combinatorics. Furthermore, this project provides several research training
opportunities for graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to
advance our understanding of the quotient of the polynomial ring modulo the
ideal of quasisymmetric polynomials. This quotient is an quasisymmetric analog
of the coinvariant algebra, an object with a storied history going back to the
work of A. Borel. A basis for the coinvariant algebra with deep geometric and
combinatorial relevance is given by Schubert polynomials of Lascoux-
Schützenberger. Motivated by questions pertaining to the permutahedral variety,
the PI will study a new basis for the quasisymmetric quotient that is intimately
tied with Schubert polynomials. The overarching goal of this project is to gain
further insight into the long-standing open question of multiplying Schubert
polynomials combinatorially. On the geometric side, the PI will draw upon
connections between the permutahedral variety and the quasisymmetric quotient to
bring forth novel aspects of lattice point enumeration in
permutahedra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.