* 2246336
* IRES Track I: US Student Research Experience in Design and Synthesis of Advanced Materials for High-efficiency Energy Storage and Conversion
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Milka Montes, University of Texas of the Permian Basin
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 07/31/2026
* USD 299,965.00

The proposed IRES program aims to provide U.S. undergraduate students with
international research experience in preparing advanced energy storage and
conversion materials in greenhouse gas reforming (carbon dioxide and methane)
and high-efficient lithium-ion battery preparation. Four U.S. students per year
for three years (12 students) from regional/national underrepresented groups
will be mentored by counterpart faculties and graduate students with expertise
in ongoing projects at the Qingdao campus of Shandong University of Science and
Technology (SDUST), Shandong, China. These students will participate in research
projects with the frontiers of knowledge and methodological approaches. IRES
students will develop and polish valuable technical skills, learn about
renewable, sustainable solutions to global greenhouse gas challenges, and live
in a bicultural community of faculty and students participating in the program.
It benefits the advancement of CO2 dry reforming CH4 (greenhouse gas reforming)
and lithium-ion battery design and preparation in the U.S. The University of
Texas Permian Basin (UTPB) is a Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI) located in
rural West Texas, serving 37% of Pell-eligible and 49% of first-generation
students whose families often work in the oil fields or service industries. The
IRES participants will be recruited from underrepresented groups (i.e., women
and minorities) in West Texas and Pell grant-qualified applicants in STEM
nationally. The proposed project will further develop their interest in STEM and
enhance their enthusiasm to pursue graduate studies and careers in STEM
disciplines. This IRES project, through interactions with global mentors and
peers and working in international research environments, provides the students
with opportunities to be prepared for worldwide competence and cooperation in
addressing energy issues and climate change. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Climate
change due to greenhouse gas (carbon emission) brings with it a tremendous
threat to humans. This IRES research project aims to develop new methodologies
or improve existing ones to design and prepare energy storage/conversion
advanced materials for carbon emission reduction to mitigate climate change
damage. A computational model will be used for students to study reaction
mechanisms. Students in the program will perform independent research projects
that aim to achieve high-efficient energy utilization and enhance energy storage
and conversion. They will engage in the following topics of CO2 dry reforming
CH4 and lithium-ion batteries design: 1) preparation of bio-mass carbon-based
catalyst and using it for CO2 dry reforming of CH4 with microwave plasma
discharge; 2) investigation of the evolution of thermal stress process of the
carbon structure and evaluating any potential damage to biomass-based carbon
catalyst; 3) analysis of the data from the proposed experiments to disclose the
reaction mechanism in combination with the results from quantum mechanics
calculations; 4) prepare the Sb-based anode for high-performance testing in
lithium-ion batteries; and 5) assemble lithium batteries and evaluate their
performance. The breakthroughs made from the project can significantly impact
the improvements of lithium-ion battery efficiency and greenhouse reforming, as
well as in the U.S. corresponding areas. The proposed research projects will
contribute to carbon emission reduction by achieving high-efficiency energy
storage and conversion. Reutilization of greenhouse gas carbon dioxide plus
methane from abundant, low-cost natural gas reserves can manufacture new
chemical feedstocks to produce durable chemicals in a carbon-neutral or carbon-
negative route.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.