* 2246364
* IRES Track I: United States-Nepal Collaborative Research for Climate, Water and Environmental Biotechnology (CWEB)
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Samendra Sherchan, Morgan State University
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 05/31/2026
* USD 296,586.00

This National Science Foundation IRES award engages faculty and students from
Morgan State University, USA, and Tribhuvan University, Nepal. Underrepresented
minority undergraduate and graduate students will receive international research
training in the multidisciplinary areas of climate change, geosciences,
microbiology, environmental data science and water quality analysis. The
students will conduct hands-on citizen science research in Nepal under the
guidance of diverse interdisciplinary faculty mentors, postdocs, and peer
graduate students; develop leadership, communication, and mentoring skills;
visit local leaders in environmental stewardship; and expand networking
opportunities with scientists at the partner institutes. Upon the completion of
the project, students will present their findings through a one-day Mini-
research Symposium at Morgan State and by producing scientific publications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Morgan State, a U.S. HBCU, has a high percentage of
underrepresented minorities (URM); more than 80% of its student population is
African American. This IRES Track I program will provide these students with a
rewarding international research opportunity in Kathmandu, Nepal. Following
required training and research preparation at Morgan State University, 10
students annually over the course of three summers will travel to Nepal for
field and laboratory research. The proposed site aims to form an
interdisciplinary workforce and the activities will include a) short courses, b)
workshops on leadership, scientific ethics, and communication skills, c)
mentored research, d) seminar series from prominent scientists and e) field
trips and social events. The program is co-organized by the Tribhuvan University
Central Department of Microbiology, Central Department of Environmental Science,
Center for Molecular Dynamics, Public Health Research Laboratory and Kathmandu
Research Institute for Biological Sciences. Major research efforts will focus on
these areas a) changing climate and drinking water quality; b) emerging
pathogens; and c) disease ecology, and d) environmental biotechnology. They will
spend a total of 10 weeks in Nepal and research will be conducted in three towns
within Nepal (Kathmandu metropolitan city, Lalitpur and Bhaktapur) with
different socioeconomic factors. Over the course of this IRES program, the US
and Nepalese partners will strengthen their collaboration through research
training, international teamwork, and cultural
exchange.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.