* 2246972
* Travel: NSF Student Travel Grant for 2022 Annual Computer Security Applications Conference (ACSAC)
* CSE,CNS
* 11/15/2022,10/31/2024
* Jinpeng Wei, Applied Computer Security Associates
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 10/31/2024
* USD 24,900.00

The Annual Computer Security Applications Conference (ACSAC) is a top-tier venue
for quick and wide dissemination of cutting-edge research results in computer
security applications. The conference achieves this by hosting several technical
sessions, workshops, training sessions, keynotes by distinguished speakers,
artifacts competition, case studies, panels, national interest discussions,
work-in-progress talks, and poster sessions. The 2022 ACSAC conference consists
of approximately 73 technical papers across a wide spectrum of computer security
and privacy domains. The hard topic theme of the 2022 conference is "Trustworthy
Systems." The conference's broader significance and importance are reflected in
its agenda, which explores some of the most intriguing and pressing challenges
in the discipline, highlighting open avenues for further work in these areas.
Participation in the conference is thus a valuable opportunity to students and
is an important part of graduate education in
cybersecurity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides travel support to
encourage participation in the 2022 Annual Computer Security Applications
Conference by students who would normally find it difficult to attend. Criteria
for selection include evidence of a serious interest in the field as
demonstrated by statement of research, curriculum vitae (CV) showing research
output, coursework and/or project experience, and a letter of recommendation
from a research adviser or faculty member confirming that the student is in good
standing plus a justification of financial need. Organizers encourage
participation of women and students from other under-represented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.