* 2246353
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: New Constructions for Garbled Computation
* CSE,CNS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2027
* David Heath, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 03/31/2027
* USD 400,000.00

Secure multi-party computation (MPC) is a large and growing subfield of
cryptography that enables mutually untrusting parties to jointly evaluate
functions on their private data. One exciting promise of MPC is the ability to
write such functions as general programs and then evaluate them securely. This
would enable even non-crypto-specialists to automatically augment ordinary
software with powerful security properties. Tools for achieving this goal have
proven elusive, due to barriers to efficiently executing ordinary programs
inside MPC. The critical barrier is in efficiently handling random access memory
(RAM). RAM is ubiquitous in computing, but efficient MPC handling of RAM is well
known as a stubborn challenge. This project will significantly improve MPC
handling of RAM, thus enabling far more efficient general-purpose MPC
tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Garbled RAM (GRAM) is a powerful MPC primitive that
removes interactivity (and hence costly latency) from MPC of programs with RAM
accesses. Recent GRAM techniques overcame several long-standing obstacles to
GRAM efficiency and restored hope for significant further improvement. The
investigators will seize the opportunity, and will explore and implement novel
GRAM techniques. The project’s scope is broad, and includes improving GRAM
efficiency, bringing GRAM to richer settings, understanding GRAM’s theoretical
and practical limitations, improving the cryptographic assumptions needed to
construct efficient GRAM, and implementing software
prototypes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.