* 2246948
* Highly Electron-Deficient Carbon, Boron and Silicon Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Guy Bertrand, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 06/30/2026
* USD 550,000.00

With support from the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division,
Professor Guy Bertrand of the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry at the
University of California – San Diego, is studying highly electron-deficient
carbon, boron and silicon compounds. Usually atoms such as carbon, boron, and
silicon contain a full octet, i.e. are surrounded by eight electrons when they
form compounds with other atoms. This project seeks to isolate species that only
possess 4 or 5 surrounding electrons. The isolation such compounds has been
impeded by the belief that they are inherently unstable. However, by attaching
groups that are specially designed to stabilize electron deficiencies stable
compounds with these very low electron counts will be prepared. The availability
of these stable versions provides a better understanding of chemical reaction
mechanisms and opens the way for new applications. As an example, carbon
compounds with six-valence electrons have become powerful tools in chemistry and
have found medicinal and material science applications. This project will
prepare carbon, silicon and boron with as few as four valence electrons.
Although the work is fundamental in nature, the resulting species will certainly
find a plethora of applications and benefit society at large. The laboratory of
the PI is a joint venture between UCSD and the French CNRS. It serves to promote
the exchange of undergraduates and graduates between UCSD and European
Universities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recent isolation of a monsubstituted
carbene, namely an aminocarbene (R2NCH), demonstrates that an amino substituent
can tame the intrinsic instability of a six-electron species. Therefore, the
Bertrand team believes that using this principle compounds featuring a main-
group element with only five- and even four-valence electrons can be isolated.
Monocoordinated carbon compounds, namely amino carbynes (R2NC:●) and amino
carbocations (R2NC:+), as well as the isoelectronic borylene radical anions
(R2NB:●-) and borylenes (R2NB:) will be prepared. Apart from monocoordinate
systems, dicoordinate carbon radical cations (R2C+●) and carbodications (R2C++),
which also feature only five and four valence-electrons around the carbon atom
and are the one and two electron oxidized forms of a carbene, respectively, are
also being targeted. Once these electron-deficient species are in hand, their
synthetic utility will be explored. As an illustration, carbodications R2C++
could find applications as strong Lewis acids, including in frustrated Lewis
pair chemistry. This project which is at the nexus of physical, organic,
inorganic and organometallic chemistry is well suited to the education of
chemists at all levels.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.