* 2246659
* Discrete Geometry and Extremal Combinatorics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Andrei Pohoata, Emory University
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 07/31/2026
* USD 189,451.00

This project concerns several open problems at the intersection of discrete
geometry and extremal combinatorics. Questions in discrete geometry
traditionally involve sets of points, lines, triangles, planes, or other simple
geometric objects, and many of them are tantalizingly natural and worth studying
for their own sake. Some of them, such as the structure of 3-dimensional convex
polytopes, go back to the antiquity, while others are also intimately connected
with various different areas of modern mathematics, in particular extremal
combinatorics. In recent years, these rich interactions have led to several
remarkable developments between these two fields, and the goal of this project
is to essentially capitalize as much as possible on this momentum.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first part of this project concerns Ramsey theory
around the Erdős-Szekeres problem about the existence of large convex polytopes
in finite configurations of point sets in general position, with an eye
particularly towards establishing new upper bounds for various classical Ramsey
numbers for graphs and hypergraphs. The second part of this proposal is about
incidence geometry, an area with roots in Turán-type problems in extremal graph
theory which is also fundamentally connected with other branches of mathematics,
such as harmonic analysis and number theory, via the so-called sum-product
phenomenon. The PI intends to further develop these connections by studying
several old and new natural problems that arise on the different sides of this
story. Examples of motivating (longstanding) questions include: the Zarankiewicz
problem, the unit distance conjecture, and the Heilbronn triangle problem. As a
byproduct, the PI also plans to develop new tools that could further the
interplay between algebraic, analytic, combinatorial, and probabilistic methods
in discrete mathematics. The PI plans to involve graduate students in this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.