* 2246348
* Collaborative Research: IRES Track I: US-Costa Rica Collaboration to Quantify the Holistic Benefits of Resource Recovery in Small-Scale Communities
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Kevin Orner, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 07/31/2026
* USD 133,865.00

Integrating waste treatment with resource recovery in small-scale communities
can facilitate progress toward global sanitation initiatives. However,
challenges in quantifying and communicating the holistic social, environmental,
and economic impacts and benefits of wastewater management strategies can
prevent the implementation of such initiatives. This IRES Track I program will
take place in Costa Rica, where 66% of the septic tank sludge is not treated
properly before disposal and 86% of the wastewater connected to sanitary sewers
receives limited to no treatment prior to discharge. Contamination caused by
untreated wastewater jeopardizes Costa Ricaâ€™s national economy, which is
dependent on ecotourism. Consequently, this program will provide 18 U.S.
students from West Virginia University, University of South Florida, and
California State University, Chico with an international and interdisciplinary
research experience in engineering and anthropology over the course of three
years. Students will use both social science and engineering methods to improve
the long-term sustainability of sanitation systems in small communities using
triple-bottom line (social, environmental, and economic) decision making
strategies for wastewater management. Students will develop interdisciplinary
skills and competencies while addressing global sanitation challenges in the
socioeconomic and cultural context of rapidly urbanizing cities in Costa Rica.
Along with increased participation of students from underrepresented groups,
this program will contribute to training a diverse U.S. workforce to address
environmental issues of global significance. The program will strengthen and
expand the partnership between collaborators in the U.S. and Costa Rica to
facilitate progress toward safe management of wastewater and integrated resource
recovery in a sustainable and culturally appropriate
way.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IRES Track I program will provide 18 U.S.
students from West Virginia University, University of South Florida, and
California State University, Chico with an international and interdisciplinary
research experience to solve complex sanitation challenges in the ecotourism
community of Santa Elena, Costa Rica. This three-year research experience is
motivated by the following driving objectives: develop convergent knowledge at
the intersection of environmental engineering and anthropology; provide U.S.
students the opportunity to develop interdisciplinary global skills and
competencies; and facilitate safe management of wastewater and integrated
recovery of resources in Costa Rica. The intellectual merit of this project
stems from interdisciplinary research combining the fields of environmental
engineering and anthropology to address issues of global importance in a
sustainable and culturally appropriate way. This convergent research will spur
the development of global skills and competencies and will facilitate safe
management of wastewater and recovery of resources in Costa Rica. In this IRES
program, undergraduate and graduate students will receive training and skill
development in water quality testing, life cycle assessment, life cycle cost
analysis, and qualitative and quantitative social science data collection and
analysis. Students will work in multidisciplinary teams to engage a wide range
of local stakeholders to identify and assess sustainability metrics relevant to
small wastewater treatment integrating resource recovery to support decision-
making in the sanitation sector. Students will assess triple-bottom line
(social, environmental, and economic) sustainability metrics and use multi-
criteria decision analysis (MCDA) to improve the long-term sustainability of
sanitation systems. A new MCDA tool will be developed based on the social,
environmental and economic context of Central America. The tool will allow
wastewater utilities in small communities serving populations of less than
10,000 to compare performance across multiple criteria for alternate solutions
at decentralized, semi-centralized and centralized scales of implementation.
IRES students will develop interdisciplinary skills and competencies while
addressing global sanitation challenges in the socioeconomic and cultural
context of Costa Rica. This, along with increased participation of students from
underrepresented groups, will contribute to training a diverse U.S. workforce.
The program will strengthen and expand the partnership between collaborators in
the U.S. and Costa Rica to facilitate progress toward safe management of
wastewater and integrated resource recovery in Costa
Rica.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.