* 2246810
* Synthesis of Main Group Compounds and Materials with Novel Structures and Optoelectronic Properties
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* John Protasiewicz, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 05/31/2026
* USD 590,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis program of the Division of Chemistry,
Professor John Protasiewicz and his students at the Department of Chemistry at
Case Western Reserve University are preparing compounds with P=C-containing
extended pi-electron systems. The inclusion of P=C units permits the optical and
electronic properties of the material to be tuned in order to maximize the
behavior of the material. A motivation for these studies is a need for
economical means to manufacture highly efficient lighting and displays. Methods
that utilize inexpensive and abundant elements and ones that minimize the
formation of wasteful and toxic byproducts are especially attractive. This
project envisions the preparation of low cost/lightweight/processable plastics
and materials related to light emitting technology. Examples, include polymers,
molecular electronics, light emitting diodes, photovoltaics, and flexible
electronics. The students trained and educated as part of this research program
are being prepared to enter tomorrow's skilled workforce in industry and
education. In addition to the technical broader impacts related to advanced
manufacturing, Professor Protasiewicz will co-organize and run programs directed
at raising awareness of mental health issues among graduate students and
faculty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Reactive main group systems will be synthesized
and their photophysical properties interrogated to advance and create new
paradigms in main group photophysical chemistry. This work explores several
interconnected research threads, inspired from previous studies on luminescent
1,3-benzoxaphospholes and 1,3-benzazaphospholes. A new class of photoluminescent
compounds (phospha-azulenes) bearing P=C bonds will be prepared to display
fluorescence from the S2 (not S1) excited state, thus breaking Kasha's rule.
Anti-Kasha compounds are rare and have desirable photophysical properties.
Unconventional hydrogen bonding between N-heterocyclic carbenes and fluorescent
secondary amines will be exploited to develop the supramolecular chemistry of
dicarbenes that can undergo hydrogen bonding to a fluorophores containing two NH
functional groups, which will offer new opportunities to develop materials that
could act as turn-on fluorescent sensors for select applications. Previous
studies also uncovered an unusual reaction that converts ortho-phosphinophenol
to benzodioxaphosphole. This process involves removing 6 hydrogen atoms and
making new PP and PO bonds. This process will be extended to other types of
bonds and and attempts will be made to make the process catalytic. The metal-
free systems to be developed in this research move away from previously reported
strategies based on expensive and/or toxic transition metals and concentrates on
elements that are less toxic and more earth abundant. Combined, these efforts
aim to advance and showcase the advantages that main group elements can offer to
the greater field of optoelectronic and structural
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.