* 2246258
* Collaborative Research: IRES Track I: Odonata morphological adaptations to environmental gradients in Ghana: integrating student research in the field, museum, and laboratory
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Jessica Ware, American Museum Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 05/31/2026
* USD 17,103.00

Global climate change has had profound impacts on food and water availability,
habitat availability, and infrastructure vulnerability, while threatening
biodiversity across all ecological scales. In this collaborative IRES project,
researchers will study the response and adaptation of dragonflies in different
climactic habitats, with the goal of broadening our understanding of the effects
of regional and global environmental change on biodiversity. The project will
recruit 18 U.S. student researchers to work on projects that are critically
important to document and preserve biodiversity and understand the adaptations
that allow successful colonization during rapid environmental change. Students
will be recruited from traditionally underrepresented groups to build capacity,
thereby increasing inclusion, equity, and innovation in the broader research
community. Further, students from both the U.S. and Ghana will be mentored by a
diverse, interdisciplinary, multi-institutional, and international team, gaining
a high degree of professional and personal development through exposure to a
variety of expertise at different types of institutions and in different
research contexts. Fostering international collaborations is a necessary step
for worldwide conservation of biodiversity due to climate change, and this
program will facilitate such an endeavor, as the research is a collaboration
among three institutions, The Pennsylvania State University, the American Museum
of Natural History, and the international host institution University of Cape
Coast in Ghana. This collaboration will allow us to leverage student and faculty
capacities built over the course of the project to extend to other countries
that share similar ecological concerns. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;West Africa is
thought to be one of the world’s most vulnerable regions to the effects of
anthropogenic environmental change and subsequent loss in biodiversity. However,
there remains a paucity of information on insect species biodiversity and their
distribution in the region, how rapid environmental change affects those
assemblages, and the morphological adaptations that may allow insects to adapt
to a changing environment. This project will exploit naturally occurring climate
ecozones within a small geographic range in Ghana to assess the effects of
environmental change, both natural and anthropogenic, on odonate biodiversity
and community structuring. Additionally, the project will assess the wing and
neural adaptations that contribute to successful colonization of diverse
habitats, which may predict insect survival and colonization in a rapidly
changing environment. In view of Ghana’s rapid habitat losses and quickly
changing landscape, this project offers the first comprehensive faunal studies
for databasing, future monitoring, and conservation of the undocumented and
underrepresented odonata species of Ghana. Leveraging methodology from material
sciences and neurobiology, this project also will link phenotypic variation in
morphological attributes (e.g., optical properties, durability of wings,
mushroom bodies) with variation in environmental factors across the three
ecozones of Ghana. Doing so will elucidate which morphological characteristics
allow successful colonization of different habitat types. Overall, this project
will extend our knowledge on the effects of environmental change on odonata
distributions, as well as the morphological adaptations that correlate with
variation in environmental factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.