* 2246962
* Commutative algebra in algebraic geometry and algebraic combinatorics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Patricia Klein, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Tim Hodges
* 07/31/2026
* USD 165,000.00

Many constraints governing real-world problems, such as those arising in
robotics or statistics, are described (or approximated) by solutions to
polynomial equations. The set of solutions to a polynomial equation makes up a
geometric object in multi-dimensional space (e.g., the set of solutions to the
equation y=x^2 is a parabola in 2-space). The intersection of several of these
geometric objects is made up of the points that are solutions to all of
polynomial equations cutting out those geometric objects. When such an
intersection consists of finitely many points, it is natural to ask how many
points. Questions of this nature have been of broad interest within algebraic
geometry and algebraic combinatorics since at least the time of Hermann Schubert
(1848-1911), whose methodology for solving these problems forms the basis of
what is now called Schubert calculus. The PI will apply techniques from
commutative algebra to solve problems in modern-day Schubert calculus. Through
her research program, she will train graduate students. She will also promote
gender equity in the mathematical sciences by taking on leadership roles in
conferences and research communities for women and non-binary mathematicians
working in commutative algebra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary theme of this
research project is the use of combinatorial models to understand affine
varieties and the algebro-geometric significance of these combinatorial models.
The PI will first focus on Schubert varieties in the complete flag variety and
the Groebner geometry of several classes of related affine varieties. A
motivating problem is to understand the Schubert structure constants. Another
family of problems concerns the connection between Gorenstein liaison and
Groebner degenerations. The PI will use this connection to study a range of
combinatorially-natural varieties. She will also further the understanding of
Gorenstein liaison itself. A link between these two focuses is the family of
alternating sign matrix (ASM) varieties, which are generalizations of matrix
Schubert varieties. Understanding when and why ASM varieties fail to exhibit
various “niceness” properties of matrix Schubert varieties will shed light on
which features of matrix Schubert varieties are essential to their good
behavior. It will also facilitate the use of ASM varieties in testing an open
question in Gorenstein liaison.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.