* 2246174
* CRII:RI:Toward Socially-diverse Multi-document Summarization
* CSE,IIS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2025
* Ameeta Agrawal, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Eleni Miltsakaki
* 03/31/2025
* USD 169,989.00

User-generated social data such as microblogs, discussion posts, and product
reviews often contain rich expressions of opinions and thoughts, near real-time
information, and diverse perspectives on a wide range of topics from health to
socio-political movements. Such data represents many unique perspectives
originating from people from many different walks of life and belonging to
different social groups. Accessing such data is relatively easy; however,
extracting important and meaningful information to get a holistic view from such
an overwhelming volume of unstructured, noisy, and redundant data remains
extremely challenging. Automatic text summarization models are important
computational tools that enable identification of salient pieces of text by
condensing several documents into a short, concise summary, with most algorithms
focusing on improving the quality of the summaries along dimensions of fluency,
factuality, coherence and so on. However, when it comes to summarizing socially
diverse data, an important yet overlooked dimension of quality is the breadth of
diverse perspectives that a summary encapsulates. This research aims to improve
text summarization algorithms for socially rich data and is specifically
motivated by applications in natural language
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will leverage social diversity, a
unique characteristic of social data, for improving the overall quality of
multi-document summaries. The technical aims of the project are divided into two
thrusts. The first thrust develops a suite of novel datasets of summaries
corresponding to multiple documents from different socially salient groups that
can serve as reliable benchmarks for model training and evaluation. The second
thrust develops new unsupervised and few-shot learning algorithms for generating
high quality extractive and abstractive summaries reflecting a broad spectrum of
diverse perspectives. This thrust will develop new methods for integrating
diversity constraints into summarization algorithms as well as jointly
optimizing summaryâ€™s textual quality and social diversity. The novel methods
will be complemented by a comprehensive evaluation plan including several
summarization metrics of automatic and human evaluation. This research effort
will create cross-disciplinary opportunities for bringing together researchers
and students from language technology and fairness communities to develop new
datasets and algorithms for generating socially diverse
summaries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.