* 2246877
* Combinatorics and Braid Varieties
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Nathan Williams, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2026
* USD 210,000.00

Algebraic combinatorics is a branch of mathematics that studies algebraic
structures using combinatorial methods, and combinatorial structures using
algebraic methods. Such structures and methods are often fundamental to many
different scientific disciplines and show up in many different contexts---
algebraic combinatorics therefore has diverse applications to subjects like
cryptography, protein folding, high-energy physics, and quantum computing. This
project will use algebraic objects and methods to produce new combinatorial
results, leveraging braid varieties--a sort of algebraic space associated to a
knot--as a unifying tool. Funds will additionally support training graduate
students and outreach efforts, including work on an interactive online discrete
mathematics textbook.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In more detail, this proposal
suggests a framework for producing combinatorial results using braid varieties
over finite fields, Hecke algebra traces, rational Cherednik algebras, and a new
relationship with noncrossing combinatorics. The framework has already proven
successful in producing substantial new results: the PI's recent joint work with
Galashin, Lam, and Trinh resolved two decades-long open problems in Coxeter-
Catalan combinatorics, simultaneously producing the first definition of rational
noncrossing Coxeter-Catalan objects, while also giving the first uniform
enumeration of noncrossing objects. Connections to Macdonald theory--diagonal
harmonics and q,t-combinatorics--are also expected when working over the complex
numbers. At different levels of generality, different techniques become
available. For finite Coxeter groups, it is possible to compute everything in a
case-by-case manner using an explicit decomposition of the Hecke algebra, and
there are many interesting combinatorial and representation-theoretic problems
open for immediate attack. Special classes of elements in finite type have
favorable representation-theoretic properties that allow for uniform approaches.
For affine Weyl groups, the main tool is a trace formula for translations, due
to Opdam. For example, the proposed framework recovers some Tessler matrix
identities due to Haglund in this setting. For general Kac-Moody Weyl groups, we
are reduced to general recursive and cluster-theoretic methods. These methods
also apply in both the finite and affine cases, but will require software
implementation before further exploration is possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.