* 2246805
* Deliberate Design and Synthesis of Thionated Organic Photosensitizers Activated by One- and Two-Photon Absorption in the Near-Infrared
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Carlos Crespo-Hern치ndez, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Francis D'Souza
* 06/30/2026
* USD 535,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms-B (CSDM-B)
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Carlos E. Crespo-Hern치ndez of the
Department of Chemistry at Case Western Reserve University is developing new
classes of organic compounds absorbing one or two photons in the near-infrared
(NIR). The goal of this research is to design and synthesize biocompatible
organic compounds absorbing in the NIR for photodynamic therapy and other light-
induced applications. The project includes elements of organic, physical,
computational, and materials chemistry, and is therefore well suited to the
education and training of early career scientists. Outreach and research-focused
activities involving economically disadvantaged and underrepresented high school
students are planned as an integral part of the funded project. Through
Professor Carlos E. Crespo-Hern치ndez's ongoing collaborations, students receive
a unique cross-disciplinary and multi-cultural training research experience,
with the potential for international exchange and engagement between US
chemistry students and those abroad, commensurate with the globalization of
science and technology. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Developing new organic compounds
and controlling their emissive and intersystem crossing properties represent a
major priority for many phenomena of significance to society. This research may
hold the key to the development of new photo-drugs for the treatment of cancer,
imaging-guided cancer phototherapy, photodynamic inactivation of microorganisms,
and the development of fluorescent biomarkers, which will facilitate their use
in biotechnical and biomedical applications. For example, photodynamic therapy
(PDT) is a clinically approved therapeutic procedure that is rapidly entering
the mainstream of cancer treatments. Research in PDT has concentrated primarily
on the development of photosensitizers (PSs) that incorporate heavy transition
metals to increase their triplet yields. Besides poor selectivity for the target
tissue, such metal complexes frequently suffer from high dark cytotoxicity and
are often costly and difficult to synthesize. Professor Carlos E. Crespo-
Hern치ndez's group has spearheaded the development of PSs based on the thionation
of nucleic acid derivatives. Building on this discovery, this research focuses
on the synthesis of carbonyl- and thiocarbonyl-containing chromophores and the
study of their one- and two-photon absorption properties upon NIR laser
excitation. Their photophysical properties, including singlet-triplet spin-orbit
coupling constants, triplet decay lifetimes, and quantum yields of singlet
oxygen generation, will be measured. The proposed chemistry is expected to yield
new organic PSs capable of absorbing one or two photons in the NIR therapeutic
window, a necessary pre-condition for developing an effective PDT
agent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.