* 2246470
* RUI: Primary and Secondary Coordination Sphere Effects in Ruthenium-Catalyzed Base-Free Hydrogen Transfer Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Steven Kalman, Stockton University
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 08/31/2026
* USD 219,632.00

With support from the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Steven Kalman of Stockton University is studying the development of new
catalysts that can add hydrogen to organic compounds (hydrogenation). These
reactions are important for making products ranging from pharmaceuticals to
fragrances and any number of fine chemicals. Traditionally these types of
reactions are done using specialized equipment and hydrogen gas. The work
proposed here bypasses the storage of hydrogen by generating hydrogen during the
reaction from readily available precursors. Another emphasis of this research is
to make the reactions simpler and less expensive. This will be done through
design by constructing catalysts that perform hydrogenations using mild
conditions. This funding will support the work of undergraduate students from
diverse backgrounds by providing training in various chemistry techniques and an
immersive summer research experience. This unique opportunity is preparing them
for both obtaining advanced degrees in science fields and contributing to a
globally competitive STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics)
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The hydrogenation of double and triple bonds is
an important reaction in the synthesis of various organic compounds. Transfer
hydrogenation is a reaction that uses an easily handled reagent like isopropyl
alcohol as a substitute for hydrogen gas, negating the use of specialized
equipment associated with using gaseous reagents. Most catalysts for this
reaction require the use of base additives and/or an atmosphere free of oxygen
and moisture. Dr. Kalman and his research group are developing new ruthenium
catalysts based on imidazole carboxamide ligands that operate under aerobic
conditions and without additives, which allows for a simpler and less expensive
reaction setup. These catalysts operate by metal-ligand cooperation in which the
ligand participates in the bond breaking and bond forming steps rather than
acting solely as a spectator in the reaction. Specifically, Dr. Kalman and his
students are studying how modifications to the ligand structure impact the
catalytic activities of the ruthenium complexes, leading to the development of
more active and selective catalysts. Further, they are applying these new
catalysts to other organic reactions such as acceptorless dehydrogenation, a
reaction that is important in both organic synthesis and hydrogen
storage.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.