* 2246630
* Bifurcations in Complex Algebraic Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Laura DeMarco, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Tyson
* 06/30/2026
* USD 446,934.00

The stability of a dynamical system is arguably its most important feature, from
a theoretical, computational, or practical point of view. For systems that
evolve with time, one aims to determine which perturbations will preserve the
system’s long-term behavior and which perturbations will lead to radically
different outcomes. This project concerns stability and bifurcations in the
setting of complex algebraic dynamical systems. Such systems are defined by
polynomial formulas in one or several variables. The algebraic nature of the
defining equations connect the dynamical study with the rich theory of algebraic
geometry. Moreover, in the case of examples where all of the defining
polynomials have, for example, integer coefficients, the relevant dynamical
stability questions have surprising connections to number theory and to the
Diophantine geometry of the underlying equations. The project will extend the
theory of dynamical stability for complex analytic examples to new settings that
arise naturally in arithmetic geometry and complex dynamics. The project also
provides research and training opportunities for graduate students and
postdocs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project develops the theory of stability for
analytic families of maps on projective spaces, in both a complex analytic
setting and in the setting of non-archimedean-valued fields and p-adic analysis.
It was recently discovered, in earlier work of the PI and of other researchers,
that certain questions about height functions and arithmetic intersection theory
can be analyzed using complex dynamics. In a series of recent breakthroughs in
arithmetic geometry, especially concerning uniform bounds for numbers of
rational points on families of algebraic varieties, stability theory played a
crucial--if somewhat hidden--role. This project aims to shed new light on the
role of stability theory and to push the theory further. Many of the proposed
problems and applications of the theory are related to the occurrence of
`unlikely intersections’ in families of abelian varieties or in more general
families of polarized dynamical systems. Specific goals of this project include
(1) to characterize positivity properties of certain bifurcation currents and
measures; (2) to provide bounds on the geometry of invariant subvarieties for
algebraic dynamical systems; and (3) to formulate a theory of bifurcations in
the setting of p-adic analytic families of maps. The research activity conducted
under this award is expected to impact multiple areas of mathematics, including
number theory, geometry, and dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.