* 2246080
* CRII: CPS: Towards Efficient Shared Electric Micromobility: An Interaction-aware Management Framework for Mobile Cyber-Physical Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Yu Yang, Lehigh University
* Standard Grant
* Ralph Wachter
* 04/30/2025
* USD 175,000.00

Shared electric micromobility (SEM) services such as shared electric bikes and
scooters, as an emerging example of mobile cyber-physical systems, have been
increasingly popular in recent years for short-distance trips such as from bus
stops to home, enabling convenient mobility through multi-modal transportation
and less environmental impact by reducing emission by traffic congestion.
However, the success of the service depends on the effective and efficient
management of thousands of electric vehicles (e.g., bikes or scooters). Existing
management frameworks mainly focused on balancing demand and supply considering
energy recharging. However, most of them, if not all, ignored human interactions
with systems (e.g., how users select and use vehicles), which leads to a
significant gap between experimental and real-world effectiveness. The objective
of this project is to develop an interaction-aware management framework for
mobile cyber-physical systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project leverages and
innovates machine learning and CPS techniques to fill the critical gap of
interaction-aware management, thereby providing an integrated framework for
human-in-the-loop CPS. The project tasks include: (1) designing new prediction
algorithms based on adaptive spatial-temporal correlations to predict the real-
time demand of micromobility vehicles, (2) designing new prediction models to
imitate human interactions and new control algorithms to rebalance and charge
vehicles considering human interactions, and (3) testing the approaches in a
real-world testbed of a micromobility service provider. The success of this
project could lead to a paradigm shift in CPS with human-in-the-loop by
explicitly incorporating human interaction modeling and prediction. The proposal
is timely due to the increasing interest in micromobility services and human-in-
the-loop systems, as well as the proliferation of computing artifacts that
interact with or monitor the physical world. This project will also contribute
to the curriculum of CPS courses and will engage undergraduate and graduate
students in STEM disciplines and from underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.