* 2246498
* RUI: Synergistic biodegradation of polyethylene terepthalate (PET) plastic by microbial consortia
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Jay Mellies, Reed College
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 06/30/2026
* USD 828,353.00

With nearly 400 million metric tons of new plastics produced every year and with
recycling rates at only 9%, the majority of plastics eventually enter the
environment. Single-use items, such as water bottles and food containers, and
textiles made from polyethylene terephthalate (PET) comprise a significant
proportion of this waste. With the idea of creating a more circular PET economy,
a community of soil bacteria with the ability to degrade PET plastic waste was
identified. The overall goal of this project is to determine how this bacterial
community achieves this environmentally and potentially commercially important
feat. Undergraduates and high school students will participate in the research.
An emphasis will be placed on recruiting underrepresented minority and first-
generation student researchers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Previous research
identified a snapshot of bacterial genes induced during the late exponential
phase of growth on PET plastic. This information, combined with metagenome
analysis indicated that synergistic cross-feeding among a consortium of soil
bacteria was partly responsible for the ability to degrade PET plastic. In this
project, threshold requirements for PET degradation will be explored by RNA
sequencing to analyze the gene products necessary for colonization by the
bacteria and for polymer cleavage during the initial stages of growth. Informed
by these analyses, individual genes within the metagenome will be targeted for
creating deletion mutations. Genes targeted for deletion will include those
encoding biosurfactants, uptake systems, enzymes known to degrade and metabolize
PET, and regulators that perceive environmental signals. The mutants will be
analyzed by HPLC and NMR to monitor breakdown products, thus allowing inference
of which genes contribute to PET degradation within the consortium. Such a
systems approach offers an avenue to understand the observed synergistic growth
of microbes on PET and has the potential to revolutionize understanding of how
plastics are recycled in natural environments. In turn, this knowledge could be
applied to create a more circular plastics economy using bio-recycling
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.