* 2246813
* Conference: Conference on Frontiers in Applied and Computational Mathematics (FACM 2023): New trends in computational wave propagation and imaging
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2024
* Michael Siegel, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Jodi Mead
* 04/30/2024
* USD 34,778.00

This grant supports the participation of graduate students, postdoctoral
fellows, and junior faculty in the conference ``Frontiers in Applied and
Computational Mathematics'' (FACM) to be held May 26-27, 2023 at NJIT. This 18th
conference in the FACM meeting series will be devoted to promising recent
research in the field of computational wave propagation and imaging. Wave
scattering and imaging problems are pervasive in a variety of engineering and
industrial applications. These include, for instance, the design of
optoelectronic devices such as lasers and solar panels, stealth technology,
medical imaging, and nondestructive testing of materials (in which a prescribed
incident electromagnetic wave is used to illuminate a sample and identify the
location and shape of cracks or defects). Another important example comes from
microchip design, which involves challenging wave propagation problems in
multilayer materials that call for new numerical methods. Despite numerous
successes, challenges remain in, e.g., high-frequency problems, wave scattering
in complex media, design of fast algorithms, and the application of new
techniques based on machine-learning, among others. The conference brings
together a diverse group of mathematicians, statisticians, scientists, and
engineers to present their research in an environment that promotes significant
interaction and cross-fertilization among the participants.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The FACM 2023 conference theme is ``New trends in
computational wave propagation and imaging,’’ and will focus on several problem
areas that have either been established as areas of major significance in
applied mathematics, or as emerging research fields with exceptional potential.
These are: (1) inverse problems and imaging, (2) integral equation and high-
frequency methods, (3) optimal transport in optical design, and (4) applications
of machine learning in PDE's and inverse problems. The field of computational
wave propagation and imaging has grown rapidly in the past two decades, fueled
by industrial applications and supported by rapid development in mathematical
theory and novel approaches stemming from advances in, for example, nonlinear
optimization, randomized and fast linear solvers, and machine learning/data
science. Despite the progress, numerous challenges remain, for instance, in
treating high frequency problems with multiple scattering effects, computational
inversion with limited (sparse, incomplete, or both) data, and high dimensional
problems, among many others. In addition, there is a strong need for fundamental
theory that can lead to a better understanding of the mathematical underpinnings
of the new algorithms. FACM 2023 presents an ideal forum to stimulate new
strategies to tackle these challenging problems through cross-fertilization of
ideas and new collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.