* 2246949
* CAS: Reaction and Deactivation Implications of Pore structure, Nodal Identity, and Coordination Environment on Small-molecule Oxidations by Metal-organic Frameworks
* MPS,CHE
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Michele Sarazen, Princeton University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 03/31/2026
* USD 499,999.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Michele L. Sarazen of Princeton University is studying selective oxidation
reactions that are central in a variety of pharmaceutical, fine chemical, and
other chemical industry processes. Specifically, this work is directed at the
design of advanced catalysts with high reactivity, selectivity, and stability
that can efficiently and sustainably address our growing energy and product
demands through combined synthesis, characterization, and reaction analysis.
Metal-organic frameworks (MOFs) are a class of materials attractive for many
chemistries, including oxidations. This proposal aims to provide understanding
of how MOFs behave under model operating conditions, their deactivation
pathways, and their reactivation. If successful, the results of these studies
will help guide further research, not only in catalysis but also for other
applications such as gas capture and separations, energy storage, drug delivery,
and sensors. Additional implications for commercial sustainability from
understanding material limitations can improve existing materials in terms of
thermochemical robustness and stability, and reducing waste from spent
catalysts. Similarly, this work prioritizes sustainable practices by considering
cheaper and more abundant metals and more benign oxidants compared to many
current industrial processes. PI Sarazen will continue her engagement in
scientific outreach and educational programs that aim to increase diversity
within the scientific community through demonstrations in on-/off-campus
outreach events that utilize these catalysts in the oxidation of dye molecules
found in wastewater, offering exciting, vibrant color changes that can be used
to promote the power of catalyst applications and public scientific literacy on
sustainable industrial chemistry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves
the study of liquid-phase oxidation reactions valuable for industrial
applications through experimental and computational characterizations. The
regularly distributed metal centers in open crystalline MOF networks will be
used to build structure-function relations and elucidate reaction and
deactivation mechanisms during representative oxidation reactions of 1-octene,
where rigorous kinetic experiments will be coupled with characterization
techniques and computational modelling. Specifically, this proposed work will
investigate physicochemically tunable Fe-based MIL MOFs during hydrogen
peroxide-assisted oxidation of conformationally and synthetically modular
1-octene to quantify the impacts of pore hydrophobicity, acidity, and Fe active
site coordination sphere perturbations on observed reactivity, selectivity, and
stability. The results of this experimental study will motivate computational
investigations with density functional theory by taking advantage of the
crystalline nature of MOFs and could develop trends that predict promising
material compositions or methods to improve existing materials for a desired
application. The framework described here for studying entire catalytic
lifecycles, including specific mechanistic details for oxidation reactions on
Fe-carboxylate MOFs, has the potential to provide a foundation that can be
extended to improve catalyst efficiency for other reactions of various
feedstocks related to hydrocarbon and oxygenate processing from carbon upgrading
(petroleum/biomass/waste refining) over different MOF architectures and even
different energy (i.e., electrocatalytic, photocatalytic)
inputs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.