* 2246766
* Intertwining ideas for some problems in probability
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Pierre Patie, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Wilmer
* 06/30/2026
* USD 300,000.00

Stochastic models play a vital role in understanding complex phenomena that
occur in the natural, social, and engineering sciences. Obtaining comprehensive
and accurate information about these models is crucial for gaining a systematic
understanding of the modeled system and for designing effective problem-solving
strategies. The objective of this project is to provide fresh perspectives in
the study of recently proposed models in various areas of mathematical physics
and finance. The underlying concept is to establish a connection between a
simple stochastic dynamic, which is easily analyzable and well-understood, and a
family of complex stochastic models. This connection allows for the transfer of
fundamental properties from the reference model to the entire family. To achieve
this, the project aims to deepen the understanding of classification schemes can
connect models of disparate phenomena. In fact, all stochastic models within a
class are linked solely by a set of points known as the spectrum, which remains
independent of the dynamics' structure. In addition to theoretical development,
this project also incorporates a computational component: its goal is to develop
precise and efficient numerical schemes for simulating such complex models. Both
undergraduate and graduate students will participate, in an inclusive learning
environment where students can contribute and gain valuable experience. The
awardee will also organize conferences, facilitating opportunities for scholars
and researchers to collaborate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By combining theoretical
insights with practical computational methods, this project strives to advance
the understanding and applicability of general Markov semigroups on Hilbert
spaces. It encompasses three primary objectives, which can be described as
follows: first, to deevelop a novel methodology to characterize different
isospectral orbits, including unitary, intertwining, interweaving, and weak
similarity orbits, of Markov semigroups on Hilbert spaces. This methodology aims
to provide a comprehensive understanding of the various orbits exhibited by
these semigroups. Second to utilize the aforementioned classification schemes to
identify analytical, ergodic, and mixing properties that can be transferred from
the reference semigroup to its corresponding orbit. Particular emphasis will be
placed on studying Markov processes residing in subsets of Euclidean space and
Weyl chambers, with the goal of conducting an in-depth analysis of dynamical
determinantal point processes. Third, to use the classification schemes
developed in this project to design precise and exact algorithms for simulating
these dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.