* 2246508
* CAS: Collaborative Research: Photophysics and Electron Transfer Reactivity of Ion Radical Excited States
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Kirk Schanze, University of Texas at San Antonio
* Standard Grant
* Francis D'Souza
* 05/31/2026
* USD 475,104.00

With support of the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms-B (CSDM-B)
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Kirk S. Schanze of the Department
of Chemistry at the University of Texas at San Antonio, and Professor Aim√©e
Tomlinson of the Department of Chemistry at the University of North Georgia are
studying the properties of charged organic radicals with useful properties as
photosensitizers for organic reactions and solar energy conversion. The project
lies at the interface of organic, physical, and computational chemistry and is
well suited for broad education of chemical scientists at all levels. The
investigators will leverage the diverse populations at their respective
universities to engage underrepresented students in all aspects of the research.
This collaboration will provide engaged research students access to the feedback
loop between theory and experiment thus enriching their chemical research
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to provide an understanding of
the factors that control ion radical doublet excited states and their electron
transfer reactivity, through a collaborative approach involving experimental
photophysics and computational chemistry using density functional theory and
time dependent density functional theory. Stable anion and cation radicals of a
variety of molecules will be prepared by chemical reduction or oxidation
followed by characterization of their photophysical properties through
picosecond transient absorption and fluorescence spectroscopy methods. Key
parameters to be determined include the lifetime and energy of the doublet
excited state, along with the radiative and non-radiative decay rate constants.
The experimental results will be utilized to inform structure-property
relationships for the ion radical doublet excited states, with specific aim to
delineate whether an energy gap law correlation exists between their energy and
non-radiative decay rate. Theory will be used to identify molecular systems that
are optimized with respect to doublet excited state energy and lifetime thereby,
guiding the design of optimized electron transfer
photosensitizers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.