* 2246000
* American Geophysical Union (AGU) Chapman Conference on Advances in Understanding Alfven Waves in the Sun and the Heliosphere; Berlin, Germany; May 28-June 2, 2023
* GEO,AGS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Royce Hanson, American Geophysical Union
* Standard Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 12/31/2023
* USD 49,960.00

Alfvén waves in space plasmas have been studied for several decades. They have
been recorded in the magnetospheres of planets (e.g., Earth, Jupiter), the solar
wind, as well as the solar atmosphere. Despite the great differences in the
plasma properties of these regions, the overarching themes of research are wave
generation, wave propagation, and wave dissipation, which are three fundamental
aspects of any kind of waves. A fourth aspect of waves is their application,
either with direct benefit to humans or for scientific pursuit. This grant funds
support for an international conference focusing on research in Alfven waves.
Support includes travel for student and early career scientists to participate
and present at the conference. An AGU monograph and a special issue of a journal
are planned for disseminating the results presented.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Chapman Conference on Advances in Understanding Alfven Waves in the Sun and the
Heliosphere will be held in Berlin, Germany from May 28-June 2, 2023. This
interdisciplinary conference aims to bring together scientists from different
communities to review and discuss the current state of research on Alfven waves
in space plasmas, including the solar atmosphere, the solar wind, planetary
magnetospheres and ionospheres, and laboratory plasmas (if relevant to space
plasmas). Two prior wave-related Chapman conferences focused on ultra-low
frequency waves (Magnetospheric ULF waves in 2005, Low-frequency waves in space
plasmas in 2014). While the first one focused on waves in Earth’s magnetosphere,
the second one was interdisciplinary, including waves in the solar atmosphere
and other planetary magnetospheres (e.g., Jupiter,
Mars).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.