* 2246281
* CAREER: Advancing Theory and Practice of Robust Simulation Analysis Under Input Model Risk
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2022,08/31/2026
* Eunhye Song, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 08/31/2026
* USD 459,174.00

This Faculty Early Career Development Program (CAREER) grant advances the
national health, prosperity and welfare by creating a robust decision-making
framework for data-driven simulation. Due to its flexibility in capturing system
randomness, simulation has been a popular tool to support decision-making
problems that arise in manufacturing, healthcare, defense, finance, and other
domains. However, simulation analysis is subject to “model risk” of drawing an
incorrect statistical inference due to discrepancy between the real system and
the simulation model. Failure to account for such risk may lead to poor quality
decisions made on the basis of these models. This research focuses on “input
model risk” that arises when the probability distribution functions driving
randomness in a simulation model are estimated based on the available data. The
project will study methods to quantify, reduce, and ensure robust decisions
under input model risk. In particular, a new robust decision-making framework
will be studied to balance a practical user input on acceptable suboptimality
and robustness to the statistical error in the simulation model. The education
mission of this grant is to train current and next-generation STEM workforce to
make model risk a central focus of simulation analysis and equip them with
computational tools to employ. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will enable
input model risk quantification for complex simulated systems that are here-to-
fore practically infeasible due to computationally complexity. A minimum-cost
simulation experiment design will be obtained by applying the likelihood ratio
method and solving a bilevel optimization problem. Moreover, a Gaussian process
(GP) metamodel will be created to predict the simulation output mean as a
function of both parametric and nonparametric input models. This GP metamodel
will serve as a vehicle to design a comprehensive framework for all three steps
of the robust simulation analysis life cycle: (1) risk quantification, (2)
robust optimization, and (3) risk reduction. The concept of “practically robust”
optimality will be newly defined by accounting for the user-specified practical
optimality gap of interest. This framework will reduce conservatism of existing
methods while achieving the level of robustness the user desires. To find a
practically robust optimum, an efficient simulation optimization algorithm,
which sequentially allocates simulation effort guided by GP inference, will be
created. Finally, an actionable guidance to reduce input model risk will be
provided by optimizing the data collection plan to attain a stronger statistical
performance guarantee for the practically robust
optimum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.