* 2246564
* CAREER: Multiplexed and Selective Molecular Sensing Based on Raman Enhancement Through 2D Materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2022,08/31/2025
* Shengxi Huang, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Leon Shterengas
* 08/31/2025
* USD 392,541.00

Nontechnical Description: The sensing of biochemical molecules has growing
importance in various fields including Internet of Things (IoT), big data- and
machine learning-enabled health monitoring, disease diagnosis, environmental
monitoring, and food safety. An ideal molecular sensing platform should be
highly sensitive, selective, label-free, generating reproducible signal, and
able to detect multiple analytes simultaneously (multiplexity). Nowadays,
advanced sensors can achieve high sensitivity and stability using electronic,
optical or electrochemical mechanisms. With the assistance of receptors (meaning
prior knowledge of the analytes is required), high selectivity of analytes can
also be realized. However, high multiplexity within short measurement time and
without prior knowledge is still beyond maturity. In this context, Raman
spectroscopy, which probes the molecular vibrational modes through the
measurement of light scattering, stands out as a promising method to achieve all
the above requirements, in particular multiplexity and label-free, due to the
multiple, extremely narrow and fingerprinting peaks in Raman spectra. While the
main drawback of Raman spectroscopy is the weak signal, surface-enhanced Raman
spectroscopy has been developed to mediate this issue with even single-molecule
sensitivity using structured metal substrates, yet it has suffered from signal
non-uniformity and noise. An alternative, Raman enhancement through two-
dimensional materials (RE2D), replaces metallic substrates with 2D materials, a
type of material only one atom or a few atoms thick. RE2D has exhibited
significantly improved signal uniformity and low noise with the added advantage
of tunability. This project will explore the fundamental science and techniques
to further enhance the sensitivity and multiplexity of RE2D technology, by
fabricating various types of 2D material substrates, combining 2D materials with
metallic substrates, and applying electrical voltage to tune the enhancement.
The research outcome will also be used as educational tools for research-like
undergraduate and graduate courses. In addition, the PI will initiate a
mentoring program for female graduate students, which will broadly benefit Penn
State female students in their research, study, work-life balance and career
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical Description: This project aims to
generate new fundamental understanding of the novel phenomenon of Raman
enhancement through two-dimensional materials (RE2D), i.e. the enhancement of
Raman signals of organic analyte molecules when placed on 2D material surfaces.
This new knowledge will pave the way for an entirely new family of sensors that
combine a number of desired features: high multiplexity, molecular selectivity,
unprecedented signal reliability, and tunability. By further integrating
plasmonic structures with 2D materials, high sensitivity will be achieved. The
project is organized around two main thrusts: (1) analysis of the effects of 2D
material-analyte molecule pairing on RE2D, as well as the tunability of
molecular selection in RE2D; and (2) determination of the combined effects of
chemical and electromagnetic mechanisms on Raman enhancement in a 2D-plasmonic
integrated substrate. The fundamental science revealed and the prototype devices
demonstrated will effectively guide the design and fabrication of sensitive and
multiplexed RE2D sensors. The research outcomes will be integrated into the
education and outreach activities: creating research-like courses and Research
Experience for Undergraduate programs on Raman-based nanosensors and 2D material
optoelectronics, which cultivate studentsâ€™ abilities of critical thinking and
motivate them to find solutions to societal problems using advanced
technologies. The PI will also initiate a women graduate student mentoring
program, and pair female Penn State alumnae mentors with female graduate
students to support their long-term success.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.