* 2246693
* Stereoselective Reactions of Aromatic Building Blocks
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Jeffrey Johnson, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2026
* USD 515,013.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Jeffrey Johnson of the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
will study the reaction chemistry of abundant aromatic starting materials.
Molecular complexity and sustainability are considerable challenges for the
field of chemistry. Professor Johnson and his team are seeking to develop new
chemical reactions that generate highly functionalized and useful products from
simpler and abundant feedstock chemicals. It is expected that some of the highly
functionalized products will find applications as bioactive compounds in
chemical biology and medicinal chemistry. Catalysis will play a central role in
these studies, which are expected to provide new experimental tools for the
chemical community. The research impacts will be complemented by the research
team’s efforts in outreach to elementary schools and the general public, and
through support for students from underrepresented groups in science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
generation of highly functionalized and stereochemically defined small molecule
building blocks is central to many scientific endeavors, particularly in the
realm of chemical synthesis for applications in chemical biology. Aromatic
compounds are seldom viewed as useful starting molecules for stereoselective
synthesis of nonaromatic materials due to their inherent stability and relative
inertness. Professor Johnson’s team is pursuing a multipronged approach to the
development of catalytic pathways that convert achiral aromatic starting
materials into useful, stereoenriched, chiral building blocks, including highly
functionalized systems and heterocycles. The Johnson laboratory aims to
transform achiral aromatic compounds into chiral carbocycles through catalyzed
dearomatization reactions such as carbenoid transfer and reduction under mild
conditions. Application to the rapid generation of natural products and natural
product mimics is expected during the course of these
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.