* 2246747
* OPTICAL SENSING AND CHEMOMETRIC ANALYSIS OF CHIRAL COMPOUNDS
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Christian Wolf, Georgetown University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 08/31/2026
* USD 544,758.00

With support of the Chemical Structure, Dynamic &amp; Mechanism B Program of the
Chemistry Division, Professor Christian Wolfâ€™s research group of the Department
of Chemistry at Georgetown University is developing optical sensing methodology
that accelerates and broadens chiral compound analysis by introducing widely
applicable small-molecule probes, conceptually new molecular recognition
strategies, artificial intelligence tools, and automated high-throughput
experimentation technology. This research has the potential to push current
research and development boundaries, transform cumbersome analysis protocols,
and unfold new opportunities, for example, continuous asymmetric reaction
development workflows that eliminate slow and work-intensive laboratory
practice. The proposed work is highly collaborative involving industrial and
academic partners and provides multiple training opportunities for graduate,
undergraduate and high school students from groups underrepresented in
science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chiroptical sensing assays for primary and
secondary amines, amino alcohols, amino acids, alcohols and hydroxy acids have
been introduced to date. However, comprehensive sensing--determination of
absolute configuration, selectivity, and concentration--remains a challenge for
a number of systems. These include (a) compounds devoid of functionalities such
as nitriles, esters, amides, tertiary amines or aromatic scaffolds, (b)
substrates that possess more than one chirality center and (c) multicomponent
mixtures. To overcome these limitations, new molecular probe designs that
quickly capture currently elusive chiral target compounds in solution and report
the molecular recognition event via spontaneous chirality amplification across
stereodynamic receptor scaffolds into a distinct and quantifiable chiroptical
(circular dichroism and UV/vis absorption) response will be introduced. In
addition, organic reaction based multi-modal optical chirality sensing
methodology and chemometrics capable of orthogonal data fusion and spectral
deconvolution will be developed to achieve comprehensive sensing of complicated
mixtures by eliminating the common need for physical separation prior to the
analysis. Finally, machine learning will be integrated with chiroptical high-
throughput screening technology to enable original asymmetric catalysis
discoveries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.