* 2246561
* Multifaceted regulation of the DNA repair machinery and suppression of aberrant transcription by telomere proteins
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2027
* Neal Lue, Joan and Sanford I. Weill Medical College of Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Manju Hingorani
* 05/31/2027
* USD 910,000.00

At the ends of chromosomes, structures known as telomeres play an important role
in protecting the integrity of genetic information contained in DNA. Telomeres
can be likened to aglets, the caps at the tips of shoelaces; when the aglets are
missing, the shoelaces (chromosomes) get frayed and fall apart. Many proteins
work together to protect telomere DNA, and defects in these proteins can lead to
chromosome destabilization. This study will provide insights into abnormal
transactions at telomeres and improve understanding of how genetic information
is protected. This project will also provide opportunities for training many
community college students in the technical and critical thinking skills
necessary for future scientific careers, and therefore have broadly beneficial
impacts on society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Telomeres are specialized nucleoprotein
structures that allow cells to distinguish normal chromosome ends from double
strand breaks. When these structures are defective, telomere DNA becomes
deprotected and is subjected to abnormal “repair” reactions, which can include
degradation, recombination, and end-to-end fusion. Our understanding of the
factors that mediate and regulate abnormal telomere repair is incomplete. For
example, abnormal telomeres are often transcribed at high levels, and both the
mechanisms of transcription and the functional significance of the transcripts
are poorly understood. This study will address two major questions. First, how
are abnormal telomere repair pathways regulated by the cell cycle? Second, what
factors are involved in abnormal telomere transcription and how do the
transcripts impact abnormal telomere repair? The project will combine
biochemical and molecular genetic approaches to address these questions in the
fungus Ustilago maydis (a maize pathogen) that has well-developed genetic tools
and significant similarities to animal cells with respect to telomere
regulation. The outcomes will advance our understanding of mechanisms that
underlie abnormal repair reactions at deprotected
telomeres.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.