* 2246357
* Collaborative Research: IRES Track I: US/France Multidisciplinary Collaboration in Nanoelectronics, Quantum Materials and Next-Generation Computing
* O/D,OISE
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2026
* Karcher Morris, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Maija Kukla
* 03/31/2026
* USD 150,000.00

This IRES project involves a research and educational collaboration between
University of California, San Diego (UCSD) and New York University (NYU) in the
US with International Partner Institutions Université de Lorraine and Université
Paris-Saclay in France. The project will address societal needs and key
technological barriers to next generation computation and data storage by
training US students to address these challenges. A goal is to broadly educate
diverse, globally engaged, and talented young scientists and engineers in modern
materials and devices for advanced computing. This will be accomplished by
having them study and conduct research in forefront areas of nano-systems and
quantum materials that can enable a new generation of computers during research
internships in France. The topics are at the heart of research on new low-power
computing needs for our current data-centered society. In the project, the
student researchers will be exposed to a wide range of scientific and
engineering challenges and be trained to work effectively across
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IRES project will engage 9
students per year in research internships, which are typically 8 weeks-long. The
proposed student population will be 3 undergraduate and 2 graduate researchers
per year from UCSD and 2 undergraduate and 2 graduate researchers per year from
NYU. The intellectual merit of this materials-centered multidisciplinary
research is based on exploiting the unique properties of quantum materials to
address fundamental problems associated with creating new types of non-volatile
memories and advancing next generation computing. Specific research and
education activities will focus on the fabrication and advanced characterization
of new quantum materials, integration of these materials into prototype devices,
device testing, and advanced modeling. The results will be the input to theory
and modeling of scaling up memory-based brain-inspired computer architectures.
The research goals will be on understanding and control of novel materials,
which will have broad ranging impact from understanding the performance of
current devices, to assessing the potential of next generation energy efficient,
ultrafast, and ultra-small memory devices. Thus the work will provide input to
the modeling and design of mem-computing networks and architectures. The
integration of research and education will be achieved via several mechanisms
including research activities at world-class international laboratories,
participation of students in summer schools, presentation of their research at
international and university conferences, and continued research opportunities
at their home institutions. These efforts are aimed at strengthening the
pipeline of students, including minority and women students, into STEM with a
focus on nanotechnologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.