* 2246847
* Problems in Combinatorial Geometry and Ramsey Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Andrew Suk, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 08/31/2026
* USD 251,813.00

This research project studies several fundamental problems in combinatorial
geometry and Ramsey theory. Combinatorial geometry is the study of extremal
configurations of points, lines, and other simple geometric objects in Euclidean
space. Understanding these extremal configurations is a fundamental mathematical
problem, which also has several practical applications such as in motion
planning in robotics, visibility and intersection problems in computer graphics,
and frequency assignment problems in cellular networks. The area has seen
tremendous growth over the past 15 years, with numerous unexpected connections
to other mathematical areas such as number theory, logic, and computer science.
One of the main goals of this project is to further explore these connections,
and the interplay of methods from combinatorics (regularity lemma, probabilistic
method, and the container method), topology (cell decomposition), algebraic
geometry (polynomial method), and computer science (coding theory). Graduate
students will be involved in this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There are three
main areas under investigation. The first area is in incidence geometry, and one
of the major goals of this project is to characterize dense point-line
arrangements in the plane. The second area of research is in the study of
combinatorial and topological problems involving planar arrangements of curves,
including graph drawings. The third area is in Ramsey theory, which is a
fundamental area of combinatorics that focuses on the appearance of a specific
configuration in a sufficiently large system. The PI will continue his long-term
study of estimating classical graph and hypergraph Ramsey numbers. He will also
study Ramsey-type problems with a geometric flavor, which involve point sets in
general position, Heilbronnâ€™s triangle problem, visibility graphs, and
unavoidable crossing patterns in graph drawings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.