* 2246274
* GOALI: Nanofluidic Physics of CO2 Utilization and Storage in Shale and Tight Oil Reservoirs
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2025
* Erdal Ozkan, Colorado School of Mines
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2025
* USD 555,274.00

The petroleum industry in the US faces two pressing challenges. First, it needs
to sequester CO2, but current technologies and cost structures are too
expensive. Second, oil recovery is frustratingly low in its tight oil reservoirs
dominated by nanoscale pores. A promising approach to addressing these
challenges is to inject CO2 into tight oil reservoirs to enhance oil recovery
and simultaneously sequester CO2. However, optimizing this operation is
difficult because of the limited knowledge of nanoscale physics governing oil
and CO2 transport and the uncertainties it brings to reservoir-scale modeling
and prediction. The principal aim of this project is to understand such
nanoscale flow physics and its impact on enhanced oil recovery and CO2 storage.
This project will help engineers optimize CO2 utilization and sequestration
operations in tight oil reservoirs with greater confidence, benefiting the
petroleum industry and society. Insights from this study will also help
understand similar transport phenomena of nanoconfined mixtures in areas such as
water purification and mineral extraction, thus benefiting other industries. The
project will encompass significant educational and outreach activities to
underrepresented students, K12 students, and petroleum
companies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to investigate the transport
of oil and CO2 in tight oil reservoirs. The overarching hypothesis is that CO2
at oil-wall interfaces and its gradient along the pore wall modulate oil-CO2
transport in nanopores and ultimately impact oil recovery and CO2 storage at the
reservoir scale. This hypothesis will be tested by integrating bench-scale
experiments using membranes and real cores, molecular and continuum simulations,
and theories. The specific aims are to investigate CO2-mediated oil flow in
nanopores and elucidate the diffusion-driven exchange between nanopore-trapped
oil and CO2 in fractures. This research will advance nanofluidic physics,
including interlayer slippage, diffusio-osmosis due to CO2 gradient, and
modulation of transport by surface diffusion. Furthermore, an industry-standard
reservoir simulator will be enhanced with nanofluidic physics and used to
delineate the impact of such physics on oil recovery and CO2 storage at the
reservoir scale, which will help rapidly transfer fundamental knowledge gained
in this project to practice. Students, especially those from underrepresented
groups, will be recruited to join this project. Outreach programs at the PIsâ€™
institutions will be leveraged to expose K12 students to fluid dynamics research
and its contributions to society. Newsletters on pore-scale research in CO2
utilization and storage will be developed and distributed to researchers in the
petroleum industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.