* 2246559
* High Surface Area Reverse Electrowetting Mechanoelectrical Transduction
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2024
* Ifana Mahbub, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 09/30/2024
* USD 158,944.00

Self-powered sensors capable of zero-maintenance monitoring and data collection
over days to weeks are currently not available for many applications that do not
have regular access to solar energy or wireless power transmission. The goal of
this research project is to use the high surface area advantage of a liquid-
based energy harvesting concept called reverse electrowetting to harvest energy
from low-frequency movement and to develop a self-powered motion sensor to
detect various movements such as walking and running. A miniaturized integrated
circuit (IC) chip will also be developed that will make the energy harvester
highly suitable for other industrial and biomedical applications. This
technology will make it possible to develop self-powered devices capable of
long-term motion sensing that can be useful for monitoring post-operative
elderly patients who are recovering from procedures such as joint replacement
surgery. The self-powered motion sensor will rely on the harvested kinetic
motion as its external energy source and will be capable of long-term operation.
Such a wireless sensor has not previously been demonstrated for low-frequency
kinetic energy harvesting. Also, as a part of this project, energy harvesting,
and circuit design experiences will be added to the University of North Texas
(UNT) College of Engineering summer camp for the K-12 youth as well as providing
sponsorship for an undergraduate senior design team.&lt;br/&gt;High surface area
reverse electrowetting depends on reversible electrolyte movement within a
porous electrode with applied pressure or an electric field. Key limiting
parameters that have not been previously verified experimentally include
electrode pore size, electrolyte conductivity, dielectric type or thickness,
surface finish, and the pressure and voltage magnitude or frequency. These
parameters will be modeled, optimized, and experimentally validated to achieve
the maximum available energy or power for a cm-sized transducer. The hypothesis
is: reverse electrowetting is capable of producing 1 mW/cm2 at &lt;10 Hz
oscillation frequency through the use of high surface area materials and
parameter optimization. These design parameters will be used in the selection
and integration of highly porous electrode materials (e.g. sintered metal and
buckypaper) with electrolyte, electret, and housing components for maximum low-
frequency energy harvesting in a ~5 cm3 package. An integrated circuit (IC) will
be developed to convert the harvested energy into a usable constant DC power
supply. The system will be integrated with a low-power wireless data
transmission circuitry and miniaturized antenna on a flexible PDMS substrate for
developing a self-powered, conformable motion sensor. This wearable sensor will
be unique as it will be self-powered and low-cost and will demonstrate high
surface area reverse electrowetting's ability to harvest enough energy from low-
frequency motion to entirely self-power a wearable motion sensor. Specific
contributions from this research include: fundamental understanding of high
surface area reverse electrowetting, demonstration of reverse electrowetting in
a flexible system, highly efficient rectifier and DC-DC converter topologies
that can start with as low as 30 mV input voltages, and an integrated self-
powered motion sensor with wireless data transmission
capability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.