* 2246391
* Collaborative Research: IRES Track I: Wireless Federated Fog Computing for Remote Industry 4.0 Applications
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Mathieu Kourouma, Southern University
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 04/30/2026
* USD 141,721.00

The overarching goal of this project is to create unique training and research
opportunities for U.S. students through an international research collaboration
with the IMDEA Networks Institute, a world-class research institution in Madrid,
Spain. The project's research plan engages students in an interdisciplinary
cutting-edge research at the intersections of wireless networking, edge/fog
computing, and machine learning (ML). The proposed project will enable the U.S.
team to build a wireless federated fog (WFF) platform that is robust and
scalable in accommodating different types of Industry 4.0 applications in remote
areas where there is shortage of access to cloud resources, i.e., it offers the
illusion of accessing infinite cloud-like resources. To this end, a cross-layer
communications-computing framework will be developed during the project years
with novel solutions for: live container migration; deep learning (DL)
partitioning and approximation; and serverless workflow development and
deployment. The anticipated outcomes of the project will be the following
artifacts: (1) Methods for seamless migration of containerized services across
autonomous fog systems; (2) Methods for latency-aware partitioning of micro-
service workflows across WFF; (3) A serverless framework for declarative and
reliable workflow development (workflow as a code) on WFF; (4) Methods for
robust and latency-aware distributed DL inference atop uncertain WFF; (5)
Methods using approximate inference for on-premises execution of sensitive DL
services. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will provide a unique opportunity
for U.S. students to gain international cross-disciplinary experience at a
world-class research institute. Every year, graduate and undergraduate students
will be selected via a well-defined procedure to visit the Global Computing
research group at IMDEA for 8 summer weeks. The project will expose the students
to both analytical and practical challenges of the communication-computing
systems at a reputed research institution, and train them to become a globally-
engaged and cultured workforce with world-class skills. The project outcomes
will be evaluated annually by a professional evaluator, and enhanced during the
subsequent years.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.