* 2246992
* Model-theoretic tree properties and their applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Samuel Ramsey, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2026
* USD 195,001.00

Model theory is a branch of mathematical logic dedicated to studying definable
sets in mathematical structures. Model theorists aim to isolate certain
combinatorial features enjoyed by definable sets in tame structures and to
develop a general theory of structures satisfying these properties. This unifies
and explains the tameness of a structure or family of structures, but also
provides an engine for proving deep structure theorems by exploiting the
combinatorial similarity of a structure under analysis to well-understood
mathematical objects. The model-theoretic notion of simplicity was a
distillation of the tameness of sets definable in random graphs, pseudo-finite
fields, and algebraically closed difference fields and has served as a key
ingredient in applications of model theory to combinatorics and algebraic
dynamics. Simplicity was the first of the model-theoretic tree properties to be
isolated and studied, but since then there have been a number of model-theoretic
properties that have received intensive study, generalizing and deepening the
achievements of simplicity theory. The PI will continue to develop the theory of
model-theoretic tree properties and pursue applications in algebra and
combinatorics. The project also provides research training opportunities for
graduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The simple theories were defined by
Shelah as the class of theories without the tree property, a combinatorial
property of a formula that he isolated in the study of independence in stable
theories. The first applications were set-theoretic, but the core tools of
simplicity theory also led to a consolidation of the techniques at play in the
analysis of concrete structures coming from algebra and combinatorics, most
notably in the case of pseudo-finite fields and smoothly approximable structures
built out of classical geometries over finite fields. The development of the
theory, then, sparked a two-way exchange between the theory and the examples,
leading to refined understanding of core notions in model theory. The template
established by simple theories, of a theory for class of theories defined by a
combinatorial condition on trees of definable sets built on a theory of
independence, was successfully replicated for a variety of dividing lines.
Moreover, this extension has revealed striking connections and applications to
combinatorics, allowed for the analysis of core new algebraic examples, and led
to the resolution of difficult open problems in model theory. This project takes
a systematic approach to model-theoretic tree properties, consolidating the core
techniques to address both internal questions within model theory and
applications to a diverse array of structures coming from algebra, geometry, and
combinatorics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.