* 2246576
* Scaling limits of growth in random media
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2028
* Ivan Corwin, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Wilmer
* 06/30/2028
* USD 25,596.00

Probability, as a field, tries to address the question of how large complex
random systems behave. An important class of probabilistic models deals with
growth in random media. These can be used to model how a cancer grows in a
particular organ, how a car moves through traffic on a highway, how neurons move
through the brain, or how disease moves through a population. The purpose of
this project is to understand important models for growth in random media, both
in terms of developing statistical distributions associated with the models and
in terms of understanding in what sort of systems these models are relevant. The
project will leverage new tools to solve previously inaccessible problems. The
project includes a range of broader impact activities, including the
organization of scientific, education, diversity/equity/inclusion, and outreach
programs; advising and mentoring junior researchers; and serving on editorial
and scientific boards and committees. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stochastic PDEs,
random walks in random media, interacting particle systems, six vertex model,
and Gibbs states are active areas of study within probability, equilibrium and
non-equilibrium statistical physics, combinatorics, analysis and representation
theory. This project touches on problems in and draws upon tools from each of
these areas. In particular, this project will probe (1) the nature of invariant
measures and mixing times for various growth models in contact with boundaries,
(2) the behavior of multi-class particle systems and the propagation of
perturbations in growth dynamics, and (3) the fluctuations of interfaces, in
particular the likelihood of upper and lower deviation probabilities along with
various applications. By marrying integrable structures (e.g. Yang-Baxter
equation, symmetric functions, determinantal processes, matrix product ansastz)
with probabilistic methods (e.g. couplings, Gibbsian properties, hydrodynamic /
stochastic PDE limits) the PI will solve problems in both areas which were
previously inaccessible from either approach alone.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.