* 2246599
* H.S.I. Institutional Transformation Project: NMSU-MAS, Mejorando las Aulas en STEM/Improving STEM Classrooms
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Dan Arvizu, New Mexico State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 05/31/2028
* USD 1,054,684.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI) Program, this Track 3 project aims to enhance the success of
a diverse population of students through faculty professional development
focused on equitable and inclusive teaching practices. This will increase the
number of Hispanic, first-generation, and low-income students who complete STEM
degrees and are prepared to successfully enter the workforce or pursue advanced
training. This is important as it will contribute to a more diverse, and
therefore more innovative and productive, STEM workforce and develop role models
for future generations of students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will
investigate the impact of a specific model of faculty professional development
on faculty teaching and the success of a diverse STEM student population,
including Hispanic and first-generation students at a land-grant Hispanic-
Serving Institution. The results of this project will contribute to the
understanding of (i) How faculty make decisions about teaching strategies,
particularly in light of institutional equity, diversity, and inclusivity (EID)
and research priorities (ii) How faculty professional development focusing on
active, culturally-relevant and welcoming practices impacts faculty and their
teaching and (iii) How faculty engagement with active, culturally-relevant and
welcoming practices impacts the success of a diverse STEM student population. By
monitoring the impact of project activities on measures of success of students
who are Hispanic, first-generation and/or low income, the project will enable
the researchers to determine the extent to which specific interventions have the
intended impact on students in the context of an HSI and land grant institution.
This work has the potential to make substantial impacts on the number and
diversity of students entering and strengthening the STEM workforce. This will
create a generalizable and transferable model of faculty professional
development and STEM student success that will impact faculty and students
beyond our institution. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM
education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will
also generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.