* 2246567
* GOALI: Development of General Methods to Access Functional Arylalkoxysilanes
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Kangsang Lee, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 07/31/2026
* USD 499,256.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis program of the Division of Chemistry
of the National Science Foundation, Professor Kangsang Lee, Department of
Chemistry at the University of Central Florida, is supported to develop general
methods for the preparation of functional arylalkoxysilanes. Silicones are very
widely used materials and are found in common consumer products such as bottles,
cosmetic products, and cookware as well as in high-tech automotive, electronic,
aeronautic and biomedical applications. A group of compounds called
alkoxysilanes are the most common building blocks in the manufacture of silicone
materials. However, their utility is limited due to difficulties in preparing
subtle variations of them. However, there is another group of potential silicone
building blocks called arylalkoxysilanes that potentially can overcome the
limitations of the alkoxysilanes. A major problem faced in employing this class
of building blocks is that methods the efficiently prepare them are not known.
Thus, this project aims at developing a direct and atom-economical pathway to
synthesize a wide variety of arylalkoxysilanes. The project involves a close
collaboration between Professor Lee’s group and scientists at Dow Chemical
Company. This collaboration and the access to facilities at Dow permits the
advances made in Professor Lee’s laboratories to be efficiently evaluated for
their potential in the industrial manufacture of silicones. Additionally, it
provides exemplary educational experiences to the students who will be engaged
in the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop a number of
catalytic C–H silylation reactions involving arenes and heteroarenes. Carbon-
hydrogen silylation reactions are currently limited to reactive hydrosilanes
such as trialkylsilanes and siloxyhydrosilanes and result in arylsilanes that
cannot be directly utilized in siloxane polymer synthesis. More desirable
building blocks in silicone syntheses are alkoxy-containing arylsilanes.
However, only a few of these are available due to the lack of efficient
synthetic methodologies. To address this problem this project an efficient
rhodium catalyzed C–H silylation between unactivated (hetero)arenes and mono-,
di- or trialkoxyhydrosilanes is being developed. The process is designed to
provide a general methodology to a variety of arylalkoxysilanes. The project
involves close collaboration between Professor Lee’s group and scientists at Dow
Chemical Company. The industrial partner will provide expertise and the
facilities for in high-throughput screening to identify potential catalysts and
will apply these results to uncover structure-property relationships to guide
further synthetic efforts. Additionally, the new arylalkoxysilanes will be
evaluated as precursors to polymeric materials. This aspect of the project will
involve internships, which will provide rich industrial experiences to the
students involved.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.