* 2246964
* Interplay Between Antiaromaticity and Diradical Character: New Structures and New Directions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Michael Haley, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 06/30/2026
* USD 575,795.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis and Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and
Mechanisms B Programs in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Michael Haley and
his students in the Department of Chemistry &amp; Biochemistry at the University
of Oregon are preparing molecules containing expanded architectures to answer
fundamental scientific questions as well as to explore their materials
properties. A key goal is to develop simple synthetic methods for the assembly
of these electron-accepting molecules. The Haley group examines the optical,
electronic, and/or magnetic properties of all new molecular scaffolds with an
emphasis upon utilization of these materials in optoelectronic devices such as
organic field effect transistors (OFETs) and organic photovoltaics (OPVs). This
project serves as an excellent training ground for graduate and undergraduate
researchers in fundamental and applied chemical synthesis, with exposure to
organic synthesis, computational chemistry and x-ray crystallography. The
broader impacts of this program include industrial internships of graduate
students at local and regional companies, the exchange of graduate students with
those of foreign collaborators, the hosting of extended stays of visiting
scientists including professors from primarily undergraduate institutions
(PUIs), and continued substantial involvement of undergraduates in chemical
research via programs that promote participation of members of groups
underrepresented in STEM (science, technology, engineering and
mathematics).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research on non-benzenoid molecules has
experienced a resurgence as chemists have recognized their potential as organic
semiconductors characterized by the relatively low energy of their molecular
orbitals and the small energy gap between their highest occupied and lowest
unoccupied molecular orbitals (HOMO and LUMO, respectively). This project sets
out to continue these systematic studies by examining (1) new heterocycle-fused
‘push-pull’ derivatives, (2) asymmetrically substituted compounds, and (3) pi-
expanded ‘tetraradicaloid’ molecules. Further efforts will expand into
completely new research directions such as their use as (4) antiaromatic, redox-
active ligands and (5) antiaromatic N-heterocyclic carbenes in organometallic
complexes. The molecules developed in these studies present opportunities for
practical applications, particularly in the area of nanotechnology and low-cost
electronics. In the longer term, these studies are expected to lead to a deeper
fundamental understanding of the relationship between electronic structure and
molecular architecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.