* 2246828
* Stereoretentive Reactions at the Anomeric Carbon
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Maciej Walczak, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 06/30/2026
* USD 575,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Maciej Walczak of the University of Colorado at Boulder is studying methods to
prepare carbohydrates and their derivatives to better understand their
biological roles. The research features the development of techniques to produce
unique and difficult-to-access chemical structures in a controlled manner and
with high yields and it is envisioned that this work will translate into more
efficient manufacturing processes for the production of value added materials.
The broader impacts of the funded project will extend to the benefits accrued to
society as Dr. Walczak and his team of coworkers engage in a range of
educational and outreach activities. For example, the students conducting the
research will receive training in sophisticated synthetic chemistry techniques
preparing them to become the next generation of scientific leaders in the modern
workforce. Additionally, the Walczak team will take part in public presentations
at educational outreach events, such as CU Wizards, which are designed to
attract a demographically diverse range of visitors and to promote the
principles of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) among a
wide and general audience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The chemical synthesis of
complex oligosaccharides and their isosteres has provided unprecedented insights
into biological processes; however, current methods for the elaboration of
carbohydrate derivatives are limited in their degree of efficiency and
stereoselectivity. Accordingly, the funded project is directed toward the
development and study of new and improved methods for the stereocontrolled
synthesis of glycosides with a focus on challenging C-nucleoside and rare hexose
systems. The approach of interest involves cross-coupling reactions employing
stereodefined anomeric nucleophiles (i.e., C1 metalloid reagents) that have the
capacity to install glycosidic bonds with high levels of stereoselectivity, and
sometimes proceeding with complete stereospecificity, across a broad range of
substrates. Practical methods to prepare the requisite anomeric nucleophiles
using readily available reagents will be developed and the resultant synthons
engaged in stereoretentive C-C bond forming cross-coupling reactions to generate
saccharides that are difficult to access using established methods. The study
aims to bridge an important knowledge gap in chemical synthesis by exploring two
novel classes of reagents, C1 boronic acids and C1 silanes, which have hitherto
received little attention in organic synthesis. Specific targets of interest
include biologically active C-glycosides such as dapagliflozin and the
antibiotic pseudouridimycin alongside rare, but also biomedically significant,
L-hexoses and L-aminosugars. For the latter, a C1-homologation operation will be
deployed to enable conversion of naturally abundant D-series carbohydrate
residues into their less common L-series congeners. It is expected that the
fundamental knowledge gained during the course of the funded project will
advance the practice of catalytic methods for selective carbohydrate
functionalization and our understanding of stereospecific cross-coupling
reactions, in particular. From a broader perspective, the methods developed will
facilitate the elaboration of complex carbohydrates and glycomimetic systems and
ancillary benefits are therefore anticipated in allied disciplines such as
glycobiology and medicinal chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.