* 2246323
* IRES: Monitoring marine megafauna and coral reef communities using remote technologies
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Easton White, University of Vermont & State Agricultural College
* Standard Grant
* Kleanthis Psarris
* 06/30/2026
* USD 298,969.00

Human health is tied to the integrity and health of marine ecosystems. For
example, coral reefs create a complex architecture that provides home to 25% of
all marine life earning their nickname as the rainforest of the ocean. Despite
occupying less than 1% of the ocean floor, coral reef ecosystems provide many
socio-economical services to humans. They are home to many fish species that
directly support fisheries, provide jobs in various sectors of the ecotourism
industry, and many inhabitants produce a diverse collection of chemical
compounds of great biomedical value. Coral reefs health depend on many factors,
including the health of its tenants, such as sharks and whales. These organisms
bring nutrients from nutrient-rich latitudes and the deep to nutrient-poor coral
reefs via their excrement, and as apex predators they help maintain fish stocks
by removing sick fish and by keeping the structural integrity of the fish
community. Understanding how coral reef ecosystems, and sharks and whales’
populations are impacted by environmental and anthropogenic activities is of
fundamental importance in the maintenance of a healthy ocean and local
economies. Novel remote technology such as autonomous underwater sensors,
acoustic tags, and unmanned aerial vehicles, have become an integral component
in marine biodiversity monitoring. Throughout the three cohorts of this project,
students will receive training in remote technologies, underwater field methods,
and computational approaches. Students will formulate independent questions that
together address the research themes using the field and computational tools
provided by the program. The skills acquired in this program are transferable to
a diverse field of jobs preparing U.S. students for the STEM jobs of the future.
Because students will be living in the communities that rely on the marine
resources they are studying, by the end of the program they will also have a
better understanding of the importance of social equity and diversity of
perspectives in marine conservation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This IRES Track I
program takes place in the Santa Elena Bay, Costa Rica. The area is a unique
oceanographic region characterized by seasonal upwellings known as the “Papagayo
Upwellings” which brings deep cold and nutrient rich water to the surface during
the trade wind season, driving high productivity and biodiversity in the area.
Because of these unique oceanographic and biological characteristics, the bay is
a critical habitat for coral reefs, sharks and rays, humpback whales and several
species of dolphins. This program will recruit 5 US undergraduates and 3 U.S.
graduate students, and 1-2 Costa Rican students each year. Each student will
select a theme to develop their research project for the 6-weeks of the program.
Students will also participate in outreach activities with the community
including NGOs, fishers, scientists, and students from Costa Rica. The specific
contributions of this program include (1) quantify coral reef health under
different anthropogenic pressures, and evaluate restoration efforts using
various indicators; (2) identify drivers of decline on the shark community; (3)
study the impact of anthropogenic underwater noise on marine mammals and their
communicative space; and (4) train a diverse cohort group of students in marine
ecology by providing research experience and opportunities to work with Costa
Rican scientists and organizations championing marine conservation efforts. By
the end of the program students will have acquired skills in scuba diving,
photomosaics for coral reef biodiversity inventories, tagging sharks, passive
acoustic monitoring, experimental design, and statistical data analysis while
generating critical data on the marine megafauna and coral reef communities of
Santa Elena Bay. This authentic research experience will also help students
develop feelings of confidence, belonging, equity, and
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.