* 2246305
* CAREER: Designing Ceramic Microstructures by Controlling Anisotropic Grain Boundary Motion
* MPS,DMR
* 10/15/2022,01/31/2027
* Amanda Krause, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Nazanin Bassiri-Gharb
* 01/31/2027
* USD 217,392.00

NON-TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ceramic materials are used in a
variety of high-tech applications, spanning from airplane engines to
microprocessors. Many ceramics are composed of microscopic features known as
grains. The size of these grains dictates many material properties, including
crack resistance. A significant challenge to fabricating reliable ceramic parts
is the ability to control the grain size, because grains grow unpredictably at
the high temperatures needed for processing. The goal of this work is to uncover
the underlying mechanism for grain growth in ceramic materials to guide new
processing methods for optimal performance. To accomplish this goal, this
program trains the next generation of ceramic engineers in the necessary skills
for advanced material processing. Additionally, this programâ€™s educational goal
is to build a creative and multi-disciplinary workforce by engaging pre-
collegiate art students in activities that demonstrate the similarities between
artistic and scientific processes. To support this effort, a ceramic-processing
kit is being developed and implemented in K-12
schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;TECHNICAL SUMMARY&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of
this CAREER program is to establish a mechanistic approach that leverages
anisotropic grain boundary motion to advance microstructure design.
Discontinuous changes in mobility due to grain boundary restructuring have been
hypothesized as the cause of irregular grain growth in ceramics. However, this
restructuring involves a change in energy, conflating the thermodynamic and
kinetic contributions to grain boundary motion. Without this insight into grain
boundary motion mechanisms, processing optimization relies on heuristic,
inefficient testing, which inhibits microstructure designs. The experimental
approach in this CAREER program unambiguously deconvolutes the thermodynamic and
kinetic contributions of grain boundary motion by measuring the mobility of flat
grain boundaries with a controlled driving force: energy from an applied
magnetic field. The impact of this anisotropic mobility on microstructure
evolution is elucidated through grain growth studies using new, non-destructive
x-ray diffraction microscopy. With this mechanistic-insight, a new processing
framework can be designed for modifying grain boundaries to design
microstructures with advanced performance. The development of a creative, multi-
disciplinary workforce is critical to implementing such a processing-framework.
Therefore, this program encompasses an educational plan that combines artistic
and scientific methodologies in precollegiate activities, including developing
and implementing a multidisciplinary ceramic kit for distribution in K-12
schools. Additionally, engineering students are trained in ceramic processing
and characterization skills necessary to advance materials
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.