* 2246489
* Collaborative Research: Elucidating the Role of Natural Aerosols in Modulating Boundary Layer Clouds and Precipitation in the Southern Ocean
* GEO,AGS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2026
* Jessie Creamean, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Nicholas Anderson
* 03/31/2026
* USD 270,537.00

The Southern Ocean is an important region for understanding current and future
climate due to a persistent mix of cloud types that affect the Earthâ€™s energy
balance. An improved understanding of Southern Ocean clouds relies on better
measurements of aerosols, which are small particles that cloud droplets and ice
crystals form on. This project will deploy a suite of instrumentation on a
series of research vessel cruises conducted by Australian collaborators, and at
a location in Antarctica, to measure these aerosols. The impact of the project
will be to improve representation of aerosol-cloud interactions and cloud-
climate feedbacks over the Southern Ocean, with a view towards improved climate
projections. There is a significant outreach component to the work, where the
researchers will interact with K-12 classrooms globally through on-line and in
person activities. The project also represents strong international
collaboration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team will conduct an
observational and modeling study of the role of natural aerosols in modulating
the properties of clouds and precipitation in the Southern Ocean region. The
Southern Ocean is one of the least polluted places on Earth and the distance
from dust sources means that aerosols are dominated by biogenically derived
sulfates, including impacts from marine primary productivity. The sources and
abundances of ice-nucleating particles (INPs) remain poorly quantified over the
Southern Ocean and Antarctica. This project will take advantage of four upcoming
voyages on Australian research vessels, and a deployment at Davis Station,
Antarctica, to double the volume of existing surface-based measurements to
constrain Southern Ocean aerosol and cloud properties. The research team will
contribute to the pre-existing observational campaigns by providing additional
radiosonde measurements and collecting aerosol, seawater, sea ice, snow, and
soil for offline INP and DNA analyses. The researchers will then co-develop
process-oriented aerosol and cloud model diagnostics for parameterization
testing and development in the Community Earth System Model (CESM). The project
will result in the following deliverables: 1) Documentation of the latitudinal
gradients in cloud condensation nuclei (CCN) and cloud droplet number
concentration (Nd) over the pristine oceans during three seasons derived from
ship-based sources, 2) Quantification of the susceptibility of Nd to sources of
aerosol types and processes to provide important constraints on the observed Nd,
and 3) Documentation of latitudinal and season variability in INPs and
precipitation occurrence and phase.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.