* 2246224
* Collaborative Research: USGCRP Core Support for Future Earth International Global Change Activities
* GEO,RISE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Judit Ungvari, George Mason University
* Continuing Grant
* Lina Patino
* 04/30/2026
* USD 87,843.00

Future Earth is a global organization working to advance understanding and
informed decision making for transformations to sustainability, supporting goals
of the United States Global Change Research Program (USGCRP). Seeking solutions
to some of the world’s most pressing and complex sustainability challenges,
Future Earth furthers transdisciplinary approaches that benefit from both a
diversity of academic expertise and lived experience to ground research in a
societal frame. The Future Earth US Hub contributes to this work through
coordinating relevant research and innovation across the world, fostering
inclusive and cross-cutting global networks including Future Earth’s national
and regional committees, increasing the dissemination and impact of accessible
science and science-policy documents, establishing accessible platforms and
convening opportunities to raise the visibility of sustainability advances
globally, and evaluating progress towards these transformational goals. This
award supports global leadership of these activities by the Future Earth US
Hub.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Working with both domestic and global partners, the
Future Earth US Hub will facilitate transdisciplinary and cross-sectoral
collaborations and mobilize novel, innovative research and transformative ideas
connected to action. The Hub will support the development of next generation
sustainability leaders in areas such as systems thinking and evidence-based
decision-making, develop targeted initiatives in network development and
capacity building in Latin America, the Caribbean, and Oceania, highlight
informed sustainability options in Future Earth’s award-winning publication
Anthropocene, and grow the annual Sustainability Research and Innovation
Congress, which already in its third year, has emerged as the leading global
gathering for sustainability science. In addition, the US Hub will develop
multi-sector action coalitions around specific opportunities to connect US
researchers with the extensive global network of Future Earth and accelerate
knowledge-based change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.