* 2246220
* CRII: SaTC: RUI: An Intelligent Data-Driven Framework to Achieve Proactive Cybersecurity
* CSE,CNS
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2025
* Ericsson Santana Marin, Cal Poly Pomona Foundation, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 03/31/2025
* USD 174,994.00

Information for cyber-attack deployment has been increasingly shared by hackers
on the underground world of the darkweb. In those hidden and anonymous
environments, cyber criminals discuss how to 1) identify software
vulnerabilities, 2) create or purchase exploits, 3) choose a target and recruit
collaborators, 4) obtain access to the infrastructure needed, and 5) plan and
execute the attack. Although this behavior helps hackers to produce a huge
amount of malware, it also provides valuable intelligence for defenders, as the
information shared online can be leveraged as precursors to various types of
cyber threats. By relying on proactive cyber-threat intelligence analysis, this
project addresses the following key research question: can emerging cyber-
threats be accurately and aforesaid predicted? With continuous retrieval and
analysis of hacker communication, this research will shed light on the assets,
capabilities, behaviors, and interests of malicious hackers that can be
leveraged for establishing cyber threat prediction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
accomplish that, two finer-grained problems are being investigated. These
investigations constitute the projectâ€™s novelties and are key factors for the
design of better cyber-defense systems. First, the prediction of software
vulnerability exploitation is conducted through classification techniques that
correlate hackers' digital traces on hacker forums and marketplaces, and
security advisories with real- world hacking attempts. The positive predictions
(i.e., it will be exploited) are then ranked for patch prioritization,
overcoming two current shortcomings not addressed by machine learning work in
this domain: 1) the lack of differentiation of the predicted exploitation and 2)
the lack of time interval for predictions. Second, the anticipation of malicious
information cascades that might propagate to viral proportions is also
performed. Here, classification techniques leveraging social network analysis
are used to extract hacker topological information and to estimate social
influence, predicting which techniques, strategies, or exploits included in
hacking forums might be widely adopted in the near future. Both project efforts
will lead to new techniques to predict cyber threats that are time sensitive,
giving defenders a better chance in the fight against attackers. The project
deliverables, data and models, will be disseminated through the security
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.