* 2246809
* Collaborative Research: IRES Track II: Short Courses on Manufacturing Frontiers Leveraging Unique Facilities in Italy
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Zhijian Pei, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 06/30/2027
* USD 120,589.00

The Advanced Studies Institute (ASI) will take place in northern Italy,
including the cities of Milan, Turin, Bologna, and Modena, where a strong and
resilient manufacturing sector resides. As evidenced in recent years, a
resilient manufacturing sector is critical for coping with an international
supply chain disruption. In addition, a strong manufacturing sector is essential
to economic prosperity and national security as it generates employment and
wealth while encouraging research and technological innovation. The ASI will
help prepare an advanced manufacturing workforce for the United States to
succeed in an increasingly competitive global market. The ASI will promote
collaborative and global thinking and prepare the participating students to
become more comfortable with international collaborations. The ASI will also
expose participating students to emerging manufacturing technologies, as well as
strong bridges between fundamental research and industrial applications. Novel
technologies and manufacturing processes or systems resulting from the workforce
development and international collaborative research will lead to long-term
economic benefits for both the U.S. and Italy. The ASI will help train the next
generation of American manufacturing leaders who can leverage the global
resources to contribute to a more resilient U.S. economy.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Advanced Studies Institute (ASI) leverages the unique
facilities in Italy to train U.S. manufacturing engineering students and foster
innovative research ideas. Italy’s strong manufacturing sector embraces emerging
technologies that are the building blocks of Industry 4.0, or the Fourth
Industrial revolution. Industry 4.0 transforms a physical model of manufacturing
to a digital one, creating “smart factories” and introducing digital business
models. The ASI is comprised of eight short courses with each course covering
one emerging technology of Industry 4.0: (1) advanced processes and robotics,
(2) horizontal and vertical integration, (3) Internet of Things, (4) simulation,
(5) advanced machining, (6) augmented and virtual reality, (7) additive
manufacturing, and (8) big data and cloud computing. Short courses are
complemented by factory tours, research discussions, and short-term projects.
There will be 15 U.S. graduate students participating in the ASI each year,
totaling 30 students for the two-year duration of the project. Each ASI student
will be in Italy for 15 days. The key Italian partners are eight world-class
researchers. They will teach short courses, moderate discussion sessions,
recruit and select the Italian students to join the U.S. students, as well as
mentor all ASI students. Other Italian partners include three research labs that
will host visits from the ASI students, the Italian Association of Manufacturing
Technologies that will work with its member companies to arrange factory tours,
and ten companies that will offer factory tours. Overall, students will have
access to a unique research environment in Italy where both universities and
industries facilitate the maturity of research projects into
commercialization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.