* 2246869
* GOALI: Catalytic Stereoselective Cross-Coupling Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* James Morken, Boston College
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 05/31/2026
* USD 575,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor James Morken of Boston College and Dr. Robert Singer of Pfizer are
studying the development of new chemical reactions that produce molecules having
a well-defined three-dimensional topology. Because a significant fraction of
molecules having a defined three-dimensional shape are present in newly approved
drugs (44% of new pharmaceuticals in 2015), chemical reactions that can control
this sp3-rich topology are valuable to the pharmaceutical and chemical
industries. The goal of this research is to develop such reactions with the
expectation that these processes will streamline drug-development and improve
access to important medicines. This academic-industrial partnership is studying
new palladium and copper-based reactions for their ability to act as effective
catalysts to control the three dimensional topology of the product. They are
also evaluating whether these catalysts can operate efficiently, economically,
and with minimal production of hazardous waste. By being part of the
collaboration through the GOALI (grant opportunities for academic liaison with
industry) award, the undergraduate and graduate students involved in the
research will acquire training that is critical to science-based careers in
fields ranging from medicine to pharmaceuticals, and to chemistry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this GOALI award, the Morken research group at
Boston College and collaborators led by Dr. Robert Singer at Pfizer are
developing enantioselective cross-coupling reactions that operate on meso-
diborylalkane substrates. Chiral catalysts are being developed that can affect
cross-coupling reactions that selectively break the symmetry of the diboryl
reactant and deliver products that retain one of the original boronic ester
groups. In addition to the design of appropriate reactions and the examination
of their synthetic utility, the team is developing concise routes to new chiral
phosphine ligands that are expected to not only be useful in the the
diborylalkane reactions but also in other catalytic transformations.
Additionally, mechanistic experiments are being carried out to determine why
diboryl substrates are unusually reactive in cross-coupling reactions and
whether the gained information can be used in the design of new
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.