* 2246995
* RUI: Model Theory and Structural Ramsey Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Lynn Scow, University Enterprises Corporation at CSUSB
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2026
* USD 292,123.00

In a large enough data set, a certain amount of uniformity is guaranteed.
Variations on this theme are called "Ramsey theorems" after the groundbreaking
work of Frank Ramsey in the early 20th century. Ramsey theorems have been used
most recently in computer science to design efficient algorithms on certain
types of data sets. This project concerns structural Ramsey theory, which uses
tools from model theory to describe the objects under study. Model theory is an
area of foundations of mathematics that studies properties holding generally on
large sets of mathematical objects, across different areas of mathematics. This
research project will extend the contribution of model theory to structural
Ramsey theory. Methods from saturated model theory, pseudofinite model theory,
category theory, and topological dynamics will be applied to create new
knowledge pathways across these different areas of mathematics. This project
will also provide increased training opportunities for students at California
State University, San Bernardino.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
studies how certain maps between two infinite structures in possibly different
first-order languages can transfer information about the automorphism groups of
these structures and, ultimately, the Ramsey properties of the finitely-
generated structures embeddable in these infinite structures. In particular,
this project studies a pair of maps between two infinite structures called a
"semi-retraction" that induces a retraction of the type space of one structure
onto the type space of the other. This project also studies which Ramsey
theorems transfer from a class of finite structures to ultraproducts of these
finite structures. This project will identify notions of tame partitions and
investigate the classes of structures which have a Ramsey theorem for these tame
partitions, but perhaps not in general. Many test cases are available as a
result of a confluence of recent results in the calculation of finite big Ramsey
degrees. This work is anticipated to have applications in classification theory
in model theory, as well as in topological dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.