* 2247773
* Hydrodynamics of Liquid Crystals and Heat Flow of Harmonic Maps
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Fang-Hua Lin, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2026
* USD 583,191.00

A significant part of this project is motivated by questions in physics,
differential geometry, and material science. As such, the project is expected to
have a positive impact on interdisciplinary research and applications to other
fields of science. The list of concrete research projects includes the Ericksen-
Leslie system, describing the dynamics of liquid crystals, and its mathematical
and physical properties due to the nonlinear coupling between the Navier-Stokes
fluid dynamics and the microscopic molecular orientation evolution. In
particular, one is interested in the developments of singularities in both fluid
flows and topological defects in the liquid crystal orientation as well as its
long-time behavior. The project also investigates some geometric variational
problems such as the classical problem of energy minimizing maps into spheres
among continuous maps, the harmonic Ricci flows into surfaces. A fascinating
mathematical fact is that these are somehow all connected with the research on
liquid crystal dynamics. The project is an important and integral part of the
principal investigator's training program for graduate students and postdoctoral
researchers through topics courses, special lectures and thesis projects. The
results obtained as part of the project are disseminated through publications in
professional journals as well as through the lectures, seminars, and
conferences. The principal investigator (PI) also organizes conferences and
mentors graduate and undergraduate researchers on topics related to the work of
the project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed at solving several
challenging problems from the theory of liquid crystals. Despite numerous
efforts by various researchers and tremendous progress over the past three
decades, the fundamental problem concerning the global existence of suitable
weak solutions of the Ericksen-Leslie system in three dimensions remains a
fascinating open problem. The project studies a new modifed model and explores
the subtle underlying coupled nonlinear structure. Of related interest are the
long time asymptotics and the partial regularity of suitable global weak
solutions and the finite-time blow up in both two and three dimensions of
initially smooth solutions for this new model. A main focus of the project is
the defect and its dynamics. The PI also studies a list of concrete problems
related to the heat flow of harmonic maps. When the target is a sphere, which is
relevant in the study of liquid crystals, the PI is interested in the gradient
flow of the so-called relaxed energy of maps. By using a minimizing movement
scheme, one studies its connection to the generalized Brakke flow. A related
problem for such coupled equations in geometry is to understand the blow-up
mechanism of the harmonic Ricci flow. When the target is a non-positively curved
Alexandroff space, the project studies, through a refined minimizing movement
scheme, the existence of better weak solutions that satisfy, in addition to the
Struwe monotonicity property, the monotonicity of Almgren's frequency. The
latter has important consequences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.