* 2247666
* Atom-Efficient Heteroatom Transformations Mediated by f-Element and d(0) Catalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Tobin Marks, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 06/30/2026
* USD 600,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Tobin Marks of Northwestern University is discovering, understanding,
and optimizing, f-element and d(0)-transition metal catalysts for three
different types of critical organic reactions. It is estimated that catalysis
underpins approximately 35% of the U.S. GDP, producing coatings, fertilizers,
fuels, plastics, pharmaceuticals, medical garments and equipment, and other
chemicals on a vast scale. In the future, catalytic transformations must be more
energy and resource efficient, non-toxic, non-polluting, and employ low-cost,
earth-abundant metals in more selective, sustainable, and economically
competitive technologies. Professor Marks and his research group are addressing
these important challenges with the development of f-element and d(0) catalysts
that advance new ways to build and modify organic molecules. These activities
are also serving to educate young scientists to attack global-scale problems,
while conducting forefront research across broad disciplinary fields. Projects
funded by this award involve a transdisciplinary, educationally rigorous
combination of catalyst creation, catalyst evaluation, and understanding the
pathways by which catalytic products are formed. These activities combined with
a highly interactive research group environment, provide excellent
training/mentoring for graduate, undergraduate, and postdoctoral scholars bound
for industrial, national laboratory, or academic careers, with special emphasis
on participation by women and underrepresented
minorities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research program supported by this award is
configured around three highly-integrated exploratory, hypothesis-driven themes
capitalizing on the unique properties of earth-abundant lanthanide, actinide,
and early transition metal complexes. In the first, a remarkably rapid and
selective reduction process for carbon-element multiple bonds using simple
lanthanide catalysts and easy to handle boron compounds is being investigated
for new synthetic applications to facilitate access to natural products,
pharmaceuticals and fine chemicals. In the second theme, the position of
catalytic rare earth metals in the periodic table is being used to steer
reaction outcomes. When applied to pyridine molecules, which are important for
drugs and fine chemicals, large lanthanides lead to a change in the pyridine
double bond structure whereas small lanthanides lead to substitution on the
pyridine periphery. In the third theme, the tolerance of zirconium olefin
polymerization catalysts towards the copolymerization of monomers with amine,
phosphine and thioether functional groups is being investigated and the
properties of the resulting materials explored. The broader long term scientific
impact of this research includes the potential provide new routes to build-in
surface anti-bacterial, anti-viral, and anti-fungal characteristics for
disposable PPEs and even hospital clothing and face
masks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.