* 2247553
* Stabilization Methods for Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2026
* Scott Schmieding, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Jan Cameron
* 03/31/2026
* USD 331,955.00

The study of dynamical systems concerns the structure of systems which evolve in
time. Their study connects with several areas within mathematics, as well as
physics and other fields of science. This project is focused on groups of
symmetries of dynamical systems, exploring how properties of the underlying
system manifest in, and constrain, the structure of these symmetry groups. A key
class of systems are the hyperbolic homeomorphisms, and the core of the project
concerns a new stabilized framework for studying the collection of automorphisms
of these systems. Symbolic systems, including shifts of finite type, also play a
key role, and have important connections to other areas such as ergodic theory
and information theory, and their symmetry groups exhibit a wide range of
complexity. This project will advance the field by investigating new techniques
and invariants for classifying symmetries of systems through the use of
stabilization. The project also provides opportunities for graduate students to
conduct research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is aimed at a notion of
reconstruction: the extent to which the structure of symmetry groups, and their
stabilized counterparts, can be used to reconstruct various dynamical properties
of the underlying system. The PI intends to further develop and apply various
stabilized invariants, notable local entropy, to the study of such automorphism
groups with the goal of recovering dynamical invariants, such as topological
entropy and zeta functions. Such invariants have been used successfully in the
symbolic setting, and one aim of the project is to extend this to certain smooth
settings. One goal of the project is to study the question of whether the
stabilized automorphism group of a shift of finite type is a complete invariant
up to topological conjugacy. In addition, the project explores the extent to
which stabilized results, and invariants derived from there, might be used to
analyze the classical automorphism groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.