* 2247670
* HSI Pilot Project: Impact of Learning Assistants on STEM Identity for Students Historically Underrepresented in STEM
* EDU,EES
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Bradley McCoy, Azusa Pacific University
* Standard Grant
* Elsa Gonzalez
* 07/31/2025
* USD 199,991.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1 project aims to understand the impact
of Learning Assistants (LAs) on STEM identity for students historically
underrepresented in STEM. LA programs have grown in popularity due to strong
research support on the effectiveness of LAs at increasing student learning,
reducing rates of withdrawals and grades of D and F, increasing retention in
STEM, motivating students to teaching careers, supporting curricular and
pedagogical transformation, and increasing STEM identity. However, most research
on LAs has been conducted in a limited set of institutions and disciplines,
calling for further research on LAs in new institutional contexts. This project
will pilot and evaluate an LA program across the STEM curriculum at Azusa
Pacific University, a 4-year HSI in Los Angeles County. The LA program is
expected to improve retention and graduation rates for STEM majors, increasing
the number of Hispanic/Latino students achieving STEM degrees, and to provide
insight into factors that contribute to Hispanic/Latino students adopting a STEM
identity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses mixed-methods research to
answer the following questions: (1) Does the presence of an LA in the classroom
help cultivate a sense of STEM identity amongst students, particularly for
Hispanic or Latino students? (2) How does being an LA influence one’s
identity/sense of belonging in STEM, particularly for Hispanic or Latino LAs?
Interviews and focus group transcripts will be analyzed qualitatively by
students and LAs. In addition, data will be analyzed quantitatively from the
STEM Professional Identity Overlap 4 (STEM-PIO-4) measure and the STEM Career
Interest Survey (STEM-CIS). Researchers expect to gain insights into culturally-
specific instructional practices that can be used at HSIs to increase students’
sense of STEM identity and retention of diverse students in STEM. The HSI
Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs.
Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to
achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.