* 2247057
* GOALI: Developing New Hydrogen Isotope Exchange Strategies for Isotope Labelling of Pharmaceuticals
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Long Luo, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 07/31/2026
* USD 400,008.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis and Chemical Synthesis programs in
the Division of Chemistry, Dr. Long Luo of Wayne State University and Dr.
Jingwei Li of Merck &amp; Co are developing new methods for hydrogen isotope
labeling of pharmaceuticals. With the use of heterogeneous photocatalysis and
electrochemistry, the Luo team seeks to establish improved chemical methods for
labeling pharmaceuticals and their precursors with either multiple hydrogen
isotope atoms or selective labeling at specific sites. Hydrogen isotope
incorporation at multiple sites will improve the diagnostic signals for
detecting and quantifying drugs and drug metabolites in preclinical and clinical
studies. In addition, the site-selective labeling will provide new tools for
synthesizing drugs containing deuterium. This integrated university/industry
research program will provide unique learning and training experience for
graduate and undergraduate students, preparing this “next generation workforce”
for a future in which multi- and inter-disciplinary research is the
norm.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this GOALI award, Dr. Long Luo of Wayne State
University and Dr. Jingwei Li of Merck &amp; Co will engage in synthetic
methodology research toward new approaches to hydrogen isotope labeling of
pharmaceuticals. The team will focus on: (1) developing heterogeneous
photocatalysts to enable additional hydrogen isotope exchange sites relative to
the conventional molecular photocatalysts utilizing their unique catalyst-
substrate interface (For example, efforts to simultaneously activate benzylic
and α-amine sites using metal chalcogenide quantum dot photocatalysts) and (2)
developing electrochemical methods to achieve the hydrogen isotope exchange site
selectivity among sites with similar chemical reactivity such as α-amino C-H
bonds, utilizing the time-resolved redox environment provided by
electrochemistry to control the reaction kinetics at different sites. The team
will work to answer the following important scientific questions: (1) how can
one achieve efficient hydrogen atom transfer via the heterogenous photocatalyst-
substrate interface during a hydrogen isotope exchange reaction? (2) how can one
control the reaction pathways of hydrogen isotope exchange reactions by tuning
the electrochemical redox environment? The impact of this project will not be
limited to the field of hydrogen isotope labeling of pharmaceuticals but will
likely also provide new strategies for controlling reaction pathways in general
for photocatalytic and electrochemical reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.