* 2247473
* A Variational Approach to Spectral Shift and Spectral Minimal Partitions
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* GREGORY BERKOLAIKO, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 05/31/2026
* USD 276,227.00

Eigenvalue optimization for a parametric family of self-adjoint operators is a
mathematical abstraction of a wide variety of questions arising in applied
science. For example, the potential energy surface in quantum chemistry is the
landscape of the dependence of an eigenvalue on the atoms' positions within the
molecule; in this landscape, electrons seek out the lowest point, forcing the
molecule into the corresponding configuration. Study of pattern-formation in
reaction-diffusion systems can similarly lead to the question of optimizing
energy (eigenvalue) of a partition of the available space; this question is
known as the ‘spectral minimal partition problem’. The common feature of these
two examples is a very large number of parameters. The underlying idea of the
present project is that when the number of parameters is sufficiently large, it
is possible to obtain global information about the operator family from the
local information about the eigenvalue behavior. A practically important
consequence of this is the ability to certify an experimentally found local
minimum as being globally optimal. Questions from this project will be used to
mentor graduate and undergraduate researchers, and a WikiBook devoted to
spectral analysis on metric graphs will be created and
maintained.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific mathematical question to be
addressed in the project is the eigenvalue dependence on the boundary
conditions, which is directly related to the location of the partition
boundaries in the ‘spectral minimal partition problem’. On the operator-
theoretic level, this will be expressed as variation of the self-adjoint
extension of a fixed symmetric operator. The goal is to prove a link between the
Morse index of the eigenvalue at a critical point and the spectral shift of the
operator with respect to a reference operator. Since the Morse index describes
local stability of the eigenvalue with respect to perturbations in the boundary
conditions, this link will allow one to obtain global information in the form of
the spectral shift. The knowledge of spectral shift will then lead to bounds on
the energy landscape which, in turn, will certify the local minimum as being
globally optimal. The tools used for establishing the link will include
parametrization of self-adjoint extensions by the Lagrangian Grassmannian, the
Krein-Naimark resolvent formula, Dirichlet-to-Neumann map and the Maslov index
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.