* 2247410
* Nonlinear Elliptic Equations and Systems, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Yanyan Li, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2026
* USD 392,681.00

Partial differential equations arise naturally in physics, engineering,
geometry, and many other fields, and they form the basis for modeling many
phenomena in the physical world. The particular class of "fully nonlinear
elliptic equations and systems" is especially important from this perspective.
For instance, such equations and systems turn up in the theoretical study of
composite materials. This project contributes to a better understanding of fully
nonlinear elliptic equations and systems, thereby providing scientists and
engineers with sharpened insight into various physical processes and ultimately
enhancing the quality of consumer products manufactured from composites. As part
of the project, the principal investigator trains Ph.D. students, many of whom
are expected to continue their careers as educators. They, in turn, will convey
to even younger generations both their mathematical knowledge and the long-term
value of mathematical research not only to science and engineering but also, in
the end, to society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At a technical level, the PI has made
valuable contributions in the areas of the project and the work supported by
this award is a natural continuation of his earlier work. One part of the
project concerns a long-standing open problem on the existence and compactness
of solutions to a fully nonlinear Yamabe problem. This is equivalent to solving,
on a Riemannian manifold, a fully nonlinear elliptic (but not uniformly
elliptic) partial differential equation of second order. Closely related work
includes a fully nonlinear Nirenberg problem and a fully nonlinear Loewner-
Nirenberg problem. There has not been enough understanding for such type of
equations, especially comparing to that available for fully nonlinear uniformly
elliptic equations of second order where the theory is much more mature. The
study of the open problem should lead to better understanding of these elliptic,
but not uniformly elliptic, equations. It will also lead to a better
understanding of degenerate elliptic fully nonlinear equations of second order.
This will provide new tools in the study of this and other important nonlinear
partial differential equations arising from geometry and physics. Another part
of the project concerns elliptic equations and systems arising in the study of
fluids and composite materials. In particular, new tools are developed to study
a long-standing open problem on the existence of smooth solutions to the
incompressible stationary Navier-Stokes equations on a flat torus of dimension
sixteen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.