* 2247631
* Collaborative Research: Conference: Supporting inclusive and sustainable research infrastructure for systematics (SISRIS) by connecting scientists and their specimens.
* BIO,DBI
* 03/15/2023,02/29/2024
* Andrea Weeks, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Reed Beaman
* 02/29/2024
* USD 79,537.00

This project will create a conference-based workshop and symposium at the annual
Association for Southeastern Biologists conference (March 2023; Winston-Salem,
North Carolina) and the Botany 2023 conference (July 2023; Boise, Idaho) to
train scientists in new computational skills and practices that build inclusive
and sustainable infrastructure for collections-based research. Recent advances
in web-based software now make it possible for taxonomic experts to receive
greater professional recognition and citation of their digitized biological
specimens and identifications. Use of these software tools can increase the
visibility of scientists as well as modernize the professional rewards system to
support the development of taxonomic expertise. However, creating a self-
sustaining cycle of specimen attribution and citation that leverages this new
software requires greater awareness by collections-based researchers and
cultural change in how taxonomic expertise is credited. At the heart of this
change is ensuring that the names of the people who collect and identify
biological research specimens are disambiguated and associated with globally
unique identifiers. Accurate people-data are an essential part of the vision for
an extended specimen network because they link groups of specimens across
institutions and uncover events in the history of science. The project will
develop research infrastructure that is more inclusive, because taxonomic
contributions by all people would be acknowledged explicitly, and sustainable,
because improved recognition of taxonomic expertise would help build and sustain
this scientific workforce in the US.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Workshops will include
75 participants and the symposia will feature 12 diverse speakers, who will
reach an anticipated audience of 190 collections-based researchers. Speakers
will deliver case-studies that illustrate integrating people-data into the
digital infrastructure of biological research collections. The workshop will
comprise four hours of instruction about the use of globally unique identifiers
for people within the biodiversity informatics open-access software services of
Bionomia and the Global Biodiversity Information Facility and their interaction
with Open Researcher and Contributor ID, Wikidata, and Zenodo. Participants will
learn how to use these tools as part of documenting their own collections-based
research activities and as a means of community-level change in how taxonomic
expertise is acknowledged. For the latter objective, participants will practice
attributing US herbarium specimens to historical people from underrepresented
groups, which will increase the visibility of these scientists’ intellectual
contributions to biological research collections as well as improve the curation
of digitized US biological research collections. Extensive plans are included to
ensure broad participation, including outreach methods to underrepresented
groups and support to participants in the form of travel stipend and dependent-
care assistance. Workshop and symposium outcomes will be assessed rigorously and
shared with the broader systematics community as a model for improving how
taxonomic expertise is credited.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.