* 2247334
* Matrix Approximations, Stability of Groups and Cohomology Invariants
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Marius Dadarlat, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Jan Cameron
* 05/31/2026
* USD 269,475.00

The field of operator algebras emerged from the matrix mechanics formulation of
quantum mechanics created by Heisenberg and developed subsequently by von
Neumann. Physical properties of particles are interpreted as infinite matrices
which evolve in time and can be organized as algebraic structures of linear
operators acting on Hilbert spaces. Just like geometric spaces, operator
algebras may feature important symmetries corresponding to intrinsic properties
that are preserved under groups of transformations. The principal investigator
will study discrete finite-dimensional approximations that capture topological
properties of these infinite-dimensional structures and their stability
properties. In a different direction the principal investigator will study
topological invariants arising in the bundle theory of operator algebras. An
educational component of the project is devoted to the training of students in
an area of operator algebras that has direct connections to group stability and
testability problems in computer science and the theory of topological
insulators from solid state physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three projects
concerned with analytical and topological aspects of operator algebras will be
investigated. The purpose of the first project is to study the stability of
discrete groups with respect to the operator norm and topological obstructions
to group stability in various contexts. The second project is devoted to finite-
dimensional approximation properties of non-amenable discrete groups, with a
focus on quasidiagonality as a tool in the construction of almost flat vector
bundles and group quasi-representations that carry topological information. The
third project is concerned with invariants of continuous fields of C*-algebras
and their applications to C*-dynamical systems and higher twisted K-theory. The
aim is to obtain a complete calculation of the cohomology groups that classify
the continuous fields of stable strongly self-absorbing C*-algebras as part of
the generalized Dixmier-Douady theory that the principal investigator has
developed with Pennig.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.