* 2247646
* Collaborating with Student Partners to Design, Implement, and Assess Equity-Minded and Research-Based Teaching and Learning Practices in Mathematics Undergraduate Courses
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Cristina Villalobos, The University of Texas Rio Grande Valley
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 06/30/2025
* USD 199,838.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1 project aims to design, implement, and
assess the Students as Learners and Teachers (SaLT) HSI program at UTRGV. This
project is important due to the racial and gendered disparities in college
completion rates among Hispanics, specifically Hispanic women majoring in STEM.
SaLT HSI is a teaching intervention and innovation that can assist in retention
and student success efforts and enhance high-quality and equitable instructional
practices in mathematics undergraduate classes. The project outcomes are
expected to transform frontiers of knowledge and provide insight for subsequent
research studies and applications that center student voices through equity-
minded and equity-ethic teaching and learning practices. The outcomes are not
only expected to advance knowledge in teaching and learning but also have a
broad and positive impact on the academic success of underrepresented STEM
students in mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this
project is to evaluate the impact of an innovative intervention in which
undergraduate students majoring in mathematics, termed "student partners," work
with faculty partners in mathematics classes as collaborators to inform teaching
and learning practices. The research plan integrates a mixed-methods approach by
using quantitative and qualitative research, including a waitlist control group
design, to explore a research question to increase knowledge about effective
STEM education teaching and learning practices. The research questions explore
what the impacts are of a student-centered professional development on (1)
mathematics faculty members' mindset beliefs, culturally relevant teaching
practices, and critical consciousness (2) students' sense of belonging, mindset
beliefs, and perceptions of teaching behaviors in mathematics instructors'
courses, and (3) student partners' mindset beliefs, self-efficacy, and critical
consciousness. The project aims to achieve the overall objective by: 1.
Determining the impact of an innovative student-centered program on mathematics
faculty members' mindset beliefs, culturally relevant teaching behaviors, and
critical consciousness; 2. Identifying the impact of an innovative student-
centered program on Latinx students' mattering, sense of belonging, mindset
beliefs, and perceptions of their instructors' mindset beliefs; and 3.
Determining the impact of a student-centered professional development program on
student partners' sense of belonging, perceptions of instructor's mindset
beliefs, and critical consciousness. The HSI Program aims to enhance
undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by
the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.