* 2247629
* Synthetic Manipulation of Main Group Elements with Transition Metal Isocyanides
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Joshua Figueroa, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 06/30/2026
* USD 575,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Joshua S. Figueroa of the University of California, San Diego will
study how the chemistry and behavior of main-group elements can be controlled
and modulated by transition metal compounds featuring isocyanide supporting
groups. The isocyanide supporting groups used in the context of this project
provide a protective shield for the chemical interactions between the transition
metal and main-group elements. This shield, in turn, allows for the preparation
and isolation of molecules that are usually unstable and difficult to obtain. A
specific focus of this award is to use iron isocyanide compounds to study and
understand the fundamental properties and chemical reactivity of the diatomic
molecules boron monofluoride (BF) and diphosphorus. Boron monofluoride, as a
free molecule, is not stable under ambient conditions on account of the extreme
bonding polarization. Similarly, diphosphorus, unlike its lighter analogue
dinitrogen, is also not a stable molecule under normal conditions, preferring
instead to condense into polyphosphorus solid materials. With the advent of the
m-terphenyl isocyanide supporting groups, stable molecules containing both BF
and diphosphorus have been prepared. In the course of this award, detailed
investigations into the fundamental nature of BF and diphosphorus will be
conducted. These investigations seek to provide answers to basic questions,
including 1) how do metal-bound BF and diphosphorus react with other molecules,
2) how do BF and diphosphorus influence the chemical behavior on the metals to
which they are bound and, 3) how does the reactivity of metal-bound BF and
diphosphorus compare to that of the free, yet unstable, molecules? This project
will also focus on the preparation and characterization of other transition-
metal-supported main-group element species, with a specific emphasis on
generating other unusual or unknown diatomic molecules. The broader impacts
activities will include student research training and mentoring, the development
of a hands-on laboratory safety course for incoming graduate students, and
mentorship of transfer students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
specifically focus on the synthesis and reactivity of unusual main-group
fragments stabilized by transition-metal m-terphenyl isocyanide complexes.
Building on recent reports disclosing the synthesis of an iron terminal boron
monofluoride (BF) complex, and a mononuclear diphosphorus complex of iron,
detailed investigations will be conducted that aim to elucidate the reactivity
of these unusual diatomic ligands with exogenous substrates as well as their
specific influence on the transition metal centers to which they are bound. For
the terminal BF complex specifically, synthetic studies will be conducted that
aim to expand on the pronounced electrophilicity of the boron center, while at
the same time detailing reaction profiles that result in the cleavage of the BF
unit en route to other metal-boron complexes. In the case of the mononuclear
diphosphorus iron complex, its side-on binding mode presents the opportunity to
expound upon the fundamental periodic diagonal relationship between phosphorus
and carbon. Accordingly, reactivity studies will be conducted that aim to
compare and contrast the reactivity of metal-stabilized diphosphorus with that
of acetylene and other substituted alkynes. Specific to these efforts will be an
assessment of the scope of Diels-Alder-type reactivity between side-on
coordinated diphosphorus and organic dienes. In addition, based on preliminary
evidence, the electrophilic character of the side-on coordinated diphosphorus
with a range of nucleophilic substrates will be evaluated. In parallel to
investigations into the nature of BF and diphosphorus coordinated to iron, other
low-valent transition metal m-terphenyl isocyanide complexes will be prepared
and/or studied with respect to their ability to stabilize unusual main-group
fragments, with a focus on the preparation of other unstable or unknown diatomic
molecules, especially of the heavier p-block elements. An additional emphasis
will be placed on the synthesis of BF complexes of other transition metals in an
effort to test electronic structure hypotheses on the factors, electronic
environment(s) and conditions that are required to stabilize this reactive
diatomic molecule.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.