* 2247324
* Sulfonimidamides: New Frontiers in Stereochemistry and Functionality
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Jared Shaw, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 06/30/2026
* USD 575,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Jared T. Shaw of the University of California, Davis is studying the
development of new methods for the synthesis of sulfonimidamides (SIAs). SIAs
are organic molecules that do not occur in nature and, as such, are relatively
unexplored. They exhibit chirality, i.e. the ability to exist in a “right-” or
“left”-handed configuration. This property makes them interesting molecules to
study both for their reactivity and for the unique properties that they are
expected to impart to new drugs, materials, and other useful applications. The
funded research includes investigations into how to make these molecules
selectively of one handedness or of largely one enantiomeric configuration using
new catalytic methods that will be optimized for efficiency and examined for
breadth of application. In addition, this project will examines how this
chirality or “handedness”at a sulfur center can influence the formation of new
bonds adjacent to the SIA, which will enable the synthesis of new, complex SIAs
that have been not been accessed or explored heretofore. These related studies
will lay the groundwork for future applications in engineering and medicine that
have the potential to open up new vistas for discovery and application. In
parallel to the scientific experiments, this project will involve a monthly
science café that provides an accessible (and fun!) event where scientists
communicate their work to the general public at an off-campus venue. The broader
impacts of this work center on enabling the discovery of new molecules to
benefit society as well as the public discussion of science from across UC Davis
and how it benefits the state, community, and society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
funded research centers on the development of new synthetic methods related to
sulfonimidamides (SIAs). This underexplored functional group in organic
chemistry provides fertile ground for the discovery from potentially new
pharmaceutical lead compounds to new materials and catalysts. This research
examines several new catalytic, enantioselective methods for the synthesis of
SIAs, including cyclic versions of these molecules that are currently unknown
outside of patent literature. These catalytic methods include dynamic kinetic
resolution (DKR) using transition metal complexes as well as new phosphorous-
based conversion of S=O bonds to S=N bonds. In addition, the impact of sulfur-
based chirality on nucleophilic addition reactions that generate new stereogenic
centers will be examined. Although previous methods used S-chiral compounds,
e.g. sulfinimides, as chiral auxiliaries, this work seeks to make structurally
novel SIAs with multiple adjacent carbon stereogenic centers as useful target
molecules. Collectively this project aims to take a vertical step in the
knowledge of how to make a new functional group in organic chemistry and how
that functional group influences the reactivity of adjacent carbon
atoms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.