* 2247560
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: An Anti-tracking and Robocall-free Architecture for Next-G Mobile Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2027
* Thomas Hou, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 04/30/2027
* USD 600,000.00

Mobile networks have become integral to modern life, providing their users
ubiquitous access to voice, text, and data services. However, this reliance on
mobile phones has raised serious privacy concerns, as mobile network operators
(MNOs) have the ability to track and profile users. While the 5G system offers
some privacy protection through the use of concealed and temporary subscriber
identifiers, those with access to MNO databases can still track and profile
users. This project addresses this problem by developing a fully functional
anonymous mobile access architecture that allows legitimate mobile subscribers
to access the network without revealing their real identity. The architecture is
designed to disable mobile tracking and profiling using anonymous identifiers
ensuring that connections made by the same user at different times cannot be
linked. The design also supports critical incumbent mobile network functions,
including the identification of a user equipment (UE) and recovery of its
mobility history under legal intervention, while giving users control over the
level of privacy they risk under their own mobile phone use
contexts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research team aims to achieve the
above goal by integrating decentralized identifiers (DID) and anonymous
verifiable credential (VC) schemes into the 5G authentication and key agreement
(5G-AKA) protocol. Key research tasks to realize this anonymous mobile access
architecture include developing a novel secure callee discovery mechanism
leveraging DID to handle the voice call function, supporting user accountability
and ensuring compatibility with existing lawful interception requirements,
enabling flexible billing and rate control by service network, disabling
robocall scams, quantifying privacy risks and developing identifier refreshing
strategies, and conducting experiments and validation. Successful results for
this research will enable anti-tracking capabilities while using mobile networks
and offer a new way of thinking about privacy enhancement technologies in the
digital world. The outcomes of this research will be made publicly available
online, including tutorials, talks, publications, and open-source software. The
research team is committed to actively expanding the involvement of
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.