* 2247510
* Applied Design Thinking for Product Development Technicians
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Jennifer Swartout, NorthWest Arkansas Community College
* Standard Grant
* Eric Sheppard
* 06/30/2026
* USD 618,319.00

This project aims to serve the national interest by expanding design thinking
strategies developed under an existing Technical Certificate in Integrated
Design, to meet local and national industry needs for skilled workers with
analytical and creative problem-solving abilities and with specialized training
in product design and fabrication. This project will also strive to enlarge the
pool of students seeking such careers by providing increased opportunities and
support for Latinx students, “placed at risk” teens, and rural students
traditionally underrepresented in design-related and STEM technical fields.
Impacts will be achieved through the development of relevant, industry-advised,
and project-based coursework, and through partnerships with industry advisors
and outreach programs to provide well-supported, achievable pathways for
students from high school to college and from college to the workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will enhance strategies to meet local
workforce needs by leveraging curriculum and resources developed as part of a
previous NSF ATE grant and focuses on three goals. First is to enhance and
expand existing integrated design curricula to additional disciplines at
Northwest Arkansas Community College and other K-12 partners with industry-
aligned course components. Second is to enhance professional development
opportunities in advanced design thinking concepts, applied product design, and
sustainability. Third, and finally, is to partner with on-campus groups and
local agencies to create pathways to enroll, retain, and graduate
underrepresented groups in the region for an emerging technician role in product
development. Through meeting these goals, this project will provide an
accessible entry point for students to pursue multiple degree tracks and career
paths through design thinking, integrated design, and industry-advised
knowledge, skills, and abilities. This project leverages an existing Technical
Certificate in Integrated Design (TC-ID) across Construction Technology,
Computer-aided Design, and Fine Arts programs. The current TC-ID stacks into
three degree tracks: an Associate of Fine Arts (AFA), an Associate of Applied
Science (AAS) in Construction, or an AAS in Computer-Aided Design. This project
will expand the TC-ID to Engineering Technology and Graphic Design with
respective AAS degree tracks. The expansion of the Technical Certificate, and
the creation of a new Certificate of Proficiency in Integrated Design aimed for
concurrently enrolled high school students, will provide additional
opportunities for students to be exposed to multiple degree tracks while gaining
interdisciplinary skills and industry-ready credentials. This project is funded
by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.