* 2247692
* Strong C-H Bond Activation through Superbase Incorporation and pKa Matching
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Neil Tomson, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 06/30/2026
* USD 550,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Neil C. Tomson of the University of Pennsylvania will study the selective
cleavage of C–H bonds, a grand challenge in chemistry. These notoriously
unreactive bonds are widespread, from fossil fuels to plastics and other
materials. The development of methods for splitting C-H bonds in a controlled
manner is expected to aid in our fundamental understanding of their reaction
chemistry and provide insight into how biological systems can perform these
reactions with relative ease. These methods are also expected to enable
technological developments, including the use of abundant feedstock chemicals,
such as methane, for alternative fuels production. Trainees on this project will
become skilled at performing highly air- and moisture-sensitive synthetic
chemistry. This work will be supplemented by the use of modern computational
chemistry techniques, which will provide an information-rich supplement to the
synthetic chemistry being performed in the laboratory. The project will
contribute to ongoing outreach efforts aimed at introducing high school students
to themes in energy science. This effort will involve the creation of short
videos that provide visual aids for explaining important aspects of chemistry in
an accessible and captivating manner. The videos will highlight concepts covered
within a high school curriculum and dovetail them with the alternative fuels
focus of this research project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The activation of aliphatic
C–H bonds is challenging for several reasons, including the need for a strong
thermodynamic driving force for C–H bond cleavage. Copper ions, in combination
with O2, are known to mediate strong C–H bond activation reactions in enzymes,
but homogeneous systems have yet to adequately replicate this reactivity. This
research seeks to bridge this divide through two complementary objectives. The
first will create ligand scaffolds capable of engaging in low-barrier hydrogen
bonds with a protonated cupric superoxide unit. The added thermodynamic driving
force for proton transfer imparted by these unique hydrogen bonding interactions
is expected to boost C–H bond activation reactivity. The second will seek to
shift the thermodynamic landscape for proton transfer under anaerobic conditions
by introducing superbasic functionalities (pKa of conjugate acid greater than
16) into the primary or secondary coordination spheres of cupric complexes. This
latter strategy will be supplemented by the use of machine learning to
accelerate the discovery of critical factors controlling the capacity of various
ligand systems to enable strong C–H bond activation. The research described in
this proposal is aimed at generating the knowledge needed to create new classes
of base metal complexes for the efficient and selective activation of low
molecular weight alkanes. This work has the potential to advance our
understanding of critical C–H bond activation chemistry, while guiding future
studies on the catalytic processing of alternative fuels relevant to a renewable
energy economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.