* 2247014
* Collaborative Research: Hardware-Aware Matrix Computations for Deep Learning Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Atri Rudra, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* A. Funda Ergun
* 04/30/2026
* USD 376,964.00

Deep Learning (DL) systems these days are ubiquitous, and arguably affect our
everyday lives more than any other computational system. Recently, such deep
models (e.g., GPT-3) have increasingly become large and unwieldy with a large
computational footprint. Given the ever increasing computational requirements,
it has become nearly impossible to make progress on cutting edge research in
learning such DL models outside of a few large technological companies. This
project will explore principled ways to create DL systems that are as expressive
as the large deep models but at a fraction of the computational cost. On the
practical front these improvements are expected to expand the possibility of
creating such powerful DL models to larger parts of society. On the educational
front, this project will train undergraduate (UG) researchers and will integrate
responsible computing into UG curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
study how one can use structured matrices in concert with modern hardware
constraints to achieve similar performance as these really large models but at a
fraction of size and computational cost. Specifically, the investigators focus
on the following two thrusts: (i) Design the ‘holy grail’ of structured matrices
that satisfy all properties that are desirable in DL applications (including
having an efficient projection problem as well as having efficient parallel
and/or hardware friendly learning algorithms); and (ii) Thinking of new
applications that our new theory can unlock. This DL lens exposes new problems
to consider when studying structured matrices. In turn, the new family of
structured matrices studied in this project will not only have immediate
practical applications but will also unlock new twists on classical theoretical
problems in matrix computations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.