* 2247262
* CAS: Voltage-Driven Molecular Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Guoxiang Hu, CUNY Queens College
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2026
* USD 608,164.00

With support from the Chemical Catalysis (CAT) Program of the Chemistry
Division, Professors Michael Mirkin and Guoxiang Hu of the City University of
New York, Queens College are using electrochemical techniques in combination
with theoretical and computational approaches to investigate voltage-driven
molecular catalysis. Improved understanding of voltage-driven molecular
catalysis can facilitate the development of next-generation hybrid catalysts
with important implications for both energy technology and synthetic chemistry.
The project is also providing training opportunities for graduate and
undergraduate students, who will receive multidisciplinary research training in
electrocatalysis, scanning probe microscopy, computational chemistry, and
nanoscience. Outreach involving high school students is planned to introduce
them to the scientific approach, in general, and to catalysis and energy science
in particular.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, Professors Michael Mirkin
and Guoxiang Hu of the City University of New York, Queens College will study
the fundamentally important and incompletely understood effect of the
interfacial potential drop on activity of a surface-bound molecular catalyst.
Hybrid voltage-driven molecular catalysts are being developed for several
fundamentally important energy-related processes, such as the oxygen evolution
reaction (OER) and the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxidations of H2O2
and alcohols. Different redox mediators, including a fully organic molecular
catalyst, TEMPO [(2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidin-1-yl)oxyl], will be attached to
the catalytically inert carbon surface and the effects of chemical nature of the
catalyst, solution ionic strength, and other factors on reaction kinetics will
be investigated. Scanning electrochemical microscopy (SECM) will be used to
measure catalytic rate constants as a function of the applied potential. The
concept of voltage-driven molecular catalysis is also to be applied to
electrosynthesis. A voltage-driven molecular catalyst can facilitate
electrosynthetic reactions, which it has no capacity to catalyze without field
assistance. The effects of the applied potential, solvent, and other
experimental factors on the reaction yield and selectivity will be investigated.
First-principles electronic structure calculations based on density-functional
theory (DFT) will be performed to help elucidate details of the mechanism of
voltage-driven molecular catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.