* 2247938
* Collaborative Research: Evolution of ligand-dependent Robo receptor activation mechanisms for axon guidance
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Alexander Jaworski, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Andrea Holgado
* 07/31/2026
* USD 625,000.00

The connections between the information-processing cells of our nervous system
are formed by long extensions of these cells called axons. The growth and
guidance of axons toward their correct target cells is a critical step in neural
circuit assembly during embryonic development. One important group of proteins
that reside on growing axons and control their guidance is called Robos. This
collaborative study will elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying the
activation of Robo family proteins for axon steering, and it will also determine
how Robos have changed over the course of evolution to allow the wiring of
nervous systems with increasing complexity. By providing insights into the
molecular mechanisms of axon pathfinding, this work can improve our
understanding of disorders resulting from nervous system miswiring, and it has
the potential to inform therapeutic approaches for neural circuit repair. The
project will involve undergraduate and graduate students in cutting-edge
research, with an emphasis on the career development of women and
underrepresented minorities. It also includes outreach to Providence, RI, and
Chicago, IL, public high schools by hosting students in research laboratories
and helping them gain early experience in developmental neurobiology
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Slit-Robo ligand-receptor pair is an
evolutionarily ancient signaling module that controls axon crossing of the
nervous system midline in bilaterians by mediating repulsion. Yet, our
understanding of the signaling mechanisms of Robo and Slit homologs and other
associated proteins remains incomplete. Further complicating the picture is a
divergent Robo family member, mammalian Robo3, which cannot bind Slits but is
essential for axon crossing of the spinal cord midline. Previous work discovered
a secreted Robo3 ligand, NELL2, which guides commissural axons via repulsion.
Preliminary results indicate that the formation of an active NELL2-Robo3 complex
is mechanistically distinct from Slit-Robo interactions and that, in mammals,
Robo3 and the canonical Robos, Robo1, and Robo2, evolved from a dual ligand-
binding ancestor at the root of the vertebrate tree. The driving hypothesis for
the proposed studies is that the functional specialization of mammalian Robo
family members is crucial for circuit wiring. This project integrates the
expertise of two investigators in structural/biophysical and functional/genetic
approaches to investigate Robo signaling and evolution. Ancient sequence
reconstruction, biochemical methods, and axon guidance assays will be used to
map the evolutionary history of Robo ligand binding and signaling capabilities.
Further, structural approaches, structure-based mutagenesis, biophysical
methods, and axon guidance assays will be combined to determine the
contributions of Robo ligand binding site divergence, extracellular domain
conformation, and molecular crowding to ligand-receptor complex formation and
signaling in mammals and non-mammalian vertebrates. The project will provide
training to students at all levels and include outreach activities, with a
research focus, at local high schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.