* 2247727
* SaTC: CORE: Small: New Cryptographic Capabilities for a Quantum World
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Dakshita Khurana, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 04/30/2026
* USD 571,719.00

The emergence of quantum technologies opens up new avenues for the development
of cryptographic capabilities that would otherwise have been impossible to
achieve. For example, once an adversary gains access to a string of data, they
may store arbitrarily many copies of this string and there is no way to verify
that the string was truly deleted. Even if the string is a ciphertext encoding
an underlying plaintext, an adversary can always keep that ciphertext around
forever or distribute many copies of it to malicious entities. If security of
the underlying encryption scheme breaks down in the future, or if the key is
compromised, malicious entities may be able to recover the plaintext – and this
may be unacceptable for highly sensitive data. On the other hand, unknown
quantum states cannot be copied, and measurements on these states are inherently
destructive and irreversible. This raises the exciting possibility of building
cryptosystems with strong deletion and unclonability properties by encoding
information into quantum states.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research project
enables these capabilities by carefully combining mathematical hardness with
security that arises from the properties of quantum information. The first
research focus develops cryptosystems that support verifiable deletion of
sensitive data – these include advanced encryption schemes, methods of
outsourcing to untrusted servers, and distributed secure computation. These
schemes allow untrusted devices and servers to prove that they deleted or erased
private records forever – even after they already had access to, or computed on,
encodings of these records. The second focus strengthens the quantum no-cloning
principle in cryptographically useful ways, to build strong foundations for
unclonable cryptography. This leads to cryptosystems that prevent an adversary
from splitting a quantum encoding into two or more states that meaningfully
encode an underlying secret. The project also establishes mentoring programs and
seminars for cryptography researchers and develops expository material to
benefit an upcoming generation of researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.