* 2247846
* Many-particle Systems with Singular Interactions: Statistical Mechanics and Mean-field Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Sylvia Serfaty, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2026
* USD 704,826.00

Mathematical analysis can help understand and derive effective laws or effective
theories emerging from the collective behavior of many particles. This project
is particularly interested in such rigorous derivations in the case where the
many particles are interacting with singular forces, such as the Coulomb force,
which is the fundamental electric force of nature. Understanding the statistical
behavior of such systems, as well as their dynamical laws, is directly related
to fundamental questions in several areas of physics and applied science: the
Coulomb gas in statistical physics, models of plasmas in astrophysics and plasma
physics, quantum mechanics models, analysis of random matrices (itself initially
motivated by the analysis of the spectrum of large atoms), phase transitions in
condensed matter physics (superconductors and superfluids), but also collective
behavior in biology, social sciences, and neural networks. Recent progress has
been made bringing forward new tools from analysis and probability to analyze
such questions, with or without randomness, but much remains to be done. The
project focuses in particular on two directions. The first is obtaining
convergence results for dynamics that are valid for all time and with an
explicit error rate, thus useful in practice. The second is in understanding the
famous Kosterlitz-Thouless phase transition in the so-called "two component
plasma". This is a two-dimensional gas made of positively and negatively charged
particles with electrostatic interaction. Positive particles and negative
particles attract and, depending on the temperature, they pair into collapsed
dipoles (at low temperature) or behave as free charges (at high temperature).
What was an initial surprise is that, according to the Nobel-prize winning
prediction of Berezinsky, Kosterlitz, and Thouless, a third, intermediate and
new state of matter exists, with quite unusual behavior that is explained by the
formation of vortices. Much remains to be rigorously analyzed about this phase
transition, and the project hopes to advance this theoretical understanding. The
broader impacts of the project stem from its mentoring and training component,
expository work, communication and outreach to broader audiences, as well as
involvement with the community in various roles. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
effective or mean-field behavior of systems with singular interactions, in
particular Coulombic ones, has been understood for several situations of
dynamics and statistical mechanics. In the case of equilibrium statistical
mechanics, this consists in examining the behavior of the particle density under
the canonical Gibbs measure, and this has been understood via large deviations
techniques and potential theory. In the purely repulsive Coulomb case, much more
has been understood, including the fluctuations around the mean-field limit and
the microscopic behavior of the points. The project further extends this
understanding by proving the connection to the Gaussian Multiplicative Chaos in
the 2D Coulomb case, and by analyzing non-Coulomb Riesz repulsive interactions,
which present further challenges. Much less has been understood about the case
of a neutral plasma of oppositely charged particles (which then attract), which
makes sense as a two-dimensional system. In particular, the project will turn to
understanding the fine behavior of such a two-component Coulomb gas, in which a
very particular phase transition, the Berezinski-Kosterlitz-Thouless phase
transition, is predicted to happen. Bringing in an electrostatic and large
deviations-based approach to this topic will provide a new approach to such
problems, alternate to the renormalization methods of quantum field theory, and
allow to understand the model below and above the critical temperature, with
characterizations of the formation of dipoles and multipoles which explain the
phase transition, and analysis of the fluctuations. The last main part of the
project turns to gradient flow, conservative dynamics and Newtonian dynamics of
systems with Coulomb or Riesz repulsive or attractive interactions. Thanks in
particular to the recent modulated energy and modulated free energy methods, the
mean-field limit can be derived, but much less has been understood beyond this
than in the statistical mechanics setting. The project will allow us to
understand whether and when global-in-time convergence holds, questions of
instability in the case with attraction, and fluctuations and large deviations
away from the mean-field behavior, thus providing much more precise information
on such dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.