* 2247405
* Collaborative Research: Conference: 2023 Workshop for Aspiring PIs in Secure and Trusted Cyberspace
* CSE,CNS
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Rachel Greenstadt, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Anna Squicciarini
* 12/31/2023
* USD 44,675.00

This project funds a 1.5 day workshop to support researchers who aspire to be
principal investigators (PIs) on NSF’s Secure and Trustworthy Cyberspace (SaTC)
grants. The goal of the workshop is to provide mentorship and guidance to
aspiring PIs for writing proposals, which might be either their first attempt or
a declined proposal who needs work prior resubmission. The workshop’s novelties
are a focus on developing comprehensive research plans, through one-on-one
meetings with mentors, participating in mock panels, and developing an executive
summary that can be developed into a full proposal submitted to SaTC.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop’s broader significance and
importance are that many researchers with quality research programs may lack
support in developing critical proposal writing and presentation skills that end
up excluding them from funding opportunities. In addition to supporting aspiring
PIs, the workshop will broaden participation in the SaTC program by seeking
participants with diverse backgrounds in multiple dimensions. These include but
are not limited to those from small and large organizations; R1, R2 and liberal
arts schools; researchers interested in the CORE, as well as the EDU and TTP
programs of SaTC; researchers engaged with the breadth of cybersecurity, from
hardware, software, privacy, human factors; and aspiring PIs from traditionally
underrepresented groups in computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.