* 2247364
* Uniformization of non-uniform geometries
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Sergiy Merenkov, CUNY City College
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Tyson
* 05/31/2026
* USD 223,727.00

Recent decades have witnessed increased interest in the understanding of fractal
and random objects that exhibit non-uniform geometries. Fractals are spaces that
possess either a degree of self-similarity, or roughness, or both, and
randomness refers to uncertainty in these patterns. Non-uniform geometry here
means that the geometric features of the given objects do not adhere to the same
quantitative standards across all locations and scales. Within mathematics,
substantial interest in the study of fractals comes from their applications in
the theory of dynamical systems. Outside of mathematics, fractals have numerous
applications, for instance, in antenna design, terrain analysis, and target
recognition. This project revolves around questions and problems regarding
surface uniformization and simultaneous conformal welding, in particular, in the
presence of randomness. The principal investigator will adapt and extend
conformal uniformization and welding techniques to new non-uniform and fractal
dynamical settings. The investigator also intends to mentor students at various
levels, from high school to Ph.D., and foster research in the actively evolving
field of fractal geometry and dynamics.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The geometrically
non-uniform objects considered in this project are metric curves and spaces that
are not quasisymmetrically equivalent to circles, equilateral triangulations,
etc. Examples of such spaces are abundant in the dynamics of quadratic
polynomials, in conformal welding problems, and in random uniformization. One
specific goal of the project is to introduce a new class of random surfaces
spread over the sphere and to consider the type problem for surfaces of this
class. In the case when such surfaces are (almost surely) parabolic, the value
distribution properties of associated functions, particularly the order of
growth of such functions, will be investigated. Another goal is to develop
simultaneous conformal welding tools and techniques that in turn will extend
recent results on merging reflection groups with critically fixed anti-rational
maps. The methods to be employed are complex analytic in nature. Success in this
project will result in new contributions to the growing literature on random
surface uniformization and conformal welding, will raise new questions in random
value distribution, and will develop new tools which go beyond those employed in
current methodology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.