* 2247807
* Over-engaged parenting and science achievement in early childhood
* EDU,DRL
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2028
* Julia Leonard, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 05/31/2028
* USD 740,385.00

Acquiring scientific knowledge and skills requires persisting through
challenges, yet it has become increasingly common for parents in the United
States to step in and solve problems for their children. This type of over-
engaged parenting leads preschool-age children to have lower persistence, lower
executive function, and worse reading and math achievement in grade school
across socioeconomic backgrounds. However, prior work leaves open major
theoretical and practical questions about the beliefs that drive over-engaged
parenting and children’s response to it. Our research aims to fill these gaps by
examining the causes and consequences of over-engaged parenting so that we can
better understand how caregivers can support children's scientific success upon
school entry. This project is supported by NSF's EDU Core Research (ECR)
program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that
generates foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical
areas that are essential, broad, and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development,
and by the Discovery Research PreK-12 (DRK-12) program, which supports applied
research in formal STEM learning environments. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed research will take a multi-method approach to uncover the basic
cognitive mechanisms underlying caregivers' over-engaged behavior and children's
response to it. In Study 1, researchers will employ observational and
experimental methods to test whether parents’ beliefs about learning and task
outcome drive their over-engaged behavior on science and non-science tasks. In
Study 2, researchers will conduct experiments to determine which inferences
drive the demotivating effects of over-engaged parenting on young children’s
science persistence, as well as how parents can be involved in children's lives
without undermining their motivation. In Study 3, researchers will run a
longitudinal study assessing how over-engaged parenting during the preschool
years relates to children’s science engagement and achievement during the
transition to formal schooling. These studies will be conducted in collaboration
with community partners, schools, and science museums to ensure the inclusion of
families from diverse backgrounds. Taken together, the results will provide
critical insight into how caregivers can foster young children's science
motivation and achievement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.