* 2247861
* Enhancing Uncrewed Aerial Systems Career Readiness in Biological Monitoring and Resource Management
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Crystal Peirce, William Rainey Harper College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 07/31/2026
* USD 345,647.00

Significant growth in the Uncrewed Aircraft Systems (UAS) industry in the last
five years has led to the need for skilled pilots, technicians, and analysts in
this emerging field. The goal of this project at Harper College is to provide a
gateway to emerging employment opportunities for students in using UAS
technologies in the biological monitoring and resource management workforce
domains in the Chicago metropolitan area and northern Illinois. The integration
of UAS technology into these fields presents a novel opportunity to create a
pipeline of Science Technology Engineering and Math (STEM) technicians with
skills in drone operations and remote sensing. This project will strengthen
Harper’s capacity to serve the UAS workforce needs of the wider Chicago
metropolitan area and beyond. The success of this project will open the door to
expanding the infusion of UAS technology into STEM fields at Harper and
surrounding high schools and community colleges that use UAS technology or
remote sensing. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall educational aim of the project
will be met by focusing on two principal goals that include (1) Enhancing UAS
career readiness in biological monitoring and resource management by
incorporating UAS knowledge, skills, and abilities (KSA’s) into existing courses
and through experiential learning opportunities with industry partners, and (2)
Preparing educators to integrate UAS in STEM courses through summer workshops
and a community of practice model that promotes interdisciplinary collaboration
and curriculum development. This project will serve as a model for other
academic institutions interested in developing a comprehensive program aimed at
addressing the shortage of well-qualified and skilled UAS technicians. This
project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses
on the education of technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive
the Nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.