* 2247875
* Integrating Principles of Social Justice into Engineering Education
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Erick Fuoco, BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF COMMUNITY COLLEGE DISTRICT #508
* Standard Grant
* Mary Crowe
* 04/30/2026
* USD 199,996.00

This project seeks to improve the preparation of future engineers starting in
high school. The sequence of mathematics classes taken by students preparing to
enter engineering can take a long time to complete and for many students this
long completion time can deter them from pursuing engineering degrees. The
proposed work provides math education to high school students with the goal that
a larger portion of these students are placed in calculus when they enter
college. The team will design extra-curricular activities to enrich
participantâ€™s skillsets outside of the classroom to make them more prepared for
the engineering major and a future career in industry. In addition, engineering
students will be given the opportunity to explore connections of academic theory
to answering engineering problems that have societal impact. Increasing the
preparation and motivation of engineering students can lead to higher
recruitment and retention of future engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this
project Richard J. Daley College, an Hispanic Serving Institution (HSI), will
collaborate with Chicago Public Schools. Additional academic, professional, and
community organizations will comprise a Partner Roundtable to aid the team in
maintaining focus on inclusive and socially just programming. This work seeks to
address calculus readiness and engagement of students in engineering education.
The specific goals include (1) increasing calculus placement of incoming
engineering undergraduates; (2) providing students with desirable soft skills
and understanding of engineering in society; and (3) building community among
pre-engineering students. A primary research question is how community-centered
supports can increase the interest and improve the preparedness of pre-
engineering students. An external evaluator will use a mixed methods approach
that includes participant interviews and institutional data on math success and
retention. Research findings will be shared internally among partners, at higher
education meetings (such as the American Society for Engineering Education), and
in scholarly publications. The project aims to serve as a model for creating
community in support of effective and uplifting engineering education that can
lead to institutional change impacting many future engineering students. The HSI
Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in
STEM, and build capacity for institutional transformation at HSIs. Achieving
these aims, given the diverse nature and context of the HSIs, requires
innovative approaches that incentivize institutional and community
transformation and promote fundamental research (i) on engaged student learning,
(ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase participation in STEM
effectively, and (iii) that develops improved understanding of how to build
institutional capacity at HSIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.