* 2247411
* Complexity-Building Approaches in Photoassisted Synthesis of Heterocycles
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Andrei Kutateladze, University of Denver
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 08/31/2026
* USD 575,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Andrei Kutateladze of University of Denver is studying the development
of new molecular complexity-building methods for the synthesis of organic
compounds that possess potentially useful properties. The major thrust of this
research is based on photoassisted approaches, i.e. using light as a readily
available energy source, allowing for rapid access to complex molecular
architectures. Besides the fundamental importance of learning about the
interactions of light and matter in the context of synthetic chemistry, the
targeted complex heterocycles, i.e. molecules that contain nitrogen, sulfur, or
oxygen atoms as a part of a ring, are intentionally designed to resemble
alkaloids, an important class of natural products that may possess useful
therapeutic properties. Importantly, this award will also support research
experiences for undergraduate and graduate students, including those from
historically underrepresented groups in science, thereby working toward
inclusive excellence in the field of organic chemistry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to further expand the synthetic
photochemistry toolbox, specifically to further develop excited state
intramolecular proton transfer (ESIPT)-based photoassisted synthetic reaction
cascades. For example, the Kutateladze group is targeting hydrogen atom transfer
(HAT) in triplet states, designed to achieve large step-normalized complexity
increases in the synthesis of complex heterocyclic molecular architectures. This
work will also include a vertical growth in complexity through post-
photochemical transformations. Reaction mechanisms and the stereochemistry of
these ESIPT-triggered cascades will be investigated to better understand how
these transformations achieve their stereo- and regiochemical outcomes. The
experimental work will be augmented by computations that have been designed to
facilitate solution structure elucidation of the complex heterocyclic products
by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. The newly integrated machine
learning-augmented density functional theory (DFT) method for fast and accurate
calculations of the NMR parameters will be expanded to explicitly account for
the effect of solvents on the predicted spectra. This sub-theme of the proposed
research is critical for the success of this project because of the structural
complexity of the target molecules. Moreover, further development of this method
will likely have broader implications for the structure elucidation of complex
organic molecules, in general.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.