* 2247026
* Next Generation Manufacturing Resource Center
* EDU,DUE
* 10/15/2022,12/31/2023
* Karen Wosczyna-Birch, Education Connection
* Standard Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 12/31/2023
* USD 605,444.00

The development of a diverse, globally competitive advanced manufacturing
workforce is critical to US stability and growth. Major areas of focus for the
Regional Center for Next Generation Manufacturing (RCNGM) have been to change
negative perceptions of manufacturing careers and to increase the participation
and success of historically underrepresented minorities, women, and veterans in
the technical workforce. RCNGM has created nationally-recognized materials for
educators, career counselors, students, and parents that focus on choosing
community colleges as a next step to high paying careers in manufacturing. With
support of this award, RCNGM plans to establish an NSF ATE Resource Center.
RCNGM will broaden its partnerships by expanding community college/industry
partnerships throughout the Northeast, specifically in Massachusetts, Maine, New
Hampshire, Rhode Island, Vermont, and by partnering with the National Coalition
for Advanced Technology Centers and the National Association for Workforce
Improvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The RCNGM Resource Center will provide
exemplary resources for advanced manufacturing online learning via online tools
(website, webinars, and social media), as well as through regional and national
professional conferences that engage the RCNGM's stakeholders. These resources
will assist current and prospective principal investigators to identify and
implement successful materials and strategies for creating career pathways that
include certificates and degrees that include stackable credentials and multiple
entry/exit points. The Resource Center will also foster industry, business, and
academic partnerships by increasing the availability and variety of exemplary,
industry-driven advanced manufacturing curricula that emphasize both technical
and professional skills. The Resource Center will promote advanced manufacturing
careers with a focus on modernizing the image of manufacturing careers and
disseminating successful models for recruiting and retaining students in
advanced manufacturing. Finally, the Resource Center will coordinate and support
regional and national industry, business, and academic partnerships that have
the potential to create a sustainable network for advancing manufacturing
programs at community colleges nationwide. This project is funded by the NSF
Advanced Technological Education program that focuses on the education of
technicians for the advanced-technology fields that drive the nation's
economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.