* 2247283
* A Simulation-Based Pedagogical Approach in Chemistry Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Sungwook Hong, CSUB Auxiliary for Sponsored Programs Administration
* Standard Grant
* Julio Soto
* 06/30/2025
* USD 89,994.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this project aims to develop, implement, validate,
and disseminate a program of study that will support the fundamental
understanding of chemical reactions and their application in solving advanced
science problems by using computational modeling. Many institutions require
engineering students to take a prerequisite chemistry course, however, such a
course is often not aligned with knowledge and skills that students seek for
their majors and is not immediately applicable to solving advanced engineering
problems. Additionally, students may experience difficulties in learning
chemistry due to its abstract nature and a lack of student-centered learning
strategies. To address these challenges the Simulation-Based Pedagogical
Approach in Chemistry Education for All Students to Succeed in STEM (SPACE)
project aims to fill a gap in the research by integrating advanced engineering
techniques to give students dynamic representation of abstract and unobservable
phenomena at molecular and atomic levels using real-time simulations. This
project intends to embed evidence-based practices in entry level courses to
improve long-term student learning and create a community that will cultivate
their science identity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goals of Project SPACE are to
develop and test a co-curricular set of activities that will support the
fundamental understanding of chemical reactions and their application in solving
advanced science problems for undergraduate students in engineering majors. The
project will use training in computational modeling and simulation skills,
incorporate evidence-based learning strategies, and further develop studentsâ€™
science identity through an asset-based pedagogical tool. The project will
recruit engineering undergraduate students who are enrolled in a prerequisite
chemistry course at California State University, Los Angeles using a variety of
methods. Over the course of two years in three distinct implementations the team
will pilot-test and refine the course of study. In each implementation, students
will be assessed before, during, immediately after, and one semester later in
four main areas: chemical reaction knowledge, context-based science problem-
solving skills, motivation toward science, and science identity. Through the
three implementations, the project will be comprehensively evaluated using a set
of instruments to examine its promises for future adaptation and replication at
an institutional level. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM
education, broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity for institutional
transformation at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given the diverse nature and
context of the HSIs, requires innovative approaches that incentivize
institutional and community transformation and promote fundamental research (i)
on engaged student learning, (ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase
participation in STEM effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of
how to build institutional capacity at HSIs are supported by this
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.