* 2247159
* Developing Nonlinear Time-of-Flight Spectroscopies for Studies of Transport Mechanisms in Layered Perovskite Solar Cells
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2027
* Andrew Moran, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Kelsey Cook
* 08/31/2027
* USD 240,605.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Andrew Moran of the University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill is developing spectroscopic tools and time-of-flight
techniques to measure electron movement in perovskites. Single pulse, time-of-
flight techniques have been used to measure electron velocities in two-
dimensional materials such as solar cells for many decades; however, the time
required to collect the signal is traditionally limited by the electronics
employed for signal detection. Professor Moran and his group will construct an
instrument to reduce this time by detecting the photocurrent induced with
multiple laser pulses. Both drift and diffusion of photoexcited species within
perovskite solar cells will then be simultaneously measured. Their discoveries
could lead to a better understanding of electron transport mechanisms in layered
perovskite materials. Students involved in this project will develop technical
skills involving lasers, optics, and electronics.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multidimensional action spectroscopies capable of
disentangling parallel energy and charge funneling processes in photovoltaic
cells will be used to measure spontaneous processes such as the photocurrent and
fluorescence produced by a device. Direct detection of such spontaneous
processes clarifies the relevance of a measurement to the function of a device
and minimizes the ambiguities inherent in conventional spectroscopic approaches.
To fully characterize the parallel processes occurring in the active layers of
photovoltaic cells, Professor Moran and his group will develop a transient
grating photocurrent spectrometer in which drift and diffusion are
simultaneously measured in orthogonal directions within the active layers of the
devices. In addition, separate detection channels will be incorporated to
distinguish transport processes involving excitons (fluorescence) and free
charge carriers (photocurrent). Drift velocity dispersion will be characterized
with time-of-flight measurements in which one pulse initiates drift and the
color of a second pulse is tuned to probe photoexcited carriers at various
depths in the active layer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.