* 2247114
* CQIS: Operator algebra and Quantum Information Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Marius Junge, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Jan Cameron
* 07/31/2026
* USD 288,684.00

Analyzing how information is encoded in the state of a quantum system is
fundamental to understanding a wide range of physical phenomena and has the
potential to enhance a growing array of applications in computing, engineering,
and technology. In this project, tools from the mathematical fields of
functional analysis, operator algebras and quantum probability will be developed
with the aim of exploring connections to quantum information theory. The theory
of operator algebras provides a framework for many aspects of quantum mechanics.
Combined with concepts from quantum information theory, operator algebraic
methods may provide insight into a variety of phenomena, including the entropy
of a system, the properties of many-body systems, and black holes. The work of
the PI includes collaboration with IQUIST, a quantum institute at the University
of Illinois, and is part of an interdisciplinary effort to build a quantum
workforce which can tackle the new challenges of quantum computation and
infinite-dimensional aspects of quantum mechanics. The PI will provide summer
support for graduate students and maintain a diverse, interdisciplinary research
group. The PI plans to coordinate a learning seminar, new course offerings, and
other project opportunities (in cooperation with the Illinois Geometry Lab,
IQUIST, and Quantum Exchange Chicago) with the goal of bridging the gap between
the theoretical and practical aspects of quantum information science.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work supported by this award is motivated by dynamical
aspects in quantum information theory and operator algebra theory. This research
will simultaneously deepen the current understanding of fundamental properties
in von Neumann algebra, provide computational aspects of algebraic quantum field
theory and provide powerful inequalities for entropy decay in quantum
information theory. The outcomes of the proposed research in operator algebras
are highly interdisciplinary, including work on quantum circuits, many-body
systems and potential applications on modeling area laws for black
holes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.