* 2247544
* Rigidity, Stability, Regularity, and Resolution Theorems in the Geometric Calculus of Variations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Francesco Maggi, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 05/31/2028
* USD 372,943.00

This project investigates a set of mathematical models used in areas of Physics
like General Relativity or surface tension theory. The focus is on aspects of
these models that require the development of new mathematical tools and ideas.
This kind of basic research advances Mathematics while keeping it grounded in
the natural sciences. An important component of the project is research
training, both at the graduate and the postdoctoral
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Soap films are classically modeled as two-
dimensional surfaces, an approach that is correct in first approximation, but
prevents the understanding of some of their physical properties such as bursting
or bulging. The investigator has recently initiated the study of soap-films in
the context of capillarity theory (soap films as three-dimensional regions with
positive volume), and this project will focus on several new problems
challenging the boundaries of GMT (Geometric Measure Theory) and the Calculus of
Variations and aimed at understanding the interplay between the volume
constraint and geometric features like collapsing and thickness. The
investigator also intends to reformulate the soap film capillarity model in the
context of diffused interface capillarity, thus adding a second length scale
needed to further inquiry into collapsing phenomena. Diffused interface
capillarity is also used to propose a PDE (Partial Differential Equations)
approach to long standing questions concerning the volume-preserving mean
curvature flow. PDE and GMT methods are central to the part of the project where
the investigator will undertake a systematic analysis of a new kind of geometric
regularity theorems (mesoscale flatness criteria) and their applications to the
study of large-volume exterior isoperimetry and stable constant mean curvature
foliations at infinity in General Relativity. Finally, novel approaches to
natural generalizations of the Yamabe and Kazdan–Werner problems with boundary
in Riemannian Geometry will also be studied as part of the project using methods
from the theory of Optimal Mass Transport.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.