* 2247914
* Collaborative Research: RESEARCH PGR: The epigenomic selfing syndrome: revealing the impact of breeding system on epigenomes
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Rebecca Mosher, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Gerald Schoenknecht
* 06/30/2027
* USD 473,471.00

The evolution of mating system – whether a plant primarily self-fertilizes
(inbreeds) or outcrosses (is pollinated by a different individual) – is one of
the most frequent changes during plant evolution. Self-fertilization is
associated with a common set of changes in floral development, together known as
the selfing syndrome. For example, flowers of self-fertilizing species tend to
be smaller and unscented because they do not need to attract pollinators. We
know less about how the transition to self-fertilization impacts the genome and
epigenome – the pattern of chemical modifications that control the way genes
function. Using multiple plant species in two genera (Capsella and Mimulus),
this research will investigate how genomes and epigenomes differ between self-
fertilizing and outcrossing species. This work will help us understand
hybridization barriers, which limit our ability to make inter-species crosses
for breeding improved crops. This research will also increase our fundamental
understanding of seed development, a critical aspect of agricultural
productivity, and generate a wealth of sequence-based resources that will enable
the plant genomics community to answer further questions. Research from this
project will be incorporated into undergraduate and graduate courses taught by
the PIs. Finally, this research will help maintain ongoing collaborations with
local K-12 teachers to develop hands-on plant biology activities for use in
their classrooms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Selfing fundamentally alters the nature
of genomic conflicts and is predicted to affect several epigenetic phenomena,
including genomic imprinting, effective ploidy, and host defense against
transposons. RNA-directed DNA methylation (RdDM) plays a key role in epigenomic
regulation and has been linked to genomic conflicts, suggesting that the nature
or function of RdDM might be altered following the evolution of selfing. This
project will test the hypothesis that there is a common pattern of epigenomic
change following the transition to inbreeding and that these changes are
mediated by RdDM. Because the selfing syndrome is only apparent when multiple
transitions to selfing are compared, the relationship between mating system and
the epigenome will be investigated using six inbreeder/outbreeder comparisons in
two genera (Capsella and Mimulus). Specific areas of research include 1)
determining how selfing impacts RdDM’s role in transposon defense and collateral
gene silencing, 2) establishing the molecular cause of divergence in effective
ploidy and determine whether these changes are common during the transition to
selfing, 3) assessing the differential function of RdDM following the evolution
of selfing, and 4) determining whether there is a reduced role for RdDM in
selfing species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award was co-funded by the Plant
Genome Research Program in the Division of Integrative Organismal Systems and
the Genetic Mechanisms Cluster in the Division of Molecular and Cellular
Biosciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.