* 2247530
* HSI Pilot Project: Investigating Impact of an Active Learning-informed and Creative-Video-based Psychosocial Enrichment Intervention on Retention of Hispanic Engineering Students
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Marcus Ynalvez, Texas A&M International University
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 05/31/2025
* USD 200,000.00

With support from the National Science Foundation's Improving Undergraduate STEM
Education: Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSI) Program, this Track 1 project
aims to research active learning techniques to improve the engineering retention
rate of Hispanic students at Texas A&amp;M International University (TAMIU). The
COVID-19 pandemic has shifted classrooms to virtual learning modes, which
negatively impacted the retention of many of our undergraduate students. Student
success has always been a challenge for minority students in STEM fields and is
even more so for TAMIU's at-risk student population. With these challenges, the
project will provide engineering students with meaningful video-based learning
and group-based activities to facilitate learning. Social and video interactions
will be designed to benefit women and minorities, as almost 90% of TAMIU
students are Hispanic, and more than half are female. Simultaneously, the
project will study the effect and success of an evidence-based STEM enrichment
program that can be implemented at other minority-serving institutions. The
Project's specific aim is to improve the persistence, completion, and graduation
of Hispanic, under-represented, and low-income students pursuing undergraduate
engineering degrees. The Project's research strategy will combine a randomized
controlled trial design, a path-analytic approach, and a longitudinal approach,
and will engage two cohorts of freshman engineering students. Each cohort will
be equally divided into two groups, one with creative video projects and the
other without creative video projects, in a 2-semester enrichment program. This
intervention will be applied to two existing gateway engineering courses with
low retention rates. The Project team includes experts from engineering,
psychology, and sociology. The success of this project will generate insights
into how psychosocial outcomes facilitate the impact of our intervention on
engineering student retention and timely graduation. Findings will be
disseminated through local, state, national, and international conferences and
forums; manuscripts will be submitted for publication in engineering education,
cognitive psychology, and sociology of science journals. This project will
advance understanding and generate insights on how active learning strategies
can further enhance learning and improve engagement, retention, completion, and
persistence in undergraduate engineering education. The HSI Program aims to
enhance undergraduate STEM education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects
supported by the HSI Program will also generate new knowledge on how to achieve
these strategic aims. This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been
deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual
merit and broader impacts review criteria.