* 2247966
* Non-Stationary Random Dynamical Systems and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Anton Gorodetski, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 05/31/2026
* USD 466,463.00

Random and unpredictable factors are always present and cannot be completely
avoided. Therefore, the development of numerous real-life systems can be more
accurately explained through the application of distinct maps, that is, of
transformations that vary with time, rather than by repeatedly applying the
exact same transformation. It is intuitive to examine these issues using typical
sequences of maps, which brings us to the concept of random dynamics. Theory of
random dynamical systems goes back to Ulam and von Neumann, as well as to
Kakutani. Since then, it turned into a well-developed area of mathematics that
has numerous applications. But what if the distribution and strength of the
random factors itself does not remain constant, but changes with time? That can
be modeled by non-stationary random dynamical systems, and the study of the
properties of such systems and of their applications is the main goal of this
project. Mentoring students will be an essential part of the project. Numerous
questions closely related to the proposed project will be suggested to graduate
and undergraduate students initiating and increasing their involvement in
research in mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the first part of the project
the goal will be to show that a smooth random dynamical system, under an
assumption of absence of invariant measures, must lead to almost sure
exponential growth of the norms of random compositions, even in non-stationary
cases. Also, moduli of continuity of stationary measures will be studied. The
second part of the project will lead to a non-stationary version of the
Furstenberg Theorem on random matrix products, that claims that there exists a
nonrandom sequence, a non-stationary analog of the Lyapunov exponent, that
almost surely describes the behavior of the norms of random matrix products.
Non-commutative versions of the Central Limit Theorem, the Iterated Logarithm
Law, and other limit theorems will be proven in non-stationary settings, for
random matrix products, and, more generally, for random walks on Lie groups. The
third part of the project will provide the proof of Spectral and Dynamical
Localization for the non-stationary Anderson Model (including the Anderson-
Bernoulli case). Besides, the questions on topological structure of the spectrum
and essential spectrum of the non-stationary Anderson Model will be addressed.
In particular, it will be shown that for a discrete Schr√∂dinger operator with
potential given by a sequence of independent identically distributed random
variables plus a quasiperiodic background the spectrum must consist of a finite
number of intervals, while for a periodic background it can have infinitely many
gaps.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.