* 2247004
* Microlocal Analysis and Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Andras Vasy, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2026
* USD 611,138.00

This project develops and applies methods in the area of microlocal analysis.
Roughly speaking, microlocal analysis keeps track of the position and frequency,
or momentum, of waves (or more generally, functions, such as the amplitudes and
phases of waves) simultaneously. The planned applications are to wave
propagation and other related phenomena, as well as inverse problems related to
determining the structure of a material from surface measurements as well as to
imaging by cosmic background radiation. Although the project concerns their
mathematical theory, these problems are closely connected to the physical world.
Wave propagation is ubiquitous in nature, with light and gravitational waves
being important examples. Scattering theory of quantum particles is another
subject governed by microlocal analysis: these aspects enter into the
description of quantum waves at large distances. The inverse problems under
study are also of broad significance: applications of the theory developed here
include the determination of an unknown variable speed of elastic waves in an
object via the measurement of travel times of waves, as well as the development
of the universe through cosmic microwave background data. Many of the projects
are suitable for research by doctoral students, and the PI strives to contribute
to the education of a new generation of mathematicians and
scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Parts of the project describe the long-time or
far field behavior, including existence, of waves, such as electromagnetic or
gravitational waves, on curved space-times. The microlocal approach to analysis
on these spaces has made breakthroughs possible in the PI's (in part
collaborative) work on linear and nonlinear problems on asymptotically
hyperbolic spaces as well as Kerr-de Sitter (KdS) space (rotating black holes in
a cosmological spacetime), culminating in the proof of the stability of slowly
rotating KdS spaces with Hintz. More recently, with Hafner and Hintz the PI
extended some of these tools to the vanishing cosmological constant case
(Minkowski, Kerr). The aim here is to extend these tools to further spaces, such
as fast rotating KdS and perturbations of Kerr spacetimes. Other parts of the
project study basic objects in quantum field theory, in particular the Feynman
propagator. A novel direction, with Tripathy and Zimet, is construction of Ricci
flat metrics on K3-type surfaces. Another main area is inverse problems, where
the PI, together with Uhlmann, has introduced new tools for the spatially
localized inversion of the geodesic X-ray transform, and with Stefanov and
Uhlmann extended this to the boundary rigidity problem. A project with the PI's
former postdoc Wang studies the light ray transform with potential applications
to imaging by the cosmic background radiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.