* 2247964
* HSI Planning Project: CSUN START
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Shu-Sha Guan, The University Corporation, Northridge
* Standard Grant
* Elsa Gonzalez
* 06/30/2026
* USD 399,788.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1 project aims to enhance the quality of
first-year experiences among STEM transfer students by removing cultural and
institutional barriers. Two-year institutions are key entry points to higher
education for historically underrepresented and underserved groups such as
Latinx, low-income, and first-generation college students, particularly in
transferring to Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSI) like California State
University, Northridge (CSUN) where over half of incoming students are first-
time transfers. However, the majority of transfer students who go on to a 4-year
institution will experience “cultural mismatch” or “transfer shock” whereby a
shift in cultural norms and values aligned with middle-class contexts will lead
to reduced academic belonging, performance and persistence, particularly for
students in STEM majors. There is an urgent need to identify practices that
invite, retain, and support historically underrepresented and underserved STEM
transfer students undergoing institutional and cultural transition. If
unaddressed, undergraduate research and STEM workforce participation will remain
low among the representative yet often overlooked historically underrepresented
and underserved STEM transfer student population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
current project aims to (1) redevelop existing STEM workshops into bridging
summer, first-year transfer experience lab courses (UNIV 396) and (2) test the
effectiveness of culturally responsive lab course modifications relative to
control courses in improving student science outcomes and persistence. Results
of this project will aid HSIs in identifying customizable program elements best
suited for aiding first-year transfer students in their transition to
university. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education and
build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will also generate
new knowledge on how to achieve these aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.