* 2247498
* Accessing and Stabilizing Metastable States by Coupling Plasma and Surface Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* William Schneider, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 06/30/2026
* USD 576,640.00

With support from the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Casey O’Brien and William Schneider of the University of Notre Dame are working
collaboratively (1) to clarify the mechanisms by which atmospheric pressure
plasmas couple with solid surfaces to access and stabilize metastable nitrogen
species, and (2) to explore the potential to exploit these metastable states to
drive novel reactions. The integration of atmospheric pressure plasmas with
heterogeneous catalysts (plasma catalysis) has recently gained considerable
attention because of its potential to carry out transformations that are
difficult or impossible using conventional thermal catalysis, and in modular
units powered by renewable electricity. Realization of this potential would lead
to more energy-efficient and environmentally sustainable chemical processes.
Nitrogen activation in particular has attracted substantial interest in the
plasma catalysis community because of the ability of plasma to activate the
strong dinitrogen triple bond. Preliminary work in the O’Brien lab suggests that
the types of adsorbed nitrogen species relevant to plasma catalysis may be
richer than previously thought. This project focuses on clarifying the nature
and reactivity of plasma-generated nitrogen species using spectroscopic
techniques developed in the O’Brien lab and computational approaches in the
Schneider lab. The theory-informed spectroscopic approach and proof-of-concept
catalytic examples will broadly impact both catalysis science and technology.
This research will also enhance advanced scientific education through training
of graduate students in experimental and computational research, communication,
scientific rigor, and the ethical conduct of research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal explores a strategy to access, stabilize, and concentrate metastable
intermediates that are thermally inaccessible by coupling plasma and surface
chemistry, and to exploit these metastable species for novel surface reactions.
Casey O’Brien and William Schneider will collaboratively explore these concepts
in the context of nitrogen activation. Recent unpublished work in the O’Brien
lab suggests that metastable azides, or N3, are stabilized by metal surfaces
during exposure to N2 plasmas. While preliminary experiments indicate that
LTP(low temperature plasma)-exposed metal surfaces can accommodate metastable N3
species, there are many fundamental science questions that remain unanswered:
(i) What is the identity (N2, N3, or other) and nature of this species? (ii) Is
this species formed in the plasma first and subsequently trapped by the metal
surface, or does the surface facilitate its formation? (iii) How reactive are
these surface-adsorbed species towards other reactants? This project will
address these fundamental science questions to develop strategies to exploit
metastable species generally, and azides specifically, to drive chemical
transformations that cannot be achieved by conventional thermal catalysis or
plasma alone. To this end, this project integrates experimental and
computational approaches to clarify the mechanisms by which atmospheric pressure
plasmas couple with solid surfaces to access and stabilize metastable N3 species
and explore the potential to exploit these metastable states to drive novel
reactions. The work leverages state-of-the-art in-situ spectroscopy techniques
developed in the O’Brien, and density functional theory calculations that
predict the relationship between surface composition, structure, products, and
reactivity, providing a theoretical framework for understanding and guiding
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.