* 2247078
* Randomness in High-Dimensional Combinatorics: Colorings, Robustness, and Statistics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Thomas Kelly, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 07/31/2026
* USD 70,151.00

Graphs are discrete mathematical structures that model pairwise relations
between objects, and they are fundamental to combinatorics. From a geometric /
topological viewpoint, they are one-dimensional objects. The pursuit of a
higher-dimensional theory of many graph theoretic concepts has been a fruitful
area of research. In the last half century, the introduction of the
probabilistic method has had a tremendous impact on this area, and the study of
randomness will be central to this project. This project will focus on
developing a high-dimensional version of graph embeddings and decompositions.
Graduate and undergraduate students will be trained as part of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary focus of this proposal is embeddings
in and decompositions of graphs and hypergraphs, with a particular emphasis on
problems in “high-dimensional combinatorics”. Hypergraph embeddings and
decompositions are a central concern in modern combinatorics but also include
some of the oldest combinatorial problems. For example, the famous “Knights
Tour” problem, studied in the 9th century, and the “Icosian Game” of the 1800s,
are both embedding problems. Both can be understood as the problem of finding a
Hamilton cycle in a particular graph. Some of the most famous and influential
combinatorial questions from the eighteenth and nineteenth century on Latin
squares and combinatorial designs are now understood as hypergraph decomposition
problems. Goals of this project include (1) using randomness to prove new
embedding and decomposition results (2) proving "robust" versions of these
results using the recently introduced notion of "spreadness" and (3)
investigating statistical aspects of random combinatorial
designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.