* 2247049
* Testing for an enhanced metamorphic carbon flux on the Proterozoic Earth, Central Metasedimentary Belt, Ontario, Canada
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Emily Stewart, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Jennifer Wenner
* 06/30/2026
* USD 336,344.00

When continents collide and mountain ranges are formed, chemical reactions in
deeply-buried rocks can release carbon dioxide into Earth’s oceans and
atmosphere. While the amount of carbon released in these ‘tectonic fluxes’ is
miniscule in comparison to human activities (like the burning of fossil fuels),
this carbon can be very important on long geologic timescales (more than one
million years). In fact, these geologic carbon cycling processes have been
essential to maintaining a habitable planet on which life could evolve and
flourish. However, much of the work on geologic carbon cycling has focused on
the Phanerozoic Eon, i.e., the last 541 million years since the evolution of
complex life; yet, there is reason to suspect that tectonic collisions may have
released significantly more carbon on the early Earth. The proposed work is,
therefore, a field-based study of tectonic carbon release and mountain building
in the ancient rocks from the Central Metasedimentary Belt in Ontario, Canada.
These rocks were deposited as sediments and buried in a mountain range more than
one billion years ago, long before the evolution of plants, animals, or any kind
of multicellular life. A combination of field work, numerical modeling, and
geochemical techniques will be used to understand how these tectonically-driven
reactions released carbon. This will serve as an essential constraint on our
understanding of the interplay between geological, climatic, and biological
processes. Furthermore, study of the ancient Earth may serve as an analogue for
consideration of planetary habitability both in our solar system and
beyond.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will explore metamorphic
decarbonation in an orogenic belt of the middle to late Proterozoic using a
combination of detailed petrography, mineral chemistry, bulk rock mass-balance
calculations, thermodynamic modeling, and stable carbon and oxygen isotope
measurements. The magnitude and mechanisms of CO2 release in the Central
Metasedimentary Belt will be reconstructed to test the hypothesis that
metamorphic decarbonation was enhanced on the early Earth. Combined with
existing geochronology, this work will generate (1) rigorous field-based
estimates of the rate, timing, and magnitude of CO2 release in a Proterozoic
orogen and (2) a mechanistic understanding of the controls pressure,
temperature, protolith composition, and fluid flow exerted in metamorphic
decarbonation. This field test will be necessary to account for the complexities
introduced by spatially variable open-system fluid flow, metasomatism, and
kinetic effects. The work will support at least one PhD student, multiple
undergraduates, and high school students in developing scientific skills. In
addition, the project will develop an outreach program on plate tectonics for
K-8 students and the broader local community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.