* 2247279
* Acid and Base Organocatalysts
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2024
* Steven Kass, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 08/31/2024
* USD 192,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Steven Kass of the Department of Chemistry at the University of
Minnesota is studying a new strategy for improving catalysts. The goal of this
research is to create practical, useful, and environmentally friendly catalytic
systems. To facilitate these ends, the Kass team is taking advantage of the
attraction between opposite charges, e.g., electrostatic interactions. This
project spans a broad range of chemical disciplines from catalysis to synthesis
and the outcomes will affect the chemical, pharmaceutical, and materials
industries. Consequently, it is well suited for training and educating young
scientists who will go on to careers in these science and technology fields. An
NSF-Research Experiences for Undergraduates grant enhances the broader impact of
this work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A goal of this award is to prepare and fully
characterize charge-enhanced acids and bases, a largely underdeveloped research
area. These studies are to include the examination of the catalytic abilities of
these acids and bases in a range of chemical transformations. As part of this,
we will also study structural variants of the catalysts as a means of increasing
reactivity and selectivity. Critical to achieving our goals is that physical
studies be carried out to identify key reactive intermediates to elucidate
mechanism. With these goals and methods in mind, we are studying the ability of
charge-enhanced catalysts to control enantioselectivity and enable the synthesis
of chiral compounds. More explicitly, this award will help us to develop charge-
activated metallocene complexes. In addition to charge, these catalysts will
also contain additional Br√∏nsted acid/hydrogen bond donors and enable
multifunctional cooperativity to be studied and exploited. The impact of chiral
additives and solvents on the resulting enantioselectivities will also be
examined.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.