* 2247117
* Some topics in Analysis and Probability in Metric Measure Spaces, Random Matrices, and Diffusions
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Fabrice Baudoin, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Tyson
* 05/31/2026
* USD 492,209.00

This project lies at the intersection of several areas of mathematics: analysis,
geometry, and probability. A primary focus of the research resides in the
development of these theories in settings which lack traditional notions of
smoothness or regularity, for instance, in fractal spaces. Some of the research
topics under consideration are motivated by questions in physics, engineering,
or mathematical finance. A potential benefit of success in this project lies in
the possibility to bring tools from one mathematical field to bear on other
fields, thereby increasing the interactions between areas of mathematics. The
project also provides opportunities for collaboration and for the mentoring and
training of graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project focuses on three
subjects within the broad field of nonsmooth analysis, geometry, and
probability. First, spaces of Sobolev functions and functions of bounded
variation will be considered on general metric measure space. The theory of
Sobolev spaces on abstract metric measure spaces has attracted substantial
attention over the past few decades. In this context the upper gradient approach
has proved to be one of the most successful approaches. However, due to the lack
of sufficient connectivity, the approach via upper gradients fails to be
effective in many fractal spaces. This project will explore an alternative
approach to Sobolev spaces, building on prior work of Korevaar and Schoen, which
is more effective in fractal settings. A second direction of research involves
fractional Gaussian fields and the parabolic and hyperbolic Anderson models on
Dirichlet metric measure spaces. A key goal here is to develop a general theory
of fractional Gaussian fields and Anderson models on general Dirichlet spaces,
including fractals. Motivation arises from mathematical physics, and challenging
properties such as intermittency and localization will be investigated. Finally,
the project takes up the study of random matrices and symmetric spaces,
exploring how Riemannian fibrations of symmetric spaces enable the construction
of integrable random matrix functionals. Integrable here is understood in the
sense that the Laplace transforms of such functionals can explicitly be
expressed using special functions. These explicit formulas will be employed to
obtain suitable limit theorems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.