* 2247717
* Variations in redox of Hawaiian magmas: source and process
* GEO,OCE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Maryjo Brounce, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Gail Christeson
* 05/31/2026
* USD 388,051.00

Lavas that erupt in Hawaii, far from the boundaries between tectonic plates,
have a parameter known as the oxidation state with a large range of values. The
oxidation state of some Hawaii lavas are like lavas erupted at mid-ocean ridges,
where new ocean crust forms. Other Hawaii lavas are more like lavas erupted at
subduction zones where ocean crust descends into the mantle. This project will
investigate whether these differences are because of volcanic processes
occurring in the crust at the Hawaii volcanos, or because of differences in the
source material deep in the mantle. The results will have implications for plate
tectonic and mantle convection processes. Broader impacts include support for a
female principal investigator, a nontraditional PhD student, and undergraduate
students at a federally designated Hispanic- and Asian and Pacific Islander-
serving institution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent geological application of a
new synchrotron-source analytical tool – X-ray absorption near edge structure
spectroscopy – permits precise in situ measurements of Fe3+/Fe2+ and S6+/S2-
ratios in basaltic glasses. With this new tool, the effects of igneous
differentiation processes on these ratios in basaltic magmas and the oxygen
fugacity of these magmas can now be directly quantified and corrected for in the
quest to characterize the composition of the mantle from measurements of
seafloor basalts. As a result, there is substantial renewed interest in re-
examining fundamental questions: Is the upper mantle homogeneous or
heterogeneous in its oxidation state? What are the implications of the
homo/heterogeneity of this oxidation state of the mantle for plate tectonics,
Earth formation, and whole-Earth differentiation? In a carefully assembled suite
of samples from the Hawaiian islands that are previously studied for major,
trace, and volatile element compositions as well as stable and radiogenic
isotopic compositions, new measurements will be used to assess the origins of
the oxidized nature of a wide variety of Hawaiian intraplate magmas. This work
will determine the extent to which plate tectonic cycling may (or may not) drive
a whole-Earth oxygen cycle. This project will support the research of two
University of California at Riverside (UCR) undergraduate students and a UCR
graduate student. These students will work towards the science goals of this
proposal, as well as to work with the Natural History Museum in the Department
of Earth and Planetary Sciences at UCR to rescue geologic samples at high risk
of loss and which are relevant to this research proposal in the context of
understanding the heterogeneous nature of the Earth’s upper
mantle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.