* 2247668
* Synthesis, Characterization, and Reactivity Studies of Cerium-Ligand Multiple Bonds and Organometallics and Comparisons with Thorium, Uranium, and Group IV Congeners
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Eric Schelter, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 07/31/2026
* USD 550,000.00

With support from the Chemical Synthesis program in the Chemistry Division,
Professor Eric Schelter and his research group at the University of Pennsylvania
are investigating the organometallic chemistry of cerium, thorium, uranium, and
Group IV metal compounds, especially complexes of those elements that include
metal-ligand multiple bonds. Cerium is a rare-earth metal, but it exhibits
properties similar both to other rare-earth metals and to the transition and
actinide metals that surround it in the periodic table. This project aims at
comparing the behavior of cerium with these surrounding metals in order to
determine the factors that determine the unique properties of cerium. A better
understanding of cerium chemistry is expected to contribute to the design new
applications for cerium in catalytic, materials and chemical biology
applications. The results of these studies will also likely contribute to a
greater understanding of rare earth metals that are critical for renewable
energy and defense applications. The project will provide student training in
the handling and manipulation of the rare earths and contribute to the
maintenance of a trained work force in this important area. Hands-on research
projects for high school students are also envisioned to provide early exposure
to science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to
synthesize new metal-ligand multiply bonded organometallic compounds of cerium,
uranium, thorium, and Group IV metals. The spectroscopic properties and
reactivity patterns across these metals will be compared. The central hypothesis
is that the properties of isostructural, tetravalent metal complexes will inform
on bonding differences and 4f-/5d-covalency across this broad spectrum of
elements. Organometallic complexes and metal-ligand multiple bonds of cerium,
uranium, thorium, and group IV elements will be synthesized. Their spectroscopic
properties will be studied by multi-nuclear NMR and X-ray absorption
spectroscopy. Computational methods will be applied to model the spectroscopic
properties and to understand the relative covalent contributions to bonding.
Isostructural complexes that undergo equilibrium reactions will also be used to
observe dynamic differences in bonding across the elements of cerium, thorium
and uranium, and extending to the group IV elements. The fundamental knowledge
developed from the work is expected to contribute new and unique examples of
organometallic compounds and associated spectroscopic information that will
broaden understanding of chemical bonding. Rare earth element-containing
materials are used in the energy and defense industries and there are currently
no substitutes. Advancing cerium/rare earth chemistry will contribute to
improving beneficiation and separation of rare earths, and in so doing,
contribute to national security.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.