* 2247645
* CAS: Electrochemical Ionic Hydrogenation: Promoting Carbonyl and Imine Reduction through Electrocatalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Kate Waldie, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2026
* USD 530,387.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Kate M. Waldie of Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey is studying
strategies to prepare valuable chemical products using electrochemistry. The
goal of this project is to develop more sustainable methods for producing
chemicals using renewable, sustainable energy. The proposed research will
involve experiments to understand how catalyst structure and reaction conditions
combine to achieve high reaction efficiency and selectivity. This knowledge will
have important applications in electrocatalyst design for sustainable chemical
manufacturing. The project will also provide training for students in synthetic
chemistry, catalysis, and electrochemistry. The Waldie group will continue to
engage in outreach activities that promote the equity and inclusion of students
from traditionally underrepresented populations, including a recurring symposium
series entitled Diversity in Chemistry that highlights the careers and
perspectives of chemists from diverse backgrounds. Dr. Waldie will also develop
new lecture and laboratory teaching resources for electrochemistry education.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will develop the electrochemical ionic
hydrogenation of carbonyl and imine substrates using transition metal-hydride
complexes in the presence of Brønsted or Lewis acid promotors. This
electrocatalytic approach to hydrogenation circumvents the need for hydrogen gas
or stoichiometric reductants. However, avoiding the competitive hydrogen
evolution reaction (HER) is a significant challenge for electrochemical
reduction reactions. The proposed research will utilize detailed
electrochemical, kinetic, and mechanistic studies to examine how substrate
activation with an acid can direct the reactivity of metal-hydride complexes
toward electrochemical hydrogenation over HER. This project aims to establish a
thermodynamic framework in which the properties of the metal-hydride
electrocatalyst and acid promoter are optimized to achieve high selectivity and
high faradaic efficiency for substrate reduction. The goal is to investigate a
large reactivity scope and establish principles and methods to advance the
electrification of carbonyl and imine hydrogenation for sustainable organic
synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.