* 2247856
* Collaborative Research: GEM--Quantifying the Contribution of Off-Equatorial Ultra-Low Frequency (ULF) Waves on Radial Diffusion in the Radiation Belts
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Weichao Tu, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 05/31/2026
* USD 118,893.00

Electromagnetic waves with frequencies in the ultra-low frequency (ULF) range
are known to be among the leading causes of radial diffusion and transport of
energetic electrons in Earth's radiation belts. The frequencies of ULF waves
overlap with the range of drift frequencies of energetic electrons as they
circle the Earth, leading to resonant interactions. Numerous expressions have
been derived to quantitatively describe radial diffusion so that they can be
incorporated into global models of radiation belt electrons. However, most
expressions of the radial diffusion rates are derived only for equatorially
mirroring electrons and are based on estimates of the power of ULF waves that
are obtained either from spacecraft close to the equatorial plane or from the
ground. Recent studies using the Van Allen Probes and Arase have shown that the
wave power in magnetic fluctuations is significantly enhanced away from the
magnetic equator, consistent with models simulating the natural modes of
oscillation of magnetospheric field lines. This has significant implications for
the estimation of radial diffusion rates, as higher pitch angle electrons will
experience considerably higher ULF wave fluctuations than equatorial electrons.
This project will derive the magnetic and electric field wave powers and
incorporate them into the 3D test particle simulations to estimate the diffusion
coefficient. The novel, pitch-angle-dependent diffusion rates will be introduced
to a global model of radiation belt electrons to evaluate the effect of the
pitch-angle dependence of the diffusion coefficient on radiation belt dynamics.
The result could have significant implications for the radial diffusion rates as
currently estimated. It will pave the way for incorporating pitch-angle-
dependent radial diffusion coefficients in global models to predict the near-
Earth radiation environment better.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this
project is to quantify the role of off-equatorial Ultra-Low Frequency (ULF)
waves on the radial transport and diffusion of relativistic electrons (100s keV
to few MeV) in the outer radiation belt (L~4 to 7), investigating the effect of
pitch-angle-dependent radial transport of energetic particles on global dynamics
of the radiation belts. The following science questions will be answered: How
are ULF electric and magnetic field fluctuations distributed in magnetic
latitude and magnetic local time under varying solar and geomagnetic conditions?
What is the role of off-equatorial ULF wave fluctuations on the radial diffusion
and transport of relativistic electrons in the outer radiation belt (L~4 to 7)?
How are off-equatorial ULF waves expected to impact current radiation belt
models, and what is their contribution to the global dynamics of the radiation
belts? The team will use multiple satellite datasets (THEMIS, Van Allen Probes,
Cluster, and Arase), test particle tracing simulations, and a global radiation
belt model to quantify the contribution of off-equatorial ULF waves on radial
diffusion in the radiation belts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.