* 2247687
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: Securing Continuous Integration Workflows
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Nikos Vasilakis, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 06/30/2027
* USD 94,269.00

Continuous Integration (CI) has become essential to the modern software
development cycle. Developers engineer CI scripts, commonly called workflows or
pipelines, to automate most software maintenance tasks, such as testing and
deployment. Developers frequently misconfigure workflows resulting in severe
security issues, which can have devastating effects resulting in supply-chain
attacks. The extreme diversity of CI platforms and the supported features
further exacerbate the problem and make it challenging to specify and verify
security properties across different CI platforms uniformly. This project
addresses the problem by defining the desired security properties of a workflow
and developing platform-independent techniques to verify and enforce the
security properties. Furthermore, this research will support the cross-
disciplinary development of a diverse cohort of Ph.D. and undergraduate
students, graduate-level courses, and a gamified training environment for
workflow security analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project defines the
required security properties of CI workflows and develops methods to verify and
specify these properties. This requires techniques that can work in a platform-
independent manner to handle the diversity of CI platforms. The project handles
this through indirection by designing Workflow Intermediate Representation (WIR)
and Workflow Specification Language (WSL). WIR and WSL enable platform-agnostic
verification and specification of workflow security properties, respectively.
The verification of security properties will be performed through Workflow
Analysis Framework (WAF) that supports both static and dynamic analysis passes
over workflows encoded in a platform-agnostic WIR. WSL, a domain-specific
language, allows developers to specify workflows and their security properties
in a platform-independent manner. Designing an effective WSL requires
understanding developers' perspectives and challenges in engineering workflows
and specifying security properties. In this context, this project performs
necessary developer studies to gain insights about the above aspects. The
project also develops a bidirectional compilation infrastructure for translating
workflows from WSL to platform-specific versions, enabling compatibility with
existing platforms. Furthermore, the project also aims to create, collect, and
catalog a large corpus of representative workflows across different
platforms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.