* 2247689
* Enhancing Student Performance and Persistence through a Wisdom Community
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Hilda Cecilia Contreras Aguirre, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 05/31/2026
* USD 499,960.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this project aims to create a Wisdom Community
(WisCom) at New Mexico State University (NMSU) using an innovative instructional
design model based on collaborative and interactive learning standards and
distance education principles. As a Hispanic-Serving Institution (HSI) NMSU
serves a large Latinx student population. Due to the proximity with Mexico, many
of these students are Mexican Americans who experience socio-economic barriers
and educational inequalities. With this project, undergraduate students will
benefit from forming a support network that will improve on-campus personal
interactions and off-campus virtual- engagement. The development of the WisCom
in Electrical and Computer Engineering [ECE-WisCom] will involve innovation in
learning and teaching using a virtual educational space to facilitate online
synchronous and asynchronous communication and collaboration. The ECE-WisCom
platform focuses on online learning, which is important at a time when remote
learning is becoming a permanent fixture in the post-COVID pedagogical
landscape. The project will facilitate novel practices and activities that could
be replicated and implemented not only in other NMSU disciplines, but also in
other academic settings, including other minority serving institutions (MSIs)
with similar student demographics and characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Electrical and Computer Engineering Wisdom Community at NMSU’s goal is to
identify and establish best practices, impactful attributes, recommendations,
and implications for using online media and Mixed Reality (MR) spaces to support
STEM communities of practice. The research paradigm is educational design and
development research. It includes an analysis of needs and goals and exploration
of the learning context to design and construct a functional ECE-WisCom Learning
Management System (LMS) prototype. An evaluation and reflection upon the design
features of the ECE-WisCom and its effects on ECE students’ academic performance
will be conducted as well. The research design consists of a mixed-methods
approach to evaluate the efficacy of the MR platform once it is in use. The
envisioned MR platform will maximize four outcomes: community, identity
formation, critical thinking, and academic performance. The dissemination
includes the development of a website to facilitate practices and activities
that can be replicated in other academic settings, including other MSIs and
HSIs. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden
participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given
the diverse nature and context of the HSIs, requires innovative approaches that
incentivize institutional and community transformation and promote fundamental
research: (i) on engaged student learning, (ii) about what it takes to diversify
and increase participation in STEM effectively, and (iii) that improves the STEM
undergraduate education enterprise's understanding of how to build institutional
capacity to undertake lasting change at HSIs that are supported by this
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.