* 2247454
* Collaborative Research: Space Charge Induced Flexoelectric (SCIF) Transducers: A New Technology to Eliminate the Environmental Cost of Leaded Piezoelectric Transducers
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Susan Trolier-McKinstry, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Svetlana Tatic-Lucic
* 07/31/2026
* USD 275,000.00

Non-technical description&lt;br/&gt;Piezoelectric materials convert mechanical
force to electrical voltage and vice-versa. These materials are used in
precision sensors, optics, acoustic transmitters and receivers, and energy
harvesting devices. Most high-performance piezoelectric materials contain lead.
It is estimated that the annual worldwide production of lead-containing
piezoelectric materials is between 1250 and 4000 tons. The lead contained in
these materials represents an environmental risk all along the value chain, from
mining to end device disposal, and is increasingly subject to health, safety,
and environmental legislation. This project will develop an environmentally
benign replacement for piezoelectric transducers. This new technology will be
based on a newly observed phenomenon in semiconducting materials including
silicon. In this project, the team of researchers will fabricate nano-structured
silicon devices that can replace lead-containing piezoelectric materials. In
addition to creating a replacement for lead-containing piezoelectrics, the study
of this new technology will enhance the scientific communityâ€™s understanding of
electrical-mechanical interaction in solid materials more generally. The newly
created devices will be transformative for sensing, actuation, and energy
harvesting applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
description&lt;br/&gt;Lead zirconate titanate (PZT), or other lead-containing
piezoelectrics, are widely used in precision sensors, actuators for optics,
acoustic transmitters and receivers, energy harvesters, and precision
positioning devices. Despite the significant environmental concerns, there is
still no good replacement for PZT. In this project we will make use of a newly
observed phenomenon, space charge induced flexoelectricity, to create a high-
performance alternative to PZT transducers. Flexoelectricity refers to
electrical polarization of a dielectric material in response to strain gradient.
It has recently been observed that semiconducting materials, including silicon,
with insulating interfaces (i.e., space charge materials) exhibit enhanced
flexoelectricity. In this project the team of researchers will fabricate arrays
of nano-structured silicon pyramids to create and study space charge induced
flexoelectric transducers. In tandem with the fabrication work, the
investigators will create a computational framework for simulating the
interaction between the strain gradient, the electric field, and the diffusion
of mobile charge carriers. This computational framework will enable a detailed
investigation into the mechanisms driving space charge flexoelectricity and
allow optimization of transducers. Such transducers could have effective
piezoelectric coefficients an order of magnitude higher than state-of-the-art
micro-scale piezoelectric materials. Given that they are made from silicon, they
fill the need for a non-toxic, environmentally benign replacement to high
performance piezoelectric transducers. Space charge induced flexoelectric
transducers will be transformative for a broad range of smart materials
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.