* 2247252
* Synthesis of d- and p-Block Element Molecules, Reagents, and Precursors
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Christopher Cummins, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 07/31/2026
* USD 575,000.00

With support from the Chemical Synthesis Program of the Chemistry Division,
Professor Christoper Cummins of the Chemistry Department at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology (MIT), is synthesizing phosphorus-containing small
molecules that may have relevance to the identification of interstellar
molecules. The project resides at the intersection of synthetic chemistry and
astrochemistry. Chemical synthesis will be used to prepare small molecules that
may exist in interstellar space. Their characterization in the laboratory will
pave the way for astrophysicists to search for them in space. In reciprocal
fashion, known interstellar molecules serve as inspiration for the development
of new, highly reactive species that can be developed as new reagents in
synthetic chemistry. The project also is expected to have impacts on materials
science in that some of the new small molecules and their molecular precursors
may provide low-temperature access to inorganic materials of interest for their
electronic properties. Reagents developed in the course of the project may find
application in organic synthesis and catalysis. Additionally, the project will
educate and train a diverse group of undergraduate and graduate students, and
postdoctoral scholars. Broader impacts also include outreach through the MIT
Access program aimed at bringing members of underrepresented groups into
graduate study in chemistry, and the planned production of YouTube “Inorganic
Synthesis Videos.”&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has a theme of design and
synthesis of anthracene-based reagents for generating novel reactive
intermediates for group transfer reactions in solution, or for evolution of
small molecules into the gas phase for study by molecular beam mass spectrometry
and microwave spectroscopy. The latter form of spectroscopy is used to collect
the data required by the radio astronomers to make a positive identification of
the molecules in interstellar space. Specific systems to be investigated include
triphosphatetrahedrane, phosphorus mononitride (PN) and non-explosive synthons
to it, molecular precursors to PNSO, synthesis and chemistry of phosphiranes
(derivatives of C2H4PH), and RBA and REA Compounds (R = alkyl; E = N or P; A =
anthracene). The project also will involve the development of transition-metal
catalyzed reactions for group transfer to organic substrates, such as olefins.
One line of inquiry will explore the ramifications of strain energy release-
driven catalysis involving strained molecules known as phosphatetrahedranes. The
project involves a number of collaborations, perhaps most notably with
astrophysicists interested in investigating interstellar
molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.