* 2247019
* LEAPS-MPS: Analysis of Initial and Boundary Value Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 10/01/2022,06/30/2024
* John Holmes, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Tiziana Giorgi
* 06/30/2024
* USD 179,538.00

This award is funded in whole or in part under the American Rescue Plan Act of
2021 (Public Law 117-2)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Differential equations have played
a central role in the study of physical phenomena since Sir Isaac Newton
described the motion of planetary objects using differential calculus, and are
fundamental to the understanding of physics, engineering, biology, chemistry,
and economics. Differential equations relate how quantities or systems change
over space and time and are derived as models for real world situations. In
applications such as optimal investing, infectious diseases, chemical reactions,
and tsunamis, the differential models used are often of diffusive or dispersive
type. The mathematical theory for diffusive and dispersive nonlinear partial
differential equations is incomplete, even in basic setups such as when the
region considered can be model as the half line or a bounded interval, which for
example is the case when dealing with the ocean floor or a fiber optic cable.
This project intends to further the mathematical study of these models, to aid
scientists in their understanding of the underlining physical phenomena. The
project will provide research and training opportunities for undergraduate and
graduate students and for early career researchers, with a focus in promoting
the participation of members of underrepresented groups in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;The central aim of this project is to study dispersive and diffusive
equations on the half line and on bounded intervals using the Uniform Transform
Method (UTM), which has recently been developed as an extension to the Fourier
transform for initial and boundary data. The UTM allows to construct iterative
maps via contour integrals in the complex plane but has not yet been
successfully applied to the Nonlinear Schr√∂dinger, Korteweg-de Vries, and
Burgers equations, with initial and boundary value data in spaces of very low
regularity. This project will use the UTM to extend to bounded intervals
previous results obtained for unbounded domains in spaces of both very low and
very high regularity, with the main goal of developing the techniques and theory
necessary to study well-posedness and asymptotic behavior of the
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.