* 2247583
* The Behavior of Solvated Electrons in the Presence of Electrolytes: Using Simulation and Experiment to Determine the Hydrated Electron's Structure from Competitive Ion Pairing
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Benjamin Schwartz, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Amanda Haes
* 08/31/2026
* USD 525,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
Program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Benjamin Schwartz of the
University of California-Los Angeles is using a combination of theoretical and
experimental techniques to investigate the behavior of hydrated electrons in the
presence of salts. Hydrated electrons play a critical role in radiation
chemistry and electron transfer reactions. Despite the importance of hydrated
electrons in chemical reactivity, their structure is uncertain given current
limitations in experimental measurements and variations in results from
theoretical models. Professor Schwartz and his group will investigate hydrated
electrons in the presence of salts to examine how hydrated electrons pair with
different salt cations using ultrafast spectroscopic measurements. These results
will be directly compared using first-principles simulations to better
understand the chemical reactivity of hydrated electrons. Professor Schwartz
works with secondary-school teachers and students through an outreach program to
help bring modern science to local area high schools. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both
experimental and computational studies will be employed to reveal the structure
of hydrated electrons. Both mixed quantum/classical simulations, where only the
hydrated electron is treated quantum mechanically, and ab initio simulations,
where the entire system is treated by density functional theory (DFT), will be
used to understand the thermodynamics of simulated hydrated electrons paired
with different cations. Ultrafast spectroscopy experiments will be used to
measure the absorption spectrum of hydrated electrons in the presence of
different salts thereby providing a direct measure of the degree of ion pairing
that can be compared with the different simulation models. Additional
measurements of photoexcited hydrated electrons have the potential to provide a
detailed understanding of how the presence of salts alters the dynamics and thus
the structure of hydrated electrons paired with different cations. By using both
experiments and simulations, the reactive chemistry of pairs of hydrated
electrons and a direct connection between structure and reactivity will be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.