* 2247297
* Towards a Competency-Based High School Dual Credit Pathway for Advanced Manufacturing Technicians
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Mark Lorier, Lakeshore Technical College
* Standard Grant
* Christine Delahanty
* 05/31/2026
* USD 649,910.00

Training in advanced manufacturing technologies helps prepare students for
technician positions that are in high demand in industry. Regional manufacturers
in northeast Wisconsin are interested in new academic pathways for technicians
to meet this growing demand in the region. Competency-based education (CBE)
addresses industry technician needs by preparing skilled students to enter the
workforce with less difficulty than traditional credit-based instructional
delivery modes. Lakeshore Technical College has been a state-wide leader in the
implementation of CBE for technical education programs. CBE is an instructional
model in which students, learning at their own pace, demonstrate that they have
achieved a high level of competency for a specific set of skills that are valued
by industry. This project will develop and implement a dual enrollment program
for high school students at a new charter school to help students achieve
competencies with maintenance, Industry 4.0, and welding technologies.
Professional development for high school teachers will provide an opportunity
for teachers to earn industry-recognized certifications for training students in
advanced manufacturing technologies. Recruiting activities for high school
students in the region will provide opportunities for students to learn about
technician careers, work-based learning programs, and advanced manufacturing
technologies. The project should be of interest to the technical education
community as it will advance knowledge about how to implement CBE in technical
education and how mastery of concepts can be used for high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of this project is to address
the critical demand in the region for skilled advanced manufacturing technicians
by pursuing three objectives. First is to create a CBE dual enrollment program
in advanced manufacturing in consultation with a Business and Industry
Leadership Team (BILT). Second is to train instructors in the use of advanced
manufacturing technologies with CBE. Third is to recruit high school students to
increase the pipeline of technicians with an emphasis on students from
underrepresented groups. The BILT will review and evaluate the advanced
manufacturing curriculum to ensure that the competencies within the maintenance,
Industry 4.0, and welding pathways represent the knowledge, skills, and
abilities needed for advanced manufacturing technician positions. Community
college faculty will serve as mentors for charter school instructors and serve
as a class resource during instruction until charter school instructors complete
required certifications and are able to independently deliver all coursework in
each educational pathway. Recruitment activities for high school students will
include an annual marketing plan, bootcamps, and events in collaboration with
regional organizations to help students understand the career opportunities in
advanced manufacturing. The impact of the project on student engagement in the
program will be assessed using institutional data, online surveys, and focus
groups. The CBE model and project results will be shared and disseminated
through the Wisconsin Resource Center for charter schools, ATE Central, and the
ATE PI Conference. This project is funded by the Advanced Technological
Education program that focuses on the education of technicians for the advanced
technology fields that drive the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.