* 2247407
* Collaborative Research: Catholyte Molecular Design For Non-aqueous Mg-organic Hybrid Redox Flow Batteries
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Tao Gao, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Francis D'Souza
* 06/30/2026
* USD 339,797.00

With support of the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms-B Program of
the Chemistry Division, Tao Gao of the Department of Chemical Engineering at the
University of Utah, and Chao Luo at the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry
at George Mason University are developing new classes of organic molecules for
energy storage technologies. The objectives of this project are to design,
synthesize and characterize core-shell structured organic molecules, to gain a
fundamental understanding of the structure-property-performance correlation of
synthesized organic molecules, and to leverage this understanding for designing
a transformative hybrid flow battery for future energy storage applications. The
project offers several broader impacts, including fundamental knowledge of
organic molecules, novel battery technology development, training of the future
science and technology workforce at undergraduate and graduate levels, and an
outreach program that can engage high school students including students from
groups traditionally underrepresented in chemistry and chemical
engineering.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To unleash the potential of hybrid magnesium-
organic flow batteries, new organic molecular structure design is proposed. The
design consists of core-shell structured organic molecules with an aromatic
core, a redox-active shell, and a polyether chain connecting them. Such core-
shell structured molecules have the potential to enable fast electron-transfer
reactions to the redox-active moieties located in the shell, and provides
multiple design freedoms to tune the solubility, capacity, potential, and
stability of organic molecules. Thus, this approach has great potential to
achieve transformative energy storage performance compared to the state-of-the-
art hybrid flow batteries. A systematic experimental study is proposed,
including design and synthesis of core-shell structured organic molecules,
chemical and electrochemical characterization of the synthesized molecules, a
device-level study of flow battery performance of synthesized molecules, as well
as in situ/ex situ studies to understand reaction mechanisms and performance
limiting factors. The overall long term aim is to achieve a comprehensive
fundamental understanding of the structure-property-performance correlation of
core-shell structured organic molecules for magnesium-organic flow batteries.
The goal is to eventually provide rational structure/design guidelines of
organic materials for high-voltage, high-capacity and stable non-aqueous
magnesium-organic flow batteries. Such tunable organic molecules in the longer
term have potential application areas that include supporting redox-flow
batteries, CO2 capture, electrochemical sensing, organic electronics, and
separations science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.