* 2247308
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: Cryptographic accumulators and revocation of credentials
* CSE,CNS
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Charalampos Papamanthou, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 04/30/2026
* USD 240,000.00

As we increasingly conduct so much of our daily lives online, user
authentication becomes a vital part for numerous everyday tasks such as
shopping, banking and communicating. A common mechanism for digital
authentication is the use of authentication tokens, credentials or certificates.
Extra care needs to be taken, however, when authentication tokens are
compromised, lost or held by an owner who goes rogue. In such cases, it is
crucial that there exist an effective mechanism to securely and efficiently
revoke such tokens. The goal of this project is to design efficient revocation
mechanisms for the Web Public Key Infrastructure (PKI) and potentially transform
the future of certificate revocation on the web and beyond; our key innovation
is the use of cryptographic accumulators.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project
will focus on deploying cryptographic accumulators to improve practicality and
reach of revocation mechanisms for Transport Layer Security (TLS) certificates
in the Web PKI. Beyond TLS, the project will also concern itself with revocation
in code-signing PKI by deploying batching and aggregation techniques on
cryptographic accumulators for efficient software validity checks. Finally, the
project will address privacy issues when checking revocation and will design
solutions that can safeguard the privacy of users in Internet-of-Things (IoT)
connected communities. The project vision also includes constructions that
satisfy post-quantum security. The intellectual merits of this project are
twofold: First, it will provide numerous results on fundamental cryptographic
building blocks, such as cryptographic accumulators and (zero-knowledge) proof
batch computation/verification and aggregation. The results of this part, while
tailored to serve the functionality needs of revocation systems, can be of much
broader interest (e.g., also apply in the areas of blockchain scalability,
secure computation on the cloud, etc.). Then, this project will also have a
strong implementation and evaluation component. All proposed protocols will be
implemented, evaluated and compared with existing techniques. The prototype
implementations will be integrated in real systems to test how the proposed
accumulator protocols perform in real-world settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.