* 2247554
* Dynamic Multi-state Living Coordination Polymerization for Next Generation Polyolefins
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Lawrence Sita, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 04/30/2026
* USD 575,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis (CAT) and the Macromolecular,
Supramolecular, and Nanochemistry (MSN) Programs in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Lawrence Sita of the University of Maryland, College Park is
developing new polymerization catalysts that can be programmed to deliver
multiple products from a single initiator. This ‘one catalyst – many materials’
paradigm is being investigated to expand the range of new polyolefin materials
that possess technologically-useful physical properties that are of benefit to
society and the economy, such as recyclability and serving as replacements for
less environmentally benign legacy plastics. Group 4 catalysts are being tuned
to undergo selective polymerization in systems that would typically be assumed
to be unselective. The activities that are being pursued also provide an
excellent forum for training the next generation of scientists for science- and
engineering-related careers in education, industry, and science policy, and
importantly, those who are members of underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Homogeneous olefin polymerization catalysts are
traditionally optimized to produce a single type of polymer from a single
monomer. In contrast, Professor Sita and his research team are designing and
preparing Group 4 d(0)-complexes supported by cyclopentadienyl and amidinate
ligands that can serve as initiators for the living coordinative chain transfer
polymerization of olefins into multiple new classes of polyolefin products. By
exerting control over the relative rates of reversible dynamic reactions that
are competitive with chain-growth propagation, highly versatile multi-state
polymerization processes are being programmed to deliver a spectrum of different
products from a single initiator under otherwise identical conditions. Different
controlling elements of the system being explored include: the structure and
chirality of the amidinate ligands, the effect of coordinative groups installed
on the amidinate ligands, as well as reaction mixture temporal control over
polymer composition. These studies are working towards the advance of polyolefin
materials with desirable physical properties while establishing new elements of
catalytic control in complex systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.