* 2247795
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Small: Differentially Private Data Synthesis: Practical Algorithms and Statistical Foundations
* CSE,CNS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Guang Cheng, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* James Joshi
* 06/30/2026
* USD 97,802.00

Data collected by organizations and agencies are a key resource in today’s
information age and fuel a significant part of today's economy. However, the
disclosure of those data poses serious threats to individual privacy. One
important approach to using data while protecting privacy is differential
private data synthesis (DPDS). That is, given as input a private dataset, one
uses a differentially private algorithm to generate synthetic datasets that are
“similar” to the input dataset. While DPDS has received much attention in recent
years, our understanding on this topic remains limited. This project takes a
multi-disciplinary approach to advance our scientific understanding as well as
improve practice techniques for DPDS. More specifically, this project’s
novelties are as follows. First, it systematically explores the design space in
marginal-based DPDS algorithms that have been proven to be effective in NIST
competitions on DPDS, while also taking insights from data synthesis techniques
developed in similar fields (often not satisfying DP). Second, it develops
statistical theories that both are motivated by the empirical performances of
DPDS algorithms, and guide the empirical research of these algorithms.
&lt;br/&gt;The project’s broader significance and importance are as follows. We
are in the information economy. Data of all kinds, such as online interaction,
medical sensor data, genomic data, and location data are being collected.
Practical techniques that enable use of these data while protecting individual
privacy are crucially needed and will greatly enhance the value of such data.
Users will gain from increased control of their private information, and society
as a whole will benefit from deriving maximal benefit from aggregated data. PIs
plan to jointly develop and teach a graduate-level course on synthetic data
based on the existing research in this area as well as research results from
this project, and involve undergraduate students in research.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has two thrusts. The first thrust aims to
develop new marginal-based DPDS algorithms that improve upon the state-of-art in
empirical evaluations. The tasks include: perform an in-depth study of the
“marginal-to-dataset” problem (how to synthesize a dataset when given a set of
marginals); develop and evaluate new approaches for handling numerical
attributes; and develop adaptive and automated techniques for selecting
marginals so that dataset synthesized with them captures as much useful
information from the input dataset as possible. The second thrust complements
the empirical research in the first thrust, and aims to develop statistical
theory for high dimensional marginal-based data synthesis algorithms, and also a
general learning theory framework to evaluate the utility of synthetic data in
downstream tasks. The two thrusts are highly complementary and support each
other. The experimental study in Thrust 1 will provide insights and directions
for theoretical studies in Thrust 2, which will help explain the experimental
findings as well as guide additional experimental
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.