* 2247685
* Nonspectator Phosphorus Ligands for Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Alexander Radosevich, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 04/30/2026
* USD 600,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis and the Chemical Structure, Dynamics,
and Mechanism B Programs in the Division of Chemistry, Alexander Radosevich of
the Department of Chemistry at Massachusetts Institute of Technology is studying
the development of new metal-phosphorus complexes as homogeneous catalysts for
small molecule conversion chemistry. Catalysis plays a central role in the
scalable, economical, and sustainable synthesis of chemicals, including fuels,
drugs, and materials. In this project, Dr. Radosevich and his students are
creating new metal-based catalysts that bear phosphorus-containing substituents
that react in new ways. The specific reactions to be pursued in this research
include schemes to convert alkenes and alcohols to value-added products.
Graduate and undergraduate researchers working with Dr. Radosevich will receive
training in a broad set of spectroscopic, physical, and synthetic chemistry
techniques. Achieving these training objectives will contribute to a vital
workforce that underpins the economic competitiveness of US-based chemical
industries. Dr. Radosevich and his research group participate in a number of
outreach efforts advancing the goal of broad participation in science. Dr.
Radosevichâ€™s laboratory is also host to visiting international researchers at
all levels of experience, contributing to ongoing US leadership in international
scientific engagement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Alexander Radosevich and his
research team are pursuing the experimental physical, thermodynamic, and
mechanistic foundation for the development of new nonspectator ligands based on
tricoordinate phosphorus. This work centers on the proposition that enforcing
nontrigonal geometries on tricoordinate phosphorus ligands will yield the
structural and electronic conditions necessary to access higher-coordinate
phosphorus ligands. The specific objectives being pursued comprise experiments
that: (1) infer HOMO-LUMO electronic structure of nontrigonal tricoordinate
phosphorus ligand complexes through analysis of 31P NMR chemical shift
anisotropy, (2) develop nonspectator tricoordinate phosphorus ligands for
catalyzed conversions of alkenes involving hydrido- and hydrocarbyl-
metallophosphoranes, and (3) develop nonspectator tricoordinate phosphorus
ligand complexes as catalysts for alcohol conversion chemistry involving alkoxy
metallophosphoranes. These studies are providing a detailed, experimental
quantification of the impact of nontrigonal distortion on electronic structure
in tricoordinate phosphorus-containing complexes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.