* 2247374
* Quantum Perspectives in Banach and Metric Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Javier Chavez-Dominguez, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 06/30/2026
* USD 162,119.00

In many situations of interest, one has a quantitative way of expressing how far
apart two objects are. A basic example is physical distance between locations in
space, and a modern one is to measure how similar two words are (which is how
software autocorrects our typing). The mathematical notion used to encapsulate
this idea is that of a metric space. Particularly interesting kinds of such
spaces are those that arise from networks, that is, those for which the measure
of distance between two nodes is given by the optimal choice of a path
connecting them using the links in the network: there are no direct flights
between Oklahoma City and Boston, so for travel purposes what matters is not the
geographical distance between the two cities but rather how to get from one to
the other using the available commercial flights. Such network-type spaces play
an important role in Information Theory, the mathematical framework for
communications where information is encoded in a string of 0’s and 1’s as in
today’s computers. The project studies the shape of the corresponding quantum
network-type spaces that arise from Quantum Information Theory, which models
communication systems where information is now encoded in the state of a
quantum-mechanical system. Better knowledge of the shape of these quantum spaces
has implications for the understanding of the capabilities of the quantum
processes that will be used by the quantum computers of the future. In addition,
through outreach, mentoring of postdocs, and involvement in undergraduate
research, the project will contribute to the growth and diversification of the
body of students and researchers in STEM fields. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
project will focus on geometric questions arising from various models of
quantization. It is divided into three parts. The first is about quantum graphs
and other quantum metric spaces, with an emphasis on quantum expanders and the
further development of a theory of the large-scale geometry of quantum metric
spaces. The second part proposes to use Quantum Information Theory tools to
study the nonlinear geometry of noncommutative sequence and function spaces. The
focus is to study noncommutative versions of several generalized Mazur maps of
interest in Banach space geometry, Operator Algebra Theory, Geometric Group
Theory, and Theoretical Computer Science, as well as interpolation properties of
a new generalization of weighted noncommutative Lebesgue p spaces. The third
part is focused on operator spaces, which are a type of quantum Banach spaces.
The study of their nonlinear geometry is a timely subject. The project intends
to adapt tools coming from the linear theory of tensor products to continue the
development of a nonlinear geometric theory for operator spaces, and to study
asymptotic tensor products for operator spaces (whose Banach space counterparts
have in recent times found applications in Quantum Information
Theory).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.