* 2247434
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Regulating and Leveraging Types for Security
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Kangjie Lu, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 07/31/2026
* USD 195,154.00

Data elements are defined with types during software programming. A type not
only specifies the semantics and characteristics of data elements, but also
constrains the program operations and behaviors against data elements. Such type
information is valuable for program analysis, and type analysis does not require
complicated data-flow analysis. However, the type system in the widely used
system programming languages (C/C++) has two fundamental problems. First,
general types are prevalent; they obscure the specific data types and result in
imprecise type-based analysis results. Second, type errors and typecasting are
common; directly using erroneous types for defense mechanisms would lead to
runtime errors which are considered unacceptable. This project aims to address
the problems and use types for various security applications. The research
results will be integrated into education to improve students' awareness of type
errors, and help them capture type errors and harden their
code.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to address fundamental problems
with types in type-unsafe programming languages like C/C++ and then use the
improved types for various security applications. The project has three research
thrusts. First, the project will regulate typesâ€”specifizing the prevalent
general types and statically detecting type-confusion errors. It will employ
selective, path-based, and function-grained typecasting analysis to improve
scalability and precision. The second research thrust will then develop new
techniques that leverage&lt;br/&gt;regulated types to significantly improve the
precision of several foundational analysis techniques for security. With the
regulated types and precise analysis techniques, the last research thrust will
build effective and practical defense mechanisms such as type-based
data-/control-flow integrity. The techniques will be implemented as LLVM passes,
so that they can be easily used as compiler plugins.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.