* 2247196
* Collaborative Research: Structure and function: How microenvironment facilitates  antimicrobial response to environmental stress in a defensive symbiosis
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Marcy Balunas, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Shisler
* 07/31/2026
* USD 469,856.00

Some animals form relationships with beneficial microbes that produce compounds
that can inhibit pathogens and protect the host from disease. These beneficial
microbes (or symbionts) are often critical for the animals and can influence the
health of whole species and ecosystems. Animals that lay their eggs in the
environment are at a particularly high risk from pathogens infecting these eggs
and killing developing embryos. Therefore, some animals rely on beneficial
symbionts that produce potent antimicrobial compounds to protect their eggs.
However, we lack an understanding of how physical, biological, and chemical
factors in eggs contribute to this protection that ultimately may stave off
stresses such as pathogens and climate change. The Hawaiian bobtail squid has
served as a model animal to study beneficial relationships with bacteria. This
work will combine the expertise of a multidisciplinary team in microbiology,
chemistry, and natural products research to test the hypothesis that the
microenvironment of bobtail squid eggs helps beneficial bacteria produce
effective antimicrobial compounds that defend against pathogenic microbes.
Understanding these protective mechanisms will reveal how beneficial bacteria
protect animals from environmental stress and may lead to new drug discoveries
that can benefit humans. The research team will also create a new program that
will cross-train the next generation of researchers in both chemistry,
microbiology, and effective scientific communication to help our country prepare
leaders for the bioeconomy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many associations between hosts
and symbionts are mediated via the production of specialized metabolites and
other defensive compounds. Although great strides have been made in
characterizing the microbial diversity of host-associated microbiota, how hosts
and symbionts work together to achieve robust functional symbioses and their
response to environmental stress is not well understood. This work will use a
suite of multidisciplinary tools to understand how physical, chemical, and
biological parameters interface with the environment to govern specialized
metabolite production in a defensive symbiosis. The investigators will (I)
determine how the egg microenvironment of the Hawaiian bobtail squid, Euprymna
scolopes, contributes to antimicrobial production and localization, (II)
determine how temperature influences antimicrobial response to fungal pathogens
in ovum, and (III) characterize symbiont metabolite production using simplified
ex vivo experiments to better understand in ovum defensive function. They will
target known and new antimicrobial metabolites for expression analyses and
localization ex vivo and in ovum. Broader implications of this research include
transformative understanding of how host-microbe associations respond to threats
of increasing global temperatures and concomitant pathogen stress. The team will
integrate research and education by creating a new program, Chemistry of Squid
Symbiosis (CheSS), that will cross-train students in symbiosis and natural
product chemistry. The research team will also engage with the Skype-A-Scientist
program to receive training on effective scientific communication and public
outreach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.