* 2247257
* Collaborative Research: CAS-SC: Electrochemical Approaches to Sustainable Dinitrogen Fixation
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Alexander Miller, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 07/31/2026
* USD 190,130.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professors Alan Goldman of Rutgers University, Patrick Holland of Yale
University, and Alexander Miller of the University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill are studying the principles of electrochemical conversion of atmospheric
nitrogen (N2) to ammonia (NH3) using molecular catalysts. The research will
establish a foundation for efforts to discover sustainable alternatives to
replace current fossil fuel-based routes to ammonia. A low-temperature
electrochemical N2 fixation process for NH3 production using only renewable
energy could transform global agriculture by eliminating dependence on natural
gas and decentralizing fertilizer production, thus substantially mitigating CO2
emissions. Beyond fertilizer, electrochemical N2 fixation could also enable
carbon-free production of ammonia for the storage and transportation of
renewably produced energy, for direct use as fuel for electric utilities or
transportation or for conversion to hydrogen. Connecting the fundamental
chemistry and catalysis research with possible future application is aided by
collaboration with Professor Gal Hochman of Rutgers University, an agroeconomist
and sustainability expert. The three research groups have established a
collaborative environment ideal for training future leaders in science. In
addition to research, the students and PIs are further developing the
NitrogenFixers.org outreach program, which includes live in-person, virtual
remote, and do-it-yourself experiments on electrochemistry and sustainable
energy. It inspires middle and high school students by demonstrating the
importance and excitement of chemical research, including the importance of N2
fixation and sustainability.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;In this collaborative
project, the research groups of Professors Alan Goldman of Rutgers University,
Patrick Holland of Yale University, and Alexander Miller of the University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill are working on a grand challenge in chemistry that
relates to providing electrochemical alternatives to the Haber-Bosch procedure
for conversion of atmospheric nitrogen (N2) to ammonia (NH3) using molecular
catalysts. The guiding mechanistic hypothesis behind the research approach is
that bimetallic splitting of dinitrogen to form metal nitride complexes can give
high activity, high selectivity for NH3 (over H2), and low overpotential for
electrochemical nitrogen reduction. The collaborative team seeks detailed
mechanistic understanding of electrochemical N2 binding and splitting, and
subsequent proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET) to nitride, which can be
leveraged to discover new catalysts for ammonia synthesis. One highlight is the
use of a parallel experimentation workflow for refinement of reaction
conditions. Mechanistic studies will focus on the two key steps enabling
catalysis (N2 cleavage and nitride complex reduction). Electrochemically induced
N2 binding and the mechanism of formation of nitride complexes are being
addressed using computational studies integrated with experimental
electrochemical studies. The reduction of the nitrides in the following step is
relevant to other mechanisms of N2 reduction as well, and therefore has broad
relevance. Molecular electrocatalysis of N2 reduction remains far behind other
reactions such as CO2 reduction and H2 evolution, but the combination of
parallel electrolysis methodology and molecular-level mechanistic detail in this
project promises to lead to effective electrocatalytic systems that are well-
defined and amenable to continued development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.