* 2247482
* RUI: CAS: Solvent-Free Synthesis of Transition Metal Halide Clusters
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Dean Johnston, Otterbein College
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 05/31/2026
* USD 271,216.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Dean Johnston of Otterbein University will develop new synthetic
routes to substituted transition metal halide cluster materials that have
potential future applications in bioimaging, liquid crystal and optical devices,
catalysis, oxygen sensing, and as X-ray contrast agents. This family of clusters
is strongly phosphorescent and has unique electrochemical properties, making the
clusters potentially useful for a wide range of applications. The central
cluster core is very stable, making it an ideal building block for the creation
of new chemical constructs that link cluster units to form chains or three-
dimensional networks. It is important to note that current solution-based
methods for preparing modified clusters are severely limited by the reactivity
and solubility of the products, restricting the types of materials that can be
generated and isolated. This project seeks to overcome obstacles associated with
current synthetic techniques. The research team will use thermal heating and
mechanical grinding of metal cluster salts to prepare novel materials with
potential applications for optical devices and sensing. Undergraduate students
at Otterbein University will engage with this project through summer research
experiences and activities integrated into the Inorganic Chemistry laboratory,
gaining valuable experience in independent research and the synthesis and
characterization of inorganic materials. These research experiences will
complement the activities of the Cardinal Science Scholars Program, an NSF-
supported program of academic, co-curricular, and non-academic activities
demonstrated to increase retention and graduation in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project
is directed toward the preparation of metal cluster synthons that are intended
to serve as building blocks for new molecules and materials and to allow for
precise control over connectivity and dimensionality of cluster materials.
Greater than ninety-five percent of all known metal halide cluster derivatives
are homoleptic, illustrating the difficulty in selective ligand substitution
using solution-based synthetic routes. The Johnston research team will prepare
metal halide cluster salts where the cation is selected to react with the
anionic cluster, using charge balance and the properties of the cation to
control the stoichiometry of the reaction. Reactions will be initiated by
thermal or mechanochemical means in the absence of solvent, thereby avoiding
complications from solvent interference or solubility issues. The reactions and
products will be analyzed using thermogravimetric analysis, in-situ Raman
spectroscopy, and powder and single-crystal X-ray diffraction methods. The
results of this research are expected to provide researchers in the field of
inorganic cluster chemistry with synthetic tools and pathways to prepare new
cluster-based materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.