* 2247702
* Stable Polynomials, Rational Singularities, and Operator Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Greg Knese, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 05/31/2026
* USD 227,347.00

This project concerns a classical area of mathematics called mathematical
analysis with specific attention on two of its subfields, complex analysis and
operator theory. Complex analysis is a mature subject with wide applicability â€“
from mapping the globe to understanding the runtime of algorithms. Operator
theory was originally created to study quantum mechanics and has since grown
into a similarly mature field with applicability to engineering and
optimization. Part of the power of analysis is the ability to convert concrete
tasks, such as designing a thermostat or understanding the distribution of prime
numbers, into questions about mathematical objects called functions. This
project concerns modern fundamental research in these subjects with a focus on
questions with an inherent multivariable nature necessarily requiring a deeper
understanding of multivariable functions (and more specifically multivariable
rational functions). The research will be incorporated into educational roles at
both the undergraduate and graduate levels and by mentoring of students on these
modern and important areas of analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
focuses on three main areas: (1) characterizing the boundedness of rational
functions on domains in several variables, (2) understanding the integrability
of rational functions, and (3) systematically determining the asymptotics of
coefficients of multivariable rational functions. This research is also closely
tied to the theory of stable polynomials, an area which has enjoyed numerous
surprising applications in the last decade. Development will be continued of the
local theory of stable polynomials in old and new settings to get detailed
information about the behavior of a rational function near a singularity. In
addition, certain polynomials and rational functions built out of natural
operator theoretic constructions such as determinantal representations represent
important special cases of interest both in applications and to operator
theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.