* 2247723
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Toward Privacy Equity through Contextual Understanding of Self-Disclosure
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Shomir Wilson, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 05/31/2026
* USD 599,851.00

The goal of this project is to address concerns about the privacy risks to
personal information sharing in social media. Low socioeconomic and
underrepresented populations report feeling especially concerned about their
digital privacy in social media. The project team is studying how socioeconomic
status and group identity influence the challenges of privacy self-management.
New datasets collected and labeled through this award enable new machine
learning approaches for detection of self-disclosed personal information, social
network and peer effects on privacy-relevant behaviors, and population-specific
privacy risks. Privacy-enhancing technologies designed and developed during the
project will support privacy self-management for social media users.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;To accomplish the goals of the project, research is being undertaken
to understand differences in self-disclosure attitudes and behaviors across
socioeconomic groups. To do so, the project is developing and integrating novel
measures of social media self-relevant sharing behavior, including audience,
sensitivity of disclosure, direct vs. indirect disclosure, group privacy, and
platform and community norms. The research team is: conducting small- and big-
data empirical studies of personal disclosure, developing data-informed
descriptions of normative information flow and metrics for measurement of
contextual integrity, and is experimenting with prototype technologies to bring
equity to privacy management. The project is based on core principles of
participatory design and governance. These principles are operationalized
through broad community outreach and embedded processes for mutual learning,
including field studies, community workshops, and cooperative
prototyping.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.