* 2247928
* HSI Institutional Transformation Project: Building Community Success through Institutionalized and Culturally Responsive Support Systems
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2028
* Steven Koether, Sam Houston State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 05/31/2028
* USD 891,547.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 3 project aims to provide instructors,
teaching assistants, and peer tutors/mentors who teach and support STEM courses
with professional development opportunities that will improve student grades and
persistence. Through this professional development, the STEM instructional
community (i.e., instructors, teaching assistants, and peer tutors/mentors) will
gain the knowledge and skills to use evidence-based and culturally engaging
practices in their learning spaces. The objective is to better serve and,
ultimately, improve academic outcomes (i.e., course drops, grades, persistence)
for students that experience the most academic inequities. Intentionally
improving success for a diverse and talented, yet underserved, student
population requires a commitment to the instructional community that teaches and
supports students during early and pivotal moments in their academic careers.
This instructional community includes instructors (largely non-tenure track),
teaching assistants, and tutors/mentors that lead or assist instruction in
lower-division, gateway, high needs, pre-requisite, and/or larger courses. While
this instructional community has a large impact early on in studentsâ€™ academic
careers, they typically receive less support, guidance, and funding on college
campuses. As such, many lack the time, energy, and resources to engage in
professional development. A product of this discrepancy is that this population
also receives less attention in the research literature. As a result, knowledge
gaps surrounding the impact and development of this instructional community
compound inequity in the students they serve. The expected outcomes for this
project include quality instructional and culturally engaging professional
development and improved academic outcomes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The question
project proposes to answer is, will adequate funding, intentional support, and
quality training in evidence-based and culturally engaging practices for the
less privileged STEM instructional community (e.g., instructors, teaching
assistants, and tutors/mentors) improve college success outcomes in the targeted
courses? The project proposes to answer this question by offering competitive
stipends and scholarships for the STEM instructional community to engage with
three tiers of evidence-based, culturally engaging professional development. The
project uses an intersectionality framework to inform professional development
design, data collection, and data analysis. A recursive, action-oriented, mixed-
method research emphasis will be employed based on academic outcomes, classroom
observations, cultural engagement surveys, and qualitative contextualized
inquiry for the continual improvement and success of the program and students.
This project tackles a specific need identifiable by academic success data, one
which promises to both have an immediate and direct impact on equitable student
success at our institution. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM
education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will
also generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.