* 2247084
* Conference: Cornell Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2027
* Inna Zakharevich, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 03/31/2027
* USD 72,000.00

This award is to support speakers and participants at several meetings of the
Cornell Topology Festival, an annual conference at Cornell University, starting
with the conference planned for May 5-7, 2023. The conference has been a force
in the mathematical life of topologists and geometers in the northeastern United
States since 1963, providing an arena for the development and dissemination of a
broad array of results from within algebraic, differential, and geometric
topology and allied subjects. The activities are designed to encourage
mathematical breadth and exchange of ideas between different branches of
topology, as well as to welcome early career mathematicians into the field and
promote interactions between junior and senior participants. Each year, several
of the talks cluster around one significant theme, in order to communicated a
recent research development in one subarea to topologists across other areas,
and to educate graduate students and early career researchers on a subject of
recent interest. Each iteration of the conference starts with a day of
introductory talks by early junior speakers, and a colloquium talk on the
history of the topic chosen for the main theme. It also includes a lightning
session of short talks on exciting new research directions. All of these
activities serve to counter recent trends towards increasing specialization, by
showcasing developments across inter-related fields at an accessible level.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The area of interest for the 2023 conference will be
recent developments in the theory of 4-manifolds, a topic with deep connections
to geometric, algebraic, and symplectic topology and geometry. About one third
of the talks will be on this subject, in order to introduce topologists across
sub-disciplines to this area in more detail than obtainable by attending a
single talk or mini-course. Possible future themes include: high dimensional
negatively curved manifolds, trace methods, and homotopy type theory; although
the organizers remain flexible should a new exciting development come to light
elsewhere. The remainder of talks at the conference showcase a broad range of
recent developments in different areas of topology, selected with a view towards
breadth. Additionally, all speakers participate in a “lightning round”
consisting of short pitches of recent exciting work by others and speculation on
future trends. This gives a forward-looking perspective on new developments and
stimulates discussion. The opening introductory day of activities and graduate
student talks provides a point of entry for interested non-experts and
encourages graduate student involvement. The broader impacts of the activities
include a more broadly-trained community of topologists, able to transcend the
boundaries of subspecialties; a more diverse mathematical workforce; a more
rapid integration of younger topologists into areas of current research; and the
enhancement of collaboration among researchers in different areas of topology.
The training effects of the conference will be extended by dissemination of
lecture notes from the workshops and summaries of the panel discussion and
problem session; the main vehicle for this is the conference web site, which has
been maintained continuously since 1997.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;https://e.math.cor
nell.edu/sites/topology/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.