* 2247074
* Developing an early understanding of contagion in preschool- and kindergarten-aged children
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Nina Fefferman, Rutgers University Newark
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Ford
* 06/30/2026
* USD 757,076.00

The goal of this project is to create and test the effectiveness of a storybook
intervention that focuses on increasing young children's biological knowledge of
illness and contagion. The study focuses on the topic of contagion for several
reasons. First, research has shown that in the absence of any explicit
instruction or training in the domain of illness transmission, naive and often
incorrect theories are often formed, which are difficult to remedy later. In
fact, there is evidence that some incorrect theories about contagion persist
even into adulthood. Second, teaching children about illness transmission is
important for the development of health-related behaviors, which has direct
implications for public health. And given the economic and social disruption
caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, it is timely to develop materials to help
educators and parents teach children about illness
transmission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will create and test an informal
learning intervention, in the form of a storybook reading, to provide preschool-
and kindergarten-aged children with information about the causal mechanisms of
illness transmission. Children will be randomly assigned to hear a storybook
about illness that is designed to teach them about the causal mechanisms that
drive illness transmission, a storybook about illness with no causal information
about transmission, or a storybook unrelated to illness. The study will then
test children's knowledge about illness transmission before and after the
storybook reading and at a 3-month follow-up. Measures include the behavioral
impact of the storybook by using an illness avoidance task to examine childrenâ€™s
behavior toward a potentially contaminated toy. Further, the study examines
records of absences from the children's classrooms and information about
children's health behaviors at home from the time of the storybook reading to
the 3-month follow-up. The study uses these additional behavioral data to build
an epidemiological model about the schools themselves that assesses the
potential magnitude of this intervention on broader community health. Designed
by an interdisciplinary team, the project will combine techniques from
psychology, cognitive science, and epidemiology to create an informal learning
experience with potential impacts that can be estimated directly. This research
has potential far-reaching impacts on helping young children protect themselves
from getting sick, developing an easy and engaging intervention that can be made
accessible to parents, schools, libraries, and other educational
institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by NSF's EDU Core
Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes fundamental STEM education
research that generates foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are
made in critical areas that are essential, broad and enduring: STEM learning and
STEM learning environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.