* 2247036
* IRES: International Paradigms for Managing Hydrologic Extremes in a Shifting Climate
* O/D,OISE
* 03/01/2023,02/28/2026
* Jay Lund, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Fahmida Chowdhury
* 02/28/2026
* USD 400,000.00

Water flows across national borders, unfettered by political distinctions, while
water's role in economic and ecological vitality is more important than ever.
However, water management, research, and engineering still largely operate
within local homegrown paradigms. Water managers and researchers are typically
familiar with their own methods, sites, and toolkits. However, local focus has
consequences, and opportunities are lost when we do not learn from successes and
failures in other regions. Sharp and Leshner (2014) argue that "the search for
solutions needs to draw upon the talents and innovative ideas of scientists,
engineers, and societal leaders worldwide to overcome traditional and
nationalistic paradigms that have so far been inadequate to meeting these
challenges." The goal of this project is to contribute to US expertise in
solving future water-related challenges. UC Davis and IHE Delft will join forces
to bring three cohorts of US advanced graduate students to Europe and provide
them immersive experiences in critical analysis of differing international
approaches to water science, policy, and management. Year 1: international
approaches to flood-risk management, year 2: drought and groundwater management,
and year 3: freshwater ecosystems in a climate of growing extremes. STEM
workforce development outcomes will include students trained in: collaborating
across international boundaries on international problems and in international
settings, integrating across multiple disciplines and across international
paradigms, to integrate water science into management and policy-making, team-
based problem solving, and trained to promoted an inclusive and supportive
environment that advances diversity and inclusion as core values. Overall, this
project will contribute to US expertise in solving future water-related
challenges domestically and worldwide.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project has
three themes. &lt;br/&gt;1. International approaches to flood-risk management:
Flood magnitudes, frequencies, and impacts are becoming more severe in most
areas as a warming climate increases atmospheric precipitation and storm
intensity. The field of flood risk management integrates flood risk assessment
and its reduction to a tolerable level using diverse technical and social
measures, leading to increased resilience and adaptation capacity. Integrated
flood risk management aims to reduce the human and socioeconomic losses caused
by flooding while at the same time taking into account the benefits from floods
and the use of flood plains or coastal zones.&lt;br/&gt;2. International
approaches to drought and groundwater management: Groundwater resources have
long been used for domestic, irrigation, and industrial water supplies where
access to surface water is lacking, either seasonally, long-term, or due to
unusual climate events leading to relative lack of precipitation and runoff
(drought). Dwindling groundwater resources not only threaten long-term
sustainability of agricultural production and domestic water supplies, they also
cause expensive and sometimes unaffordable increases in pumping costs, well
outages, land subsidence, seawater intrusion, and water quality degradation,
among others. Climate change leads to changing patterns and intensity of
drought, of groundwater recharge, and of water demands on groundwater
reservoirs. &lt;br/&gt;3. Freshwater ecosystems in a climate of growing
extremes: Watersheds and river environments are complex ecological systems where
geologic structures interact with hydrologic processes to support ecological
functions and associated aquatic and riparian habitats. As the chief source of
renewable water supply for freshwater ecosystems and societal use, rivers and
wetlands provide vital supporting, provisioning, regulating, and cultural
ecosystem services. Riparian zones account for more than 75% of terrestrial
animals in the western U.S. The global extent and severity of ecosystem decline
has stimulated a worldwide response in the formation of the Intergovernmental
Science-Policy Platform on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services (IPBES) and
launch of the UN Decade on Restoration (2021-2030). Like ecosystems themselves,
addressing the threats requires scientists capable of working across
disciplines, technologies, and landscapes. To understand the complex ecology of
freshwater systems, students must understand their interdisciplinary and
integrative nature, ultimately learning to think synergistically about
biological, physical, chemical, and anthropogenic
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.