* 2247234
* Singular integrals on curves, the Beurling-Ahlfors transform, and commutators
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Henri Martikainen, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Tyson
* 06/30/2026
* USD 209,206.00

This project addresses properties of singular integrals, an important tool in
modern analysis and its applications. Such integrals appear systematically in
the context of harmonic analysis, a field of mathematics which studies
properties of functions via their decomposition into components according to a
suitable notion of vibrational frequency. The study of singular integrals is
characterized by delicate cancellations which occur between positive and
negative contributions. Some key questions to be considered in this project
involve commutators. A commutator is the difference A*B-B*A of two products
taken in the opposite order. The commutation property A*B = B*A is rare in
general, and the size of the commutator gives a measure for the degree of non-
commutativity. Classical examples are related to the uncertainty principle in
quantum mechanics. The project will advance state of the art commutator theory
involving singular integrals. This includes problems on curves with a geometric
flavor and higher parameter variants of recent key estimates with applications
to partial differential equations. Part of the project deals with an important
singular integral, the Beurling–Ahlfors transform, and particularly with
questions related to weighted estimates. Weighted estimates are generally
desirable due to their wide use throughout harmonic analysis and its
applications. Methodologically, discrete methods involving probability have
recently become central in related problems, and such methods will be further
developed in combination with new geometric constructions. In addition, the
Principal Investigator will supervise graduate students on topics related to the
proposed research, and will organize a research workshop for early-career
researchers and a separate online conference for undergraduate
research.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project revolves around the study of
singular integrals, harmonic analysis, and commutators. Among the topics to be
considered are weighted estimates for higher powers of the Beurling–Ahlfors
transform, an important exemplar of the class of singular integrals. The
relevant theory has recently been advanced by the discovery of counterexamples
showing the failure of the famous A2 conjecture in this context, but the precise
bounds are not completely understood. The investigator will also advance the
theory of commutators by studying singular integrals on curves and bi-commutator
analogues of recent commutator characterizations. Such commutator problems are
also related to weak variants of sparse domination in the multi-parameter
setting. Sparse domination methods have been central in the past decade for
related problems but up to now have remained a one-parameter tool. On the
methodological side, the project will further develop the method of approximate
weak factorizations, which has been responsible for many recent breakthroughs,
and will combine that method with other novel tools. The project will utilize
dyadic-probabilistic analysis, fine-tuned counterexamples, and geometric
factorizations to develop applicable harmonic analysis methods suitable for
these and other questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.