* 2247058
* Light Alkane Upgrading Through Dehydrogenative C-N Coupling with NH3 over Bifunctional Metal/Zeolite Catalyst
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Yizhi Xiang, Mississippi State University
* Standard Grant
* Robert McCabe
* 06/30/2026
* USD 298,108.00

The project addresses a new process and catalyst design for on-purpose
conversion of ethane to the commodity chemical acetonitrile. Ethane (a low-value
and catalytically refractive component of natural gas) is reacted with ammonia
over a bifunctional metal/zeolite catalyst to produce acetonitrile in a process
that potentially offers both environmental and economic benefits with respect to
existing technology. The project focuses on fundamental aspects of the catalyst
design and the reaction mechanism to enhance catalyst performance and
durability. Beyond the technical aspects, the project features educational and
outreach activities targeting underrepresented minorities in STEM
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will break ground for
fundamental research for the direct ethane dehydrogenative C-N coupling with
ammonia gas over bifunctional metal/zeolite catalysts. Specifically, the project
targets catalyst structure/performance relationships and the fundamental
understanding of the influence of metal functionality on C-H bond activation in
the presence of ammonia. The project investigates the influence of cobalt (Co)
and Platinum (Pt) metal sites on the Brønsted/Lewis acidity of the zeolite, in a
catalyst design that would optimize metal/acid-site bifunctionality.
Additionally, through the combination of operando DRIFT-MS and relaxation-type
transient experiments, the project will identify the surface reaction
intermediates as related to the kinetics and mechanism of the reaction over the
tandem bifunctional metal/zeolite catalyst. The fundamental knowledge obtained
from the project could be the basis for an efficient ammodehydrogenation
catalyst design. With the support of this project, the PI will help address the
problem of the loss of Mississippi’s STEM talent by recruiting and retaining
promising chemical engineering students, especially from underrepresented
groups. The investigator will work closely with various outreach programs at
Mississippi State University. Students involved in this project will gain the
skills to succeed in both industrial and academic career paths.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is jointly funded by the CBET Catalysis
program and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.