* 2247669
* RUI: Innovative Simulations to Study Pressure Effects on Fundamental Gas-Phase Chemical Processes
* MPS,CHE
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Luis Rivera Rivera, Ferris State University (Inc.)
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 04/30/2026
* USD 200,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Luis Rivera of Ferris State
University is developing computational approaches to study pressure effects on
gas-phase fundamental chemical dynamics processes. Competing chemical dynamics
processes such as energy transfer, isomerization, and dissociation are not well
understood in the high-pressure collisional regime. Current computational
methods have limitations in terms of accuracy and computational cost for
studying vibrational energy relaxation and reaction dynamics in the high-
pressure collisional regime. Professor Rivera and his students will apply
canonical approaches to develop molecular dynamics simulations that are highly
accurate, computationally inexpensive, and, more importantly, with broader
applicability to condensed phase dynamics. Their studies could lead to a better
understanding of fundamental chemical dynamics processes under extreme
conditions of high pressure and temperature, which is otherwise a challenge to
achieve by current theoretical and experimental methods. The intended outreach
activities with middle school students will prepare and inspire the next
generation of young scholars and scientists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding
the mechanisms of vibrational energy transfer within and among molecules is
fundamental to understanding many physical and chemical processes. The goal of
this RUI project is to understand gas-phase fundamental chemical dynamics
processes, such as energy transfer, isomerization, and dissociation in the high-
pressure collisional regime. This project will also address the need for
efficient approaches for generating accurate potential energy surfaces (PESs) by
application of canonical approaches. Canonical approaches demonstrate that for a
class of molecules, their PESs have the same shape. What appears to be different
shapes on the PESs is a matter of scaling. Canonical approaches will allow for
computationally inexpensive and highly accurate molecular dynamics simulations,
which are essential to study fundamental chemical dynamics processes. The
insights gained from this project will take us a step closer to unifying models
for gas and condensed-phase chemical processes. The outcomes of this work will
give a fundamental understanding of the collisional energy transfer and chemical
reactions where the isolated binary collision approximation breaks down. This
project is a unique research opportunity for undergraduate students at Ferris
State University. Research is an essential part of undergraduate education that
provides growth, development, and training.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.