* 2247005
* Collaborative Research: Learning to estimate and control gust-induced aerodynamics
* ENG,CBET
* 01/15/2023,12/31/2025
* Jeff Eldredge, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Ron Joslin
* 12/31/2025
* USD 267,114.00

Large-amplitude fluid dynamic disturbances, or “gusts”, are a pervasive
challenge for many energy and propulsion systems involving lifting surfaces,
such as wind turbines, fixed and rotary-wing aircraft, and turbomachinery. Flow
disturbances are often atmospheric, caused by terrain or weather, or introduced
by the aerodynamics of other systems, as in a wind farm or a swarm of air
vehicles. They become relatively stronger as the system's weight and size
decrease or as weather events become more extreme. Gust encounters can
significantly undermine the desired performance of the system, or at worst,
cause catastrophic failure. Devising an automated strategy for large-amplitude
gust mitigation is exceptionally challenging because the aerodynamic responses
of the system to the gust and to actuation are highly dependent upon each other.
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a promising approach for control of such complex
fluid flows that circumvents many of the obstacles to previous approaches, but
it is challenged by the burden of training: in a naïve application of RL, the
algorithm must see a suitably large range of gust conditions and actuation
responses during training to determine the best response for each
encounter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is very likely that RL training can be
accelerated if the algorithm incorporates flow state information and a
prediction of flow physics. The augmentation of RL with flow state information
remains largely unexplored, primarily because of the challenges of practically
inferring this information in real time with a small number of on-board sensors.
Sensors provide a limited footprint of the flow around them, but this footprint
can reveal most of the essential flow information. This program will leverage
prior work in computational and experimental investigations of unsteady
aerodynamics to advance the state of the art of flow state estimation from
limited sensors and to close the gap on practical use of RL in fluid dynamics.
The program will deploy experiments and computations to estimate coherent vortex
structures in a flow during encounters of a fixed wing or rotating blade with a
large-amplitude disturbance. With use of both computations and experiments with
detailed flow measurements, the program will explore a wide range of crucial
flow physics in gust encounters, including scaling effects across a wide range
of Reynolds numbers, and to study the influence of wing/blade pitching on these
encounters during RL training. This program will demonstrate, for the first
time, reinforcement learning control of gust interactions in a laboratory
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.