* 2247661
* Collaborative Research: CAS-SC: Development of Heavy Atom - Free Photocatalysts for Chemical Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Tatiana Esipova, Loyola University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 06/30/2026
* USD 292,130.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis (CAT) and Chemical Synthesis (SYN)
programs in the Division of Chemistry, the Critical Aspects of Sustainability
metaprogram (CAS) and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities (OMA), Tatiana
Esipova of Loyola University-Chicago and Tomoyasu Mani of the University of
Connecticut are developing a new family of metal- and halogen-free catalysts
that are activated by visible light. Upon activation these catalysts are capable
of promoting a number of chemical reactions. In contrast to this work, most
visible light-activated reactions require catalysts that contain precious metals
or halogen atoms and therefore are not considered to be environmentally
sustainable. With a focus on overcoming this limitation, the collaborative
Mani/Esipova team is employing computational modeling to design and optimize
their catalysts and will subsequently test them in light-driven transformations.
In addition to all of this, this research program is providing valuable
opportunities for students. Undergraduate and graduate students that are
involved in this work, including students who have been historically
underrepresented in the sciences, are developing intellectually while building
skill sets that lie at the intersection of synthetic organic chemistry and
physical chemistry. Such training is valuable for their future careers, be it in
academia or industry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research aims to develop a new
family of organic heavy atomâ€“free photoredox catalysts that contain a general
motif that consists of orthogonal electron donor-acceptor aromatic chromophores.
Generally speaking, photocatalysts absorb light and create electronically
excited states that facilitate electron transfer reactions in a mild and
controlled manner; as a result, they can produce highly reactive intermediates
that lead to value-added bond-forming events. Most currently utilized photoredox
catalysts employ halogens or precious metals to enhance the production of these
excited states. The photoredox catalysts that are developed in this study not
only take advantage of an underexplored photophysical phenomenon to produce
excited states in pi-conjugated organic molecules, but they avoid the use of
heavy atoms including metals and halogens. The research is demonstrating the
unique properties and versatility of this new class of organic photoredox
catalysts. This research is expected to establish structure-function
correlations of donor-acceptor molecules in terms of the efficiency of the
generation of the excited state and the associated catalytic activity. This work
and the continued development of sustainable catalysts is providing a firm
foundation for the continued exploration and the development of organic
photoredox catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.