* 2247342
* Collaborative Research: SHF: Small: RUI: CMOS+X: Honey-ReRAM Enabled 3D Neuromorphic Accelerator
* CSE,CCF
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Feng Zhao, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Hu, X. Sharon
* 09/30/2026
* USD 300,000.00

Current computing systems are facing significant challenges including extremely
high energy demand, tremendous consumption of nonrenewable materials,
environmental and health issues by electronic waste, and lack of technologies to
improve system performance by integration of complementary metal oxide
semiconductor (CMOS) microchips with emerging device technologies (denoted X) –
“CMOS+X”. This project will address these challenges by exploring an innovative
technology to integrate CMOS periphery circuits with a novel memory technology -
natural organic honey based resistive switching random access memory (honey-
ReRAM) for a new brain-inspired neuromorphic computing system. The prototyped
“CMOS + honey-ReRAM” computing system is promising to promote high performance,
energy efficient, and sustainable in-memory computing capability for many high
impact domains such as engineering, social science, national health, and
defense. In addition, the proposed education activities offer unique training
opportunities for underrepresented researchers including female, African
American, and Native American students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
targets to explore innovations in device fabrication and system integration
technologies to optimize honey-ReRAM devices, establish the feasibility of 3D
integration of CMOS circuits with honey-ReRAM arrays, and prototype a CMOS +
honey-ReRAM enabled neuromorphic accelerator, an essential neural network
hardware component for data processing in a vast range of devices in computing
and artificial intelligence. The honey-ReRAM will have highly reproducible
memory characteristics, thermal stability, long-term reliability, low-cost, as
well as being sustainable. The honey ReRAM will also utilize an eco-friendly
synthesis process and device manufacture. A novel three-dimensional (3D)
architecture and fabrication technology with a formal design flow will be
developed to ensure the compatibility of combining CMOS circuitry with honey-
ReRAM arrays by a heterogeneous integration on the microchip. Furthermore, this
research will provide a solution to the incompatibility problem in the
integration between CMOS and X and effectively accelerate the development and
application of CMOS+X technologies for system-level improvements in
computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.