* 2247007
* U.S.-Ireland R&amp;D Partnership: Collaborative Research: CNS Core: Medium: A unified framework for the emulation of classical and quantum physical layer networks
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2025
* Prineha Narang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Ann Von Lehmen
* 09/30/2025
* USD 224,651.00

Recent advances in quantum physics, devices, computing and communications
systems have brought attention to the potential of a quantum Internet, which may
be used for a variety of applications, including interconnection of quantum
computers. A quantum Internet is expected to involve a combination of classical
and quantum communication systems working in concert. The research in this
project seeks to apply classical control architectures and research methods to
the investigation of quantum network control, and to study network control of
quantum applications and their coexistence with classical communication systems.
Several use cases will be used to evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed
approach.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project brings together a unique
US-Ireland-Northern Ireland interdisciplinary team to address important
challenges facing the development of a quantum Internet. The United States
partners at the University of Arizona will contribute expertise in use cases
sensitive to different forms of quantum and classical noise in optical
communication systems. This includes theoretical models for these noise sources,
their expression in communication networks, and their representation in network
emulation. The Republic of Ireland team at Trinity College Dublin will use these
new models in extensions to classical network emulation tools and adapt these
tools to the study of control planes and network layering in quantum networks.
Key use cases to benchmark and evaluate these new tools will be studied by the
Northern Ireland team at Queens University Belfast. This wide range of expertise
and capabilities across each institution will be essential for the success of
this project. The software tools and understanding that will result from this
project will be widely disseminated and enable new research in the
interoperation of classical and quantum networks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.