* 2247089
* Combinatorial Objects and Actions in Higher Dimensional Settings
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Jessica Striker, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2026
* USD 255,243.00

This project is jointly funded by the Combinatorics program and the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR). Dynamics is the study of how
systems change and is fundamental to mathematics and applications, while
combinatorics explores beautiful mathematical objects composed of discrete
structures. Often, combinatorics and dynamics provide insight into the structure
of mathematical and physical objects, revealing hidden symmetries and
connections. There has been much success in the discovery of mathematical
objects and actions that display extremely elegant properties, but many of these
objects are two-dimensional. The theme of this proposal is to advance such
findings in higher dimensional realms of mathematics and statistical physics.
This study will also include mentoring students and early career researchers,
especially those of underrepresented groups in
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work is comprised of several projects
involving intricate bijections and actions, building upon results in dynamical
algebraic combinatorics and symmetric functions. One project uses a new
bijection between certain types of labelled posets that correlates the actions
of promotion and rowmotion. Another involves alternating sign matrices, which
are multidimensional Catalan analogues related to the square ice model of
statistical physics. It has been a long-standing open problem to construct an
explicit bijection between these and certain plane partitions. This project aims
to make progress on this problem by interpreting these objects as different
types of pipe dreams, objects with connections to Schubert polynomials. Finally,
web bases for irreducible representations of symmetric groups have applications
to quantum link invariants, cluster algebras, and positive geometries. This work
searches for such bases in higher dimensional cases, with surprising connections
to alternating sign matrices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.