* 2247810
* NSF-BSF: SaTC: CORE: Small: Prevention, Detection and Mitigation for Secure Interdomain Routing
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Bing Wang, University of Connecticut
* Continuing Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 06/30/2026
* USD 192,878.00

The Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) is the glue that connects hundreds of
thousands of autonomous systems into the global Internet infrastructure. From
its inception, BGP however has no built-in security mechanisms. This
vulnerability has been abused for myriad attacks, many causing large-scale
network disruptions and catastrophic financial loss. Extensive efforts on
securing BGP have led to the current increasing deployment of mechanisms for
authenticating and validating route origins. As a result, simple prefix hijacks
are expected to become less effective. While this is encouraging, attackers can
adopt many other forms of more sophisticated attacks, e.g., path manipulation
attacks and route leaks, which can be extremely damaging. While many prevention
techniques have been proposed by academia, industry and standardization
organizations, none of them has been actively deployed , partly because of
insufficient attention paid to deployment challenges. This NSF-BSF project aims
to develop effective and deployable solutions to significantly improve BGP
security. In addition, this project incorporates research outcome in course
development and provides research opportunities to underrepresented
students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project takes a multi-pronged approach to
improve BGP security. First, it develops effective and deployable strategies to
prevent attacks to BGP. Th proposed techniques aim to finally overcome the long-
standing obstacle of deploy-ability by combining significantly better security
under partial deployment with significantly lower overhead. Second, this project
develops a detect-then-prevent service that is broadly applicable to many types
of attacks, including 'hidden' and 'stealthy' attacks that are difficult to
prevent directly. In the same time the approaches will keep the defense
resilient to new classes of attacks that purposely mislead and abuse the
detection service. Third, this project develops automated mitigation techniques,
with a novel on-demand route origin authorization design, and outsourced-
mitigations leveraging content delivery networks and overlay networks. Last,
this project significantly advances the state-of-the-art of inter-domain routing
security evaluation, by developing accurate and flexible open-source simulation
tools and formal analysis mechanisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.