* 2247614
* CAREER: Learning in Adversarial and Nonstationary Environments
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2022,03/31/2025
* Gregory Ditzler, Rowan University
* Continuing Grant
* Anthony Kuh
* 03/31/2025
* USD 333,558.00

The majority of machine learning algorithms rely on the assumption that data are
sampled from a fixed probability distribution. This assumption is often violated
in practice, which results in classification and regression strategies that are
far from optimal or even reliable. Recent work has shown that an adversary can
significantly compromise the outcome of preprocessing techniques and
classification. Unfortunately, a unified framework for learning in the presence
of an adversary from streaming data has not been addressed despite the growing
number of applications that need such techniques. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
CAREER will study to understand when and why feature selection fails with an
adversary. Not only will this research focus on understanding why feature
selection fails, but also the transferability of black and white box attacks on
feature selection. This project also proposes to develop novel methods to attack
information-theoretic algorithms and approaches for resilient information-
theoretic feature selection. This CAREER also addresses the problem of learning
in a nonstationary environment with the presence of an adversary. A
comprehensive set of synthetic and real-world benchmarks will be performed for
each of the tasks. The research focuses on this unmet need and tackles a variety
of adversarial learning problems drawn from different subfields of machine
learning: specifically, algorithms for feature selection and learning in
nonstationary environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A successful implementation of
the proposed research plan will have broader impacts on machine learning and
application-driven domains. The education plan includes mentoring and training
the future workforce for data scientists, who are currently in high demand, by
introducing machine learning through multiple levels of education in a
collaborative learning environment at the university. The CAREER project also
includes integrated then integration research, revise research and learning with
a community-based integration of research in education to draw more students at
all levels for STEM and machine learning. This CAREER will engage K-12 students
in Tucson to promote STEM education and also machine learning through hands-on
teaching techniques. There will also be public talks to the data science
community based on the CAREER research outcomes and the most recent trends in
machine learning.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.