* 2247616
* Generation and Reactivity of Reactive Sulfur Species
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* John Toscano, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2026
* USD 575,000.00

With this award, the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms-B Program
continues its support of the work of Professor John P. Toscano of the Chemistry
Department at Johns Hopkins University. The research will involve the generation
and reactivity of biologically relevant reactive sulfur species, including
hydropersulfides (RSSH). Hydrogen sulfide (H2S) is an endogenously generated
small molecule signaling agent whose diverse physiological effects have been
well documented. The chemical mechanisms responsible for these effects, however,
remain inadequately defined. Recent reports indicate that much of H2S biological
activity may be attributed to RSSH, which have been reported to be involved in
the modification of protein cysteine residues (PSH) to generate protein
hydropersulfides (PSSH). Recently, there has been intense interest in the
physiological functions of these species. For example, protein persulfidation
has been shown to be dysregulated and reduced in neurological disorders such as
Alzheimer’s, Parkinson’s, and Huntington’s diseases. The research will afford
broad, comprehensive training for graduate students and undergraduates, serving
them well for future opportunities in both industry and academia. Undergraduate
participation in research will continue to be a high priority since previous
students have indicated that this experience was the highlight of their college
careers and was instrumental in clarifying their interests and preparing them
for future studies. An integrated, after school science outreach experience for
high school students focusing on the chemistry/biology interface will also be
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Despite increasing evidence for the role of RSSH
in physiological redox signaling, the biologically relevant chemistry of RSSH is
still relatively poorly understood. One way to predict the biological functions
of RSSH is to understand their fundamental chemistry. Thus, one focus of the
proposed research is further exploration of the fundamental chemical properties
of RSSH and related reactive sulfur species. Because RSSH are unstable and
decomposes rapidly into a variety of species, they are inherently difficult to
study in aqueous solution and are typically generated in situ. Although several
strategies for RSSH generation have been reported, there is still an unmet need
for the further development of new methods for the efficient and controlled
production of RSSH for biological applications. Thus, the development of novel
RSSH photoprecursors and protein persulfidating reagents, designed to react
cleanly with small molecule thiols to produce RSSH and protein cysteine residues
to produce PSSH, will also be evaluated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.