* 2247164
* CAS: Harvesting Electrons From Lower Energy Excited States to Extend Spectral Coverage and Facilitate Multiple Charge Collection Following Singlet Fission on Metal Oxides
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* David Blank, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Francis D'Souza
* 06/30/2026
* USD 200,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms-B Program of
the Chemistry Division, Professors Blank and Gladfelter from the University of
Minnesota-Twin Cities and Professor Pappenfus from the University of Minnesota-
Morris seek to build a more thorough understanding of how light can be used to
induce separation of charge, a critical first step in the conversion solar
energy into electrical or chemical energy. In addition to photovoltaic devices,
light-induced charge transfer is part of other devices such as sensors. This
project will focus on using well-defined nanocrystals of metal oxides as the
scaffold for probing this behavior. A better understanding of how to leverage
metal oxide semiconductors is expected to contribute to the development of a
range of optoelectronic devices and to improving the efficiency of such devices.
This project will directly support the training and education of the next
generation of physical/physical organic chemists, including graduate students
and undergraduate students, in areas of chemistry that cross the traditional
disciplinary boundaries. The University of Minnesota-Morris is a rural,
primarily undergraduate institution, and this project will provide undergraduate
students at Morris with a collaborative research
experience.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nanocrystalline films of semiconducting metal
oxides often play a central role in devices that involve the separation of
charge. Commonly employed metal oxides have conduction band energies that place
thermodynamic and kinetic limitations on the molecules used as sensitizers.
Indium oxide has yet to receive much attention, but it has tremendous potential.
With a lower energy conduction band, it opens a new window of opportunity to
access lower energy sensitizer states. This window would, in principle, allow
extension of the spectrum of light that can be harvested and provide access for
charge transfer from lower energy triplet states of the sensitizers. The triplet
states that are of particular interest in this proposal are those that are
generated via singlet fission. This project will use transparent solution phase
dispersions of nanocrystals with narrow size distributions as a well-defined
experimental platform to investigate the excited state dynamics and charge
transfer of the sensitizer. The goal is to realize, characterize and optimize
charge multiplication through singlet fission on a transparent metal oxide
surface with the potential to increase the efficiency of light
harvesting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.