* 2247272
* RUI: Fullertubes and Metallofullertubes:  New Molecular Architectures and Seminal Studies
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Steven Stevenson, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 07/31/2026
* USD 348,640.00

In this project for Research at Undergraduate Institutions (RUI), funded by the
Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms B Program of the Division of
Chemistry, Professor Steven Stevenson of the Department of Chemistry and
Biochemistry at Purdue University-Fort Wayne is performing research that is
isolating unusual molecules of tubular carbons with single layer endcaps. These
molecules are of significant current interest, due to their potential
application in electronics, engineering, catalysis, and medicine. The research
includes elements of analytical, organic, physical, and materials chemistry. As
such, the project is well suited for educating a diverse array of early career
scientists, including those who are members of underrepresented groups in the
field of chemistry. Significant participation of undergraduate students as well
as high school students is planned for this research
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tubular-shaped carbon allotropes consist of a
single layer of rolled graphene (i.e., single walled nanotube moiety) chemically
bonded to a single layer of carbon atoms arranged as hemispherical fullerene
endcaps. Depending on the chirality of the tubular belt and the arrangement of
hexagonal/pentagonal fullerene endcaps, these all-carbon fullertube structures
can either be metallic or non-metallic. In this research, the yields of these
fullertubes in soot obtained from different modes of synthesis (i.e., electric-
arc versus flame) will be studied. The existence of three different families of
new fullertubes will also be studied. In addition, encapsulation of transition
metal IIIB and 4f-block metal atoms into these fullertubes will be investigated.
The results emanating from these fundamental studies on fullertube structures
will like be of interest and informative to those engaged broadly in the study
of structure/function relationships in well-defined, graphene-derived
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.