* 2247752
* RUI: Sugar Probes to Track Utilization, Uptake, and Processing of Monosaccharides by Bacteria
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2026
* Danielle Dube, Bowdoin College
* Standard Grant
* Christine Chow
* 03/31/2026
* USD 402,000.00

With the support of the Chemistry of Life Processes (CLP) program in the
Division of Chemistry, Professor Danielle Dube from Bowdoin College is
developing sugar probes to facilitate the study of bacterial carbohydrates.
Bacteria coat their cell surfaces with a dense array of complex sugars, termed
glycans, that are critically important for bacteria to interact with other cells
and to survive. Despite the importance of bacterial glycans in bacterial
survival, their systematic study and perturbation remain challenging. The
proposed experimental procedures will develop new sugar probes for tracking
utilization, uptake, and processing of sugars by bacteria. Identifying which
glycan structures are present on which bacterial cells could reveal fundamental
insight into the role of these structures, as well as aid in antibiotic and
vaccine development. Over the course of the project, undergraduate researchers
will be recruited from programs at the college that serve women and historically
excluded students, and they will pursue sustained research projects in a
mentoring network. More broadly, the project has the potential to broaden the
visibility of women and people of color in the chemical glycobiology community
through a series of symposia at national meetings of the American Chemical
Society. Taken together, this work could spur the next generation of students to
persist and thrive in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project seeks
to leverage bacterial monosaccharide analogs to yield insight into optimal
parameters for probe design, monosaccharide uptake, and glycan tailoring enzymes
present within bacteria. Correlating monosaccharide-based reporter usage and
esterase activity levels in a range of bacteria provides incisive tools for
probing bacterial glycans. Developing fluorescent monosaccharide analogs to
track uptake by live bacteria could allow a better understanding of the
mechanisms controlling monosaccharide penetration into bacterial cells.
Generating fluorogenic glycoside substrates facilitates the analysis and
identification of glycan-processing enzymes in live bacterial cells and lysates.
The creation of enabling tools has potential utility for glycoscientists
pursuing basic and applied research in a range of bacterial
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.