* 2247934
* Development of SN2-type Glycosylation for Automated Glycan Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Liming Zhang, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 06/30/2026
* USD 575,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Liming Zhang of the University of California at Santa Barbara is
studying a method that selectively links together different sugar molecules
under conditions suitable for the automated synthesis of glycans. Glycans and
their conjugated forms (e.g., glycoproteins, glycopeptides, and glycolipids
etc.) are complex molecules containing many interlinked sugar units that are
implicated in a variety of biological processes and pathological events,
including: signal transduction, fertilization, cancer metastasis, cell-cell
adhesion, and immune responses. Investigations of the biological functions of
glycans and glycan conjugates are essential for managing various diseases and
for the advancement of medical treatments, but these endeavors are hindered by
the difficulty of preparing well-defined glycans for study. The method being
developed has the potential to help alleviate bottlenecks in glycan research by
enabling automated preparations of a broad range of otherwise inaccessible
glycan structures in pure form. It is anticipated that this work will in turn
accelerate the development of glycan-based vaccines and pharmaceutical agents.
The broader impacts of the funded project extend to the benefits accrued to
society as Professor Zhang engages in a range of educational activities
including the rigorous training that he will provide to the graduate student
coworkers conducting the research. These individuals, who will gain knowledge of
advanced organic chemistry while acquiring the skills necessary to perform
complex synthetic operations, are likely to make valuable future contributions
to the Nation's scientific enterprise upon joining the workforce in private
industry or academia. Undergraduate students, especially those belonging to
groups underrepresented in the physical sciences, will also be recruited to help
with the research effort; the inclusive and supportive experiences that the
students gain in the laboratory environment are anticipated to encourage them to
consider higher educational goals and/or careers in science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funded project
focuses on the study and further development of the directing-group-on-leaving-
group (DGLG) strategy for glycosylation in which glycosyl donors equipped with
activatable nucleofugal moieties at the C1 position engage with glycosyl
acceptors via largely stereoinvertive nucleophilic substitution. The SN2-like
glycosylation is directed and facilitated/accelerated by a hydrogen bond-
accepting group within the anomeric leaving group that promotes an anti-colinear
attack trajectory of the nucleophile upon the weakened bond in the electrophile.
The aims of the research are divided into three sequential phases: (1)
development of improved reaction conditions and next-generation leaving groups
for DGLG strategy-based glycosylation reactions that are appropriate for solid
phase synthesis and yet are still applicable for the stereoselective formation
of essentially any type of glycosidic bond (i.e., 1,2-cis, 1,2-trans, 2-deoxy-
alpha, 2-deoxy-beta types in pyranose or furanose systems); (2) validation and
implementation of the developed processes on the solid phase; and (3)
demonstration of the feasibility of the processes in a commercially available
platform for automated glycan synthesis. It is anticipated that the research
will lead to fundamental advances in the theory and practice of complex
carbohydrate synthesis and that the emergent technology arising from the
discoveries will be impactful to ancillary disciplines such as glycobiology and
medicinal chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.