* 2247802
* Efficient and Mild Synthesis of Arynes from Readily Available Building Blocks
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* David Stuart, Portland State University
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 06/30/2026
* USD 490,647.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
David Stuart of Portland State University and this team are studying the
development of new chemical reactions involving aromatic rings. Because aromatic
rings are a vital part of molecules that are used in medicine, agriculture, and
technology, the discovery of new methods to incorporate them into molecules will
serve to advance these societally important fields. This work will specifically
target the use of arynes; namely, aromatic rings that contain a triple bond.
Arynes have a very reactive triple bond and can in reactions that conventional
aromatic systems do not carry out. Two important areas that this work will focus
on are 1) to reduce the waste traditionally associated with synthesizing arynes
by employing simple and widely available feedstock chemicals, and 2) generating
arynes using milder conditions than are used currently. In addition to the
scientific benefits to academia and industry, this work will expand research
opportunities for undergraduate students through the development of a CURE
(course-based undergraduate research experiences) course. It will help to
provide students with a formal education in the knowledge and skills that are
needed for a career in STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics).
Additionally, outreach activities will help expand the representation of groups
that have been historically marginalized in STEM.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An aryne
is a highly reactive synthetic intermediate having a reaction profile that is
distinct from the parent arene. This feature renders arynes useful for the
diversification of aromatic rings that are found in pharmaceuticals,
agrochemicals, and other synthetic materials. However, access to arynes remains
either efficient or mild, but not both. Under this award, the Stuart group aims
to develop new chemical reactions to access arynes from simple and widely
available chemical building blocks using mild conditions to expand the
functional group compatibility of arynes. The key innovation is to use “onium”
leaving groups that are to be installed in situ as more reactive precursors to
arynes. Specifically, the team will use positively charged sulfur (sulfonium)
and iodine (iodonium) leaving groups to achieve these transformations. The
anticipated outcome of this research is that synthetic chemists will be equipped
to expand the chemical space of arenes in ways not previously
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.