* 2247244
* Geometric counts on surfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Benjamin Dozier, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Tyson
* 06/30/2026
* USD 330,586.00

Surfaces are geometric shapes that are everywhere two dimensional. Such
geometric objects play an important role in pure mathematics, as well as in
various areas of science and engineering. This project focuses on understanding
metric and geometric properties of surfaces, i.e. notions of length and angle.
Deforming the metric structure of a surface gives rise to so-called `moduli
spaces’; each point in the moduli space represents a particular geometry on the
underlying surface. The PI will continue to investigate two natural classes of
surface geometry: (i) singular flat metrics, and (ii) hyperbolic (negatively
curved) metrics. Improved understanding of flat metrics has led, and will
continue to lead, to new results in dynamical systems. Hyperbolic metrics are,
in a certain sense, the most natural metrics to put on these surfaces. This
project will also investigate various structures on the moduli spaces of
surfaces, notably measures, which provide for a well-defined notion of `random
surface’. The PI will use and further develop analogies between the two types of
metrics, as well as connections to graph theory, probability theory, spectral
geometry, and algebraic geometry. The broader impact of this project includes
the generation of questions and topics suitable for graduate students. The PI
will maintain an involvement with programs aimed at bringing together early-
career researchers to work on problems in concentrated and collaborative
settings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the flat metric setting, the PI has used the
new multi-scale compactification of strata of translation surfaces to prove
strong regularity of ergodic SL_2-invariant probability measures, verifying a
natural heuristic about affine invariant manifolds. This result, and the
techniques in its proof, have already been applied by others to study random
Teichmuller geodesics and counts of pairs of saddle connections. In another
joint work, the PI has proved restrictions on the type of equations that can
define an affine invariant manifold near the multi-scale boundary, thereby
providing a new proof of Wright's Cylinder Deformation Theorem and generalizing
it to meromorphic strata. The PI will use the above results and techniques to
study, via degeneration, the centrally important classification problem for
affine invariant manifolds, as well as problems about the less studied
k-differentials for k&gt;2. The PI has also developed a research program
concerning random hyperbolic surfaces, a young and active field. Together with
Sapir, the PI has proved a conjecture concerning the relative number of simple
versus non-simple closed geodesics for various notions of random surfaces, as
genus tends to infinity. There is a fruitful analogy between random hyperbolic
surfaces and random regular graphs; the PI has solved, and continues to
investigate, problems on both sides of the coin. This research leads to further
questions about the shape of a typical geodesic on a generic surface, as well as
to certain questions about geodesics on every hyperbolic
surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.