* 2247047
* Almost Periodic von Neumann Algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Brent Nelson, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Jan Cameron
* 04/30/2026
* USD 376,668.00

Von Neumann algebras are mathematical objects that offer a rigorous framework
for the study of quantum physics and can be thought of as infinite-dimensional
generalizations of matrix algebras. The theory was initiated by Francis J.
Murray and John von Neumann in the 1930s, and since then researchers have
discovered a vast number of applications to mathematics as well as biology,
physics, and engineering. The von Neumann algebras that occur naturally in
physics (e.g. quantum statistical mechanics or relativistic quantum field
theory) are typically what are known as non-semifinite von Neumann algebras.
This makes them more difficult to study, and in particular they lie outside the
scope of the majority of techniques developed for so-called semifinite von
Neumann algebras over the past few decades. This project seeks to adapt some of
these semifinite techniques to almost periodic von Neumann algebras, which
straddle the boundary between semifinite and non-semifinite von Neumann
algebras. The project will also involve training and professional development
for graduate students and postdocs. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research goal of
this project is to study von Neumann algebras that admit almost periodic
weights, with a focus on the non-semifinite case. Specifically, the PI will
develop a notion of von Neumann dimension for almost periodic von Neumann
algebras and use this to generalize free Stein dimension and l^2-Betti numbers
to the almost periodic case. These invariants would shed light on the structural
properties of such von Neumann algebras, and an extended notion of l^2-Betti
numbers has potential applications to non-unimodular groups and non-measure
preserving equivalence relations. Additionally, the PI proposes to extend the
notions of rigid and co-rigid inclusions from finite von Neumann algebras to von
Neumann algebras equipped with almost periodic states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.