* 2247008
* Conference: Low-Dimensional Manifolds, their Geometry and Topology, Representations and Actions of their Fundamental Groups and Connections with Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Kathryn Mann, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 03/31/2024
* USD 48,000.00

This award provides support for U.S. based participants to attend a sequence of
workshops, to be held at ICMAT Madrid and El Barco de Ávila, Spain, in April-
July 2023. As evidenced by the title, “Low-dimensional manifolds, their geometry
and topology, representations and actions of their fundamental groups and
connections with physics”, the themes are broadly classical, while relating to
central research areas in modern mathematics. The workshops will include
introductory lectures and research talks by leading experts as well as offer the
early career researchers the professional development opportunity to present
their own work and form new international
collaborations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The multiple connections between the
seemingly disparate themes of these workshops can be articulated by the central
role played by spaces of representations of a discrete group into a larger
group: for example a Lie group, groups of diffeomorphisms or groups of
homeomorphisms. These are powerful tools in unpacking the structure of the
original group, particularly when it is the fundamental group of a compact
manifold. The classical case of surface group representations is particularly
noteworthy, providing connections with Teichmuller Theory, three-manifold
topology and more recently Higher Teichmuller theory. In the setting of Higher
Teichmuller theory there is a very different perspective given through the lens
of Higgs bundles over a compact surface (equipped with a complex structure).
Since Hitchin's original insight around thirty years ago, this viewpoint has had
a tremendous impact in geometry, topology and theoretical physics. These and
many other research areas where spaces of representations of a discrete group
are ubiquitous will be at the core of the thematic program. More information
about the workshops is available at https://sites.google.com/view/javier-
aramayona/agol-lab/activity-period-2023.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.