* 2247711
* Revealing the Nanomorphology and Excited State Dynamics Behind the Ternary Advantage in Organic Photovoltaics
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Brian Collins, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Lane
* 07/31/2026
* USD 521,971.00

Non-technical Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The emergence of low-cost,
flexible, and biocompatible organic devices will have a game-changing impact on
society. These devices could revolutionize how we interface with technology,
transform our ability to renewably harvest and store energy, and advance
healthcare. Printed solar panels have great potential, yet current technology
still uses relatively low-performance materials or involves toxic lead-based
materials. Organic solar cells require two different types of molecules to
generate and transport charge from incident light. A recent breakthrough in the
performance of organic solar cells uses a blend of three types of molecules.
This suggests an opportunity for the next leap in a disruptive technology, but
it is held back by a lack of scientific understanding of the phenomenon.
Investigators will use X-ray probes to correlate the performance and
nanostructure of these blends. They will also analyze charge generation dynamics
to determine the processes responsible for performance gains. This work will
reveal how to control the phenomenon to enable truly high-performance printed
and lead-free photovoltaic modules to fully compete in the marketplace. Graduate
students involved will benefit from the multidisciplinary nature of the work to
gain critical experience and expertise in communicating in diverse
collaborations. Their travel to major national laboratories for the work will
provide new career opportunities and perspective. Students involved will bolster
outreach activities of the WSU Science Ambassadors Program by traveling to area
schools with educational activities and mentoring undergraduates in summer
projects in the principal investigator’s Research Experience for Undergraduates
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical
Description&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multicomponent organic electronic systems are
being increasingly explored to enhance properties and performance in devices for
printable, flexible, and biocompatible applications. Recently, ternary and
quaternary blends have been shown to enhance performance of organic
photovoltaics to over 20% efficiencies. The high dimensionality of parameter
space which are difficult to characterize, however, results in halting progress.
In this project, a spectral analysis of resonant soft X-ray nanoprobes will
uniquely enable definitive characterization of these complex three and four-
component systems to reveal the precise morphological paradigms responsible for
the ternary advantage. These nanostructure measurements will be combined with a
holistic analysis of the fundamental charge generation dynamic process as well
its energetics in device-relevant conditions to define the emergent excited
state pathways responsible for the performance gains. The hypothesis is that
mixing of guest molecules in strategic domains can tune charge transport and
non-radiative losses, but collection of the guest molecules at donor-acceptor
interfaces is key to lowering energetic barriers to enhance charge separation
efficiencies. The aim is to establish the mechanisms of the ternary advantage
and the thermodynamic and kinetic limits of these mechanisms to provide a model
for further optimization through molecular design and device
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.