* 2247202
* Categorical Symmetries of Operator Algebras
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Corey Jones, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Jan Cameron
* 07/31/2026
* USD 268,071.00

Symmetries are a fundamental part of the way we mathematically model the
physical world. They provide a paradigm for characterizing physical theories
across the spectrum, from high energy to condensed matter physics.
Traditionally, symmetries are described by mathematical objects called groups.
However, in recent decades, interesting quantum theories have emerged whose
fundamental symmetries are not reversible, requiring an extension of our
classical ideas of symmetry beyond groups. Quantum theories can be described in
the language of operator algebras, and these new kinds of symmetry can be
realized by mathematical objects called tensor categories acting on operator
algebras. The goal of this project is to provide classification results for
categorical symmetry of operator algebras with an emphasis on situations
relevant to quantum spin systems. These results will, in particular, help
provide a rigorous understanding of topologically ordered phases of matter. This
project will incorporate research opportunities for graduate and undergraduate
students at North Carolina State University, with an emphasis on the recruitment
of students from underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project has
two main components. In the first, the principal investigator will provide a
classification of approximately finite dimensional actions of amenable tensor
categories on approximately finite dimensional C*-algebras in terms of
K-theoretic invariants. Amenable tensor categories simultaneously generalize
discrete amenable groups and the representation categories of compact groups,
while approximately finite dimensional actions provide categorical
generalizations of global symmetries of 1D lattice spin systems. The principal
investigator will extend their previous results in this direction from the case
of fusion categories to the infinite amenable setting and apply these results to
obtain new classifications for topologically ordered spin systems. In the second
component, the principal investigator will generalize their previously developed
categorical chi invariant for von Neumann algebras to an invariant for group
actions on von Neumann algebras. The principal investigator will use this
invariant to distinguish group actions on McDuff
factors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.