* 2247153
* Three-Dimensional Numerical Modeling of Sprite Streamers
* GEO,AGS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Ningyu Liu, University of New Hampshire
* Standard Grant
* Tai-Yin Huang
* 04/30/2026
* USD 478,358.00

This award will investigate the fundamental physics of sprite streamers using a
recently developed, high-performance plasma discharge fluid simulation code, in
close conjunction with the latest high-speed images of sprites. About thirty
years ago, it was discovered that powerful lightning strokes can cause
spectacular Transient Luminous Events (TLEs) in the earthâ€™s upper atmosphere.
Sprites are one of the TLEs. Subsequent research has found that sprites share
similar physical characteristics as those commonly known spark discharges near
the ground. They, however, are much larger and last much longer, because they
occur in an environment with greatly reduced air density. Sprites can cause
significant modifications of the physical and chemical properties of the upper
atmosphere, capable of affecting the propagation of certain radio frequency
bands for long-range communications. High-resolution images of sprites have
revealed that they consist of a large number of plasma filaments known as
streamers. It has been recognized that understanding streamer physics holds the
key to learning sprite dynamics and effects. This project will utilize an
advanced computer simulation tool to study various poorly understood streamer
processes. It will greatly advance our understanding of the physics and effects
of sprites. The study will advance knowledge of dielectric breakdown and
transient plasma discharges and improve lightning forecast and safety. The
software developed in this project will be open source. Graduate and
undergraduate students will be supported and involved in this research project,
thus contributing to STEM workforce development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project will investigate streamer branching, collisions between streamer heads,
collisions between streamer heads and streamer channels, effects of neutral
density perturbations on streamer dynamics, and interaction between streamers
and the lower ionosphere. Various three-dimensional simulations will be
performed using a high-performance plasma discharge fluid code called AMPLIFI
(Adaptive Modeling of PLasma Initiation, Filamentation and Interaction), which
was recently developed, to understand the physics of these processes, their
roles in sprite dynamics, their electrical and optical effects, and their
dependence on the ambient environment. This project will also provide critical
information for interpreting high-speed images of sprites and understanding the
implications. Concrete knowledge of the dependence of sprite streamer dynamics
on ambient neutral or electrical conditions will be obtained, and this will
enable the development of potentially powerful remote sensing approaches to
studying the mesosphere/D region ionosphere by observing sprites. The study of
the neutral density perturbation effects on sprite streamer dynamics will also
reveal a novel neutral-ion coupling mechanism enabled by a strong electric
field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.