* 2247330
* New Catalytic Methods to Prepare Axially Chiral Compounds
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Donald Watson, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 06/30/2026
* USD 600,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Donald Watson of the University of Delaware is studying a nickel-
catalyzed process for the preparation of a class of compounds know as axially
chiral biarenes. Such compounds are useful materials with a range of societally
relevant applications, for example, as pharmaceutical agents or as modulators
for chemical manufacturing processes, but traditional methods for their
preparation are limited in scope and/or dependent on the use of precious metal-
based catalysts. By contrast, the process of interest is quite versatile and its
dependence on nickel, an earth abundant metal, means that the chemistry is more
environmentally sustainable. A prominent feature of the process is that it
enables the generation of biarenes in which one twisted form of the molecule
(analogous to the concept of handedness) predominates over the other. The
broader impacts of the award will extend to the benefits accrued to society as
Professor Watson and his coworkers engage in a variety of education and outreach
activities. Most notably, the Research Experiences for Academic Chemists in
Training (REACT) program which is designed to maintain engagement in the
physical sciences from students who are initially disadvantaged upon entering
college due to poor academic preparation and consequently, of high risk of
dropping out. The REACT program is anticipated to be particularly beneficial to
students belonging to groups underrepresented in the STEM (science, technology,
engineering and mathematics) workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funded project
involves further study of the enantioselective Ni-catalyzed reductive aryl
halide coupling recently reported by the Watson laboratory and which offers
potential gains in efficacy and scope over established procedures for the
synthesis of non-racemic axially chiral biarenes. The investigation is divided
across three objectives designed to allow for development of the method while
more fully realizing its synthetic potential. The first objective is focused on
extending the homocoupling process to substrates not previously explored to
target binaphthyl and biphenyl systems from a range of ortho-halo- (typically
bromo-) substituted arenes including aryl phosphines/phosphine oxides, esters,
amines, and thioethers. The second objective involves pursuit of an
intramolecular variant of the method to achieve enantioselective reductive
cyclizations of suitably tethered bis(haloarenes) and leading to both
C2-symmetric and non-symmetric polycyclic biaryls. The latter include examples
of MOP and PHOX type systems which may be useful in their own right as tunable
chiral ligand frameworks. The final and most ambitious objective is directed at
the realization of a highly enantioselective cross-coupling between two distinct
aryl halide substrates. Here, the necessary conditions to avoid competing
homocoupling events will be identified to allow for the potential emergence of a
general platform for the preparation of biaryls with broad applicability. The
High Throughput Experimentation (HTE) laboratory at the University of Delaware
will be used extensively during the course of the outlined studies to facilitate
the rational screening campaigns needed to evaluate and optimize factors such as
ligand structure, additive and solvent effects, temperature, and other reaction
variables. The findings of this work are anticipated to lead to fundamental
advances impactful to the practice of biaryl synthesis and to the wider field of
enantioselective catalysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.