* 2247494
* Screening for Generality in Asymmetric Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Eric Jacobsen, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 08/31/2026
* USD 575,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Eric Jacobsen of Harvard University is studying new approaches for the
discovery of broadly applicable catalytic processes that are capable of
controlling the three-dimensional structure of product molecules. Within the
field of asymmetric catalysis, process discovery efforts have traditionally
focused in their initial stages on the optimization of a single transformation;
accordingly, and despite decades of work and thousands of publications
describing new systems, comparatively few reactions have emerged that display
sufficient generality to be applicable in a truly predictive manner. This
attribute is important for new asymmetric catalytic processes to most deeply
impact the economical and environmentally sustainable manufacture of chemicals
of value to society, such as, pharmaceutical agents, agrochemicals, and advanced
materials for technology. To accelerate the discovery of efficient processes
capable of delivering the widest possible range of value-added products, the
funded research is directed at advancing a "screening for generality" concept
wherein catalysts and reaction conditions are evaluated and optimized against
relatively large and intentionally diverse sets of model starting materials
simultaneously. Beyond the benefits that it is expected to offer to chemical
manufacturing, the broader impacts of the award extend to the educational and
training opportunities afforded to the graduate students who are conducting the
research. These individuals will gain valuable experiences in multidisciplinary
research and they are likely to go on to become highly skilled members of the
national future STEM workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The poor reliability and
predictability of most contemporary synthetic methods for chiral molecule
synthesis hampers innovation in chemistry and adjacent fields and incentivizes
the use of older, "proven" reactions, limiting the diversity of chemical space
attainable by practitioners in the field. By enabling both stereoselectivity and
generality to be set as primary criteria in catalyst discovery and optimization
efforts, the funded research, which relies on performing optimization of
reactions across multiple substrates at once, aims to accelerate the development
of methods that provide access to the broadest range of chiral compounds. To
avoid the impracticalities of using chiral stationary phase chromatography with
ultraviolet (UV) detection to determine enantioselectivities for multiple
components within complex mixtures, supercritical fluid chiral (SFC)
chromatography in combination with mass spectrometry (MS) as the detection
method is being deployed as a tool to enable rapid and precise analysis.
Crucially, the generation of extracted ion chromatograms (EICs) made possible by
this combination of techniques enables accurate enantiomeric excess (e.e.)
determinations of products of different masses even when they co-elute with
other products or residual reaction components. Optimization screens can
therefore be performed on a broad set of substrates and the different products
can be pooled and analyzed together, greatly accelerating the analysis. The
theoretical and practical development of the screening for generality concept,
including use of SFC-MS-based pooled analysis and new computational methods for
peak deconvolution, is being studied in the context of a variety of useful
transformation types, including: an enantioselective Pictet-Spengler reaction
for the synthesis of tetrahydro-beta-carbolines and a hydrogen-bond-mediated
opening of azetidines to furnish useful gamma-chloroamine building blocks. If
brought fully to fruition, the approaches developed are anticipated to find
broad adoption and they will help to shift the overarching question propelling
research in the field of asymmetric catalysis from “is high e.e. achievable in a
reaction?” to “can a true and general solution be found for asymmetric catalysis
of this reaction?”&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.