* 2247286
* Conference and Grantee's Meeting: Disrupting Operations of Illicit Supply Networks; Arlington, Virginia; 27-28 March 2023
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/01/2023,12/31/2023
* Naoru Koizumi, George Mason University
* Standard Grant
* Georgia-Ann Klutke
* 12/31/2023
* USD 79,773.00

Networks that illegally traffic in everything from people and drugs to human
organs and nuclear material pose significant threats to US health, prosperity
and security. This award supports a conference and grantees' meeting that
convenes researchers and educators supported by NSF's Disrupting Operations of
Illicit Supply Networks (D-ISN) initiative, other interested researchers and
educators, and representatives from a variety of government sectors to share
research outcomes and explore opportunities for collaboration in studying a
variety of illicit supply networks. NSF's D-ISN initiative supports teams of
investigators from diverse fields, including operations research, the social
sciences, and computer science focused on advancing the scientific understanding
of how such illicit supply networks function and how to disrupt them. This
conference brings together these and other interested researchers, along with
NSF program directors and representatives from many different governmental
agencies and federally-sponsored Centers of Excellence, to nurture this emerging
research community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will bring together
domain experts and quantitative researchers to explore new analytical approaches
and engineering methods to disrupt and disable illicit supply networks. The
conference includes keynotes and grantee poster sessions, as well as facilitated
breakout sessions on specific illicit supply network domains (human/organ/arms
trafficking; narcotics/drugs/counterfeit products trafficking, financial fraud,
among others). There will be ample networking opportunities for supported and
other interested researchers to discuss topics related to this research theme.
These discussions will include representatives from many US and foreign agencies
whose missions involve various aspects of detection and interdiction of illicit
supply networks to begin to move academic research into translation. The
conference also provides opportunities for student
involvement.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.