* 2247031
* Connective Stereospecific Generation of Alkenes Continued
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2026
* Christopher Beaudry, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* Catalina Achim
* 03/31/2026
* USD 481,680.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Paul Blakemore of Oregon State University is studying a versatile
method for the preparation of an important class of molecules called alkenes.
Alkenes are widespread among natural and artificial chemical substances with
properties of value to medicine, engineering, agriculture, electronics, and
materials science. The method being used to generate alkenes differs from
traditional approaches in that the molecule is formed directly from two so-
called 'carbenoid' building blocks, which assemble in such a precise fashion
that potentially any kind of alkene can be targeted with complete control of
structure. Molecules to be prepared during this renewed period of support
include vitamin D2, a representative member of the D vitamin family with a range
of therapeutic indications (e.g., cancer, osteoporosis, and Alzheimer's
disease), and pumiliotoxin 251D, a defense alkaloid from a tropical frog
species, and related compounds with cardiotonic properties. The broader impacts
of the funded project extend to benefits accrued to society as the principal
investigator and his research team provide summer research experiences for high
school students under the auspices of the STEM academy at Oregon State
University. This education and outreach program promotes interest in science and
engineering from a diverse array of young learners and it includes mechanisms
designed to foster participation from individuals belonging to traditionally
underrepresented groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award supports continued
research and development of the carbenoid eliminative cross-coupling (CEXc)
concept for carbon-carbon double bond synthesis. By contrast to conventional
methods for connective alkene synthesis, CEXc does not rely on substituent
effects to control stereochemical outcome; rather, absolute stereochemical
information encoded in two stereodefined sp3-hybridized carbenoid substrates
wholly determines the relative configuration of the alkene product via a three-
stage stereospecific mechanism (ate-complex formation, 1,2-metalate
rearrangement, and beta-elimination). The funded research focuses on extending
the concept of CEXc to classes of targets not previously investigated (cyclic
styrenes, conjugated trienes, and non-conjugated alkenes) and it encompasses the
use of more reactive types of carbenoids (e.g., alpha-chloroalkyl-lithiums and
-boronates) and new reaction modalities (e.g., intramolecular). In the context
of conjugated alkene synthesis (research thrust 1), specific goals are: assembly
of conjugated trienes about the cental olefin, semi-synthesis of vitamin D2 via
generation of the C7-C8 double bond (distal bond disconnection), and formation
of macrocyclic styrenes by intramolecular CEXc triggered by sulfoxide-metal
exchange. The work on non-conjugated alkenes (research thrust 2) focuses on
generating challenging targets with subtle stereogenicity, including: chirotopic
4-cyclohexylidenes, isotopomeric olefins, and pumiliotoxin 251D. Pursuit of the
highlighted research agenda is anticipated to lead to fundamental and broadly
applicable advances both to chiral carbanion chemistry and to the practice of
advanced stereoablative synthetic techniques for the control of molecular
configuration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.