* 2247761
* CAS: Ultrafast Spectroscopy and Photoisomerization of Iron Sulfoxide Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Jeffrey Rack, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Francis D'Souza
* 05/31/2026
* USD 468,375.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms-B (CSDM-B)
Program of the Chemistry Division (CHE), and the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), Professor Jeffrey Rack of the
University of New Mexico is developing new classes of iron complexes with
interesting spectroscopic and magneto-optical properties. The goal of this
research is to design new photoactive iron complexes with sulfoxide ligands. The
project lies at the interface of organic, inorganic, and physical chemistry, and
is appropriate for education of scientists at all levels of experience. The
University of New Mexico is a majority minority institution and the Rack
research group is works to provide the highest level of education and training
for students underrepresented in science and will continue to do so under this
award. Outreach activities involving the training of high school and middle
chemistry teachers is part of the research project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed work details a research plan to create photoactive iron polypyridine
sulfoxide complexes. The goal of this work is to discover if phototriggered
sulfoxide isomerization can be supported on iron centers in a fashion similar to
that on related ruthenium complexes. In ruthenium complexes, 3MLCT excitation
prompts transient Ru3+ formation, which induces excited state isomerization of
the sulfoxide from S-bonded to O-bonded. Professor Rack and his research team
aim to reproduce this photochemistry on iron with the objective of stabilizing
high or intermediate spin states with the O-bonded coordination mode. There are
two major challenges that must be met to observe this chemistry on iron: 3MCLT
(metal-to-ligand charge-transfer) states on iron are rare due to the primogenic
effect and sulfoxide isomerization on iron has not been reported. Preliminary
results provide evidence that these challenges can be overcome and that the goal
of achieving S- to O-sulfoxide bonding on iron can be achieved. If successful,
the ability to achieve such intermediate to high spin state Fe-sulfoxide
complexes would be a significant advance for the field as this would bring this
chemistry into the realm of earth abundant transition metal space, and open up
an important new avenue of exploration for organometallic
chemists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.