* 2247107
* CAS: Novel Plasmon-Assisted Reaction Pathways on Well-Defined TiO2 Single Microcrystals in Realistic Conditions Using in-Situ Spectroscopies
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Zhenrong Zhang, Baylor University
* Standard Grant
* Francis D'Souza
* 06/30/2026
* USD 469,367.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Zhenrong Zhang and Dr. Weigang Lu of Baylor University are studying
new enabling catalysts based on the novel design of optical materials for
highly-efficient photoreactions. Economical plasmonic materials (TiN) will be
fabricated in a precisely designed nanostructure form on traditional oxide
catalysts to understand new photoreaction pathways. The developed catalysts will
advance the field of plasmon-enhanced catalyst research with new catalytic
materials and will significantly enhance catalytic efficiencies. The new
concepts of catalysis will open the path for improved industrial catalytic
processes and new optoelectronic applications. The team will engage in research
training activities on advanced imaging and photonic technology for
undergraduate students from small four-year schools and public outreach at
Baylorâ€™s Mayborn Museum to promote optics and spectroscopy in the Waco
community. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This funded research project is focused on
developing and understanding new photoreaction channels. Zhenrong Zhang and
Weigang Lu will utilize economical plasmonic catalyst materials (TiN) and novel
designs to enable new plasmon-enhanced pathways and possible manipulation of the
reaction processes for highly efficient photocatalytic reactions. The research
team will design the distribution of the enhanced electric field surrounding the
plasmonic nanostructure to efficiently inject hot electrons from the plasmonic
material into the TiO2, fabricate well-designed plasmonic nanostructure arrays
on well-defined micro-sized TiO2 crystals, establish efficient plasmon-coupling
through spatially-resolved studies, and investigate novel plasmon-assisted
photoreaction pathways and mechanisms through in situ microscale and nanoscale
studies in ambient and in liquid. This project uniquely integrates the optical
functionalities of novel plasmonic materials with well-defined traditional oxide
catalysts to develop new photocatalyst functionalities. The proposed work has
the potential to advance the field of plasmon-enhanced catalyst research by
providing enhanced understanding of reaction mechanisms at nanometer spatial
resolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.