* 2247830
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: TTP: Medium: Defending the Supply Chain of Democracy: Towards a Cryptographically Verified and Authenticated Network of Laws
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2027
* Franklin Ard, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Xiaogang (Cliff)  Wang
* 07/31/2027
* USD 512,386.00

Democracy depends on a fair, transparent, and accurate system for making and
distributing laws. Unfortunately, cyberattacks and malicious insiders have the
ability to corrupt, destroy, or withhold access to the law, threatening the
foundations of democracy itself by eroding trust in the reliability of digital
legal systems. The project’s novelties are the development of tools to secure
the law by creating a “digital legal supply chain.” These tools protect,
validate, and authenticate laws and other legal information from the moment they
are introduced in the legislative process through their publication and
distribution in public repositories. The project's broader significance and
importance are its improvements to the security and accessibility of the law,
with corresponding benefits for the future of democracy and the trustworthiness
of digital legal systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project builds and deploys
an efficient, scalable, and accountable system to secure every step of the
“digital legal supply chain”—lawmaking, publishing, archiving and preservation,
authentication, and access to the law. This entails (1) long-term solutions for
distributing, archiving, and accessing authenticatable laws securely and in
perpetuity; (2) systems for authentication integrated into the legislative
process to provide auditable assurances that the laws as passed are those
elected officials intended to pass; (3) tools for the release of authenticatable
redacted documents; and (4) refining the user experience for these systems to
make them suitable for adoption by governments of all sizes and institutional
capacities. The team of researchers is deploying these improvements in The
Archive Framework (TAF), a framework for near-term publication and
authentication of the law, that is used in production in five U.S.
jurisdictions, and in the process of adoption in two additional
jurisdictions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.