* 2247000
* Collaborative Research: Mechanistic modeling of cell encapsulation
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2023,04/30/2026
* Suncica Canic, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Amina Eladdadi
* 04/30/2026
* USD 398,044.00

Cell encapsulation is a biologically inspired technology that isolates live
cells from the hostile environment. This is done by packaging the cells in a
scaffold, which is encapsulated in a semi-permeable isolating membrane. The
packaged cells are connected to the host’s vasculature via a tube (anastomosis
graft) transporting oxygen and nutrients rich blood to the cells. The semi-
permeable encapsulating membrane, located at the interface between the blood
flow in the graft and the cell scaffold, is designed to block the host’s immune
cells from attacking the transplanted cells, while allowing passage of oxygen
and nutrients to the cells. A major challenge in cell encapsulation is
sufficient oxygen and nutrients supply to maintain the long-term viability of
cells. The main goal of this project is to develop a comprehensive multi-scale
and multi-physics mathematical and computational framework modeling cell
encapsulation. Using this framework, The PIs will address the long-term
viability of encapsulated cells by (1) studying how hydrogel architecture and
elasticity affect oxygen and nutrients supply to the cells, and by (2) exploring
design of ultrafiltrate channels within the hydrogel to maximize oxygen and
nutrients supply to the cells. The concept of cell encapsulation is highly
relevant for bioartificial organs design and for controlled delivery of
biological therapeutics. This interdisciplinary project will provide mentoring
of undergraduate and graduate students at the interface between mathematics and
biology. A new graduate course at Texas Tech will be introduced to train
students in the state-or-the-art mathematical methods developed in this project.
To promote participation of women in STEM, a series of Summer Workshops for High
School girls will be organized at the UC Berkeley Mathematics Department with
scientific visits to the UCSF Biodesign Laboratory.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to develop a comprehensive multi-scale, multi-physics
mathematical and computational model of cell encapsulation for bioartificial
organs design. At the macro-scale, two sets of time-dependent coupled models
will be developed and analyzed: (1) a fluid-structure interaction (FSI) model
between the Stokes/Navier-Stokes equations and the Biot membrane equations
coupled to the nonlinear Biot poroelastic medium equations, and (2) a set of
coupled nonlinear advection-reaction-diffusion equations defined on moving
domains describing oxygen concentration in the encapsulated organ. Two
partitioned schemes will be developed to solve the FSI problem and the coupled
advection-reaction-diffusion problems. The numerical schemes will be designed to
deal with the novel coupling conditions holding across a Biot poroelastic
membrane interface, defined on a “mixed’’ 2D/3D domain. Stability analysis and
convergence tests will be performed. To capture the impact of micro-scale
hydrogel architecture on local hydraulic conductivity, Smoothed Particle
Hydrodynamics (SPH) simulations will be used. The results of the SPH simulations
will provide synthetic data for the Encoder-Decoder Convolution Neural Networks
training (offline) to produce macro-scale parameters, such as the hydrogel
permeability tensor, needed in macro-scale simulations. Validation and parameter
estimation will be provided by the experiments at the UCSF Biodesign Laboratory.
The results from this research will advance the knowledge in mathematical FSI
involving poroelastic media and in coupled nonlinear advection-reaction-
diffusion systems on moving domains. The outcomes of the findings will advance
the knowledge in cell encapsulation for bioartificial organ design and in
controlled delivery of biological therapeutics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposal is jointly funded by the Mathematical Biology Program of the Division
of Mathematical Science (DMS), the Fluid Dynamics Program and the Engineering of
Biomedical Systems (EBMS) Program, both in the Chemical, Bioengineering,
Environmental, and Transport Systems (CBET) Division, Directorate for
Engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.