* 2247170
* Nitrogen Centered Radicals
* MPS,CHE
* 12/01/2023,11/30/2026
* Andrzej Rajca, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 11/30/2026
* USD 602,004.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Andrzej Rajca of the Department of
Chemistry at University of Nebraska-Lincoln is developing novel organic radicals
that are applicable to the development of new magnetic, electronic, and optical
technology. The goal of this research is the design, synthesis, and
characterization of high-spin radicals, possessing the unusual parallel electron
spin alignment and/or embedded within chiral structures. Structures of these
radicals are optimized to provide single-component materials with electrical
conductivity, paramagnetic agents for dynamic nuclear polarization (DNP) nuclear
magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy, as well as organic spin filters for
spintronics. As the proposed research activities involve organic synthesis,
diverse physical/materials characterization, and computations, they will provide
an opportunity to gain a broad education for scientists at all levels. This
group is also well-positioned to provide the highest level of education and
training for students underrepresented in science.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
design and synthesis of these unconventional radicals, that are evolving with
increasing complexity and challenge, provide excellent platforms for creative
thinking and problem-solving. The syntheses of the unconventional molecules are
of noteworthy interest related to the unusual synthetic methodology. The
proposed conducting ultra-robust high-spin radicals provide better insight into
electron (or hole) transport in cross-conjugated pi-systems, which are commonly
known to be detrimental to the conductivity. They will enhance our understanding
of the impact of multiple singly-occupied near-degenerate bands and strong
antiferromagnetic interactions between the high-spin molecules that facilitate
the electron transport. The proposed magnetically and thermally robust high-spin
diradical that is optimized for molecular fluorescence would provide the first
example of fluorescent high-spin diradical with near 100% population of the
triplet ground state at ambient conditions. Those high-spin diradicals that are
optimized for high DNP enhancements could advance the DNP NMR spectroscopy and
its applications. The proposed enantiomerically pure double helical high-spin
diradical dications and triradical cations are intriguing novel molecules with
thermal robustness, enantiomerically pure chiral pi-system, and strong
paramagnetic properties. The strength of chiroptical properties of the proposed
double helical high-spin diradical dication is comparable to those of
[n]helicenes, and thus, the coexistence of chirality and strong paramagnetism
may render unique chiromagnetic properties that provide a novel platform for the
discovery of new organic magneto-optic materials and efficient organic spin
filters for spintronics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.