* 2247834
* NSF-BSF: convexity and symmetry in high dimensions, with applications
* MPS,DMS
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2026
* Galyna Livshyts, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 03/31/2026
* USD 473,736.00

One of the oldest results in geometry is the isoperimetric inequality. It states
that among all the bodies with a given volume, the ball has the smallest
possible surface area. This is the reason why soap bubbles are round - they
minimize their surface pressure and thus assume the shape with the smallest
surface area. In the recent years, it has become clear that under additional
symmetry and convexity assumptions, many isoperimetric-type results become
stronger. In this project, the role that symmetry and convexity play in
isoperimetric-type questions in high dimensions and several other questions in
this field will be researched. In addition to this direction, asymptotic
questions about the geometry of high-dimensional spaces will be investigated.
When the number of parameters increases, it seems that the question should
become more complicated, and therefore, studying some precise questions in a
high-dimensional space seems hopelessly difficult. However, it turns out that
with many parameters comes beauty and simplicity, and things start behaving in
some predictable way. A simple example of this phenomenon is the fact that polls
usually exhibit behavior close to the normal distribution. Several questions in
that vein will be approached, with potential applications in learning theory. A
study of the behavior of large random matrices with so-called inhomogeneous
profiles will be performed. This is a direction with potential applications in
areas such as Statistics, Computer Science, Physics, and more. Other parts of
this project will involve supervising postdocs, graduate and undergraduate
students, and organizing seminars and conferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
isoperimetric inequality is a consequence of the celebrated Brunn-Minkowski
inequality, an important result which is used ubiquitously in convex geometry.
Over the last 20 years it has become clear that the Brunn-Minkowski inequality
is not the end of the story. If one deals only with bodies that have certain
symmetries, much stronger inequalities should also be true. This yielded many
conjectures such as the log-Brunn-Minkowski conjecture, the (B)-conjecture, and
the Dimensional Brunn-Minkowski conjecture. Using isoperimetric-type
inequalities via their local versions these fundamental open questions will be
approached. In addition, several directions in Asymptotic Geometric Analysis are
part of this project, such as creating a fast algorithm which learns a convex
body with respect to a general log-concave measure. The ensemble of
inhomogeneous random matrices will be studied, using the previously developed
methods which involve a new efficient discretization of the unit
sphere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.