* 2247290
* Multi-soliton Dynamics for Dispersive Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Andrew Lawrie, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2026
* USD 267,040.00

The natural world is governed by wave equations: the electricity on a circuit
board, the light in fiber-optic cables, the elementary particles inside atoms,
and even the black hole in the center of the galaxy all propagate by wave
dynamics. Though ubiquitous, wave-type equations are far from well-understood.
The goal of this project is to understand how waves are affected by interference
with themselves or with their environment. The research seeks to learn when and
why some waves disperse, other waves persist, and still others collapse. Knowing
how waves behave drives technological progress - smaller microchips, faster data
transmission, and deeper insights into the fundamental physics of the universe.
The project provides research training opportunities for undergraduate students,
graduate students, and postdoctoral researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
investigator studies the long-time dynamics of solutions to nonlinear wave and
dispersive equations, focusing on equations that admit topological solitons,
which are used to model the physical phenomena described above. Solitons are
localized solitary waves with a nontrivial topological invariant. They were
introduced by Skyrme in the 1960s as candidates for particles in classical field
theories. They have properties required from a particle in classical mechanics -
one can define their position, momentum, and energy - and viewed from a
distance, configurations of multiple solitons resemble systems of interacting
particles. The investigator's work on multi-soliton dynamics makes this
connection with classical mechanics explicit, reducing the dynamics of strongly
interacting solitons to underlying n-body problems for their positions, momenta,
scales, etc. A guiding principle in the analysis of soliton dynamics is the
Soliton Resolution Conjecture, which predicts that generic solutions decompose
near the final time of existence into a superposition of finitely many solitons
and a term capturing the radiation, often a solution to the underlying linear
equation. The investigator will work towards proving the conjecture in certain
settings and going beyond it in others by considering three categories of
problems: (1) the soliton resolution conjecture for evolution equations without
symmetry assumptions, starting with the harmonic map heat flow in two
dimensions, which is a long-standing open problem; (2) the unique continuation
problem for singular nonlinear waves past the blow-up time; and (3) the question
of giving asymptotic descriptions of multi-soliton solutions and their
collisions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.