* 2247589
* CAS: Toward Molecular Control of Cage Escape Yields in Bimolecular Photochemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Gerald Meyer, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Francis D'Souza
* 08/31/2026
* USD 575,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms B Program of
the Chemistry Division, Professor Gerald Meyer of the Department of Chemistry at
the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and his team are studying
chemical reactions that are initiated with visible light with the aim of
improving the efficiency of such transformations. The goal in most cases is to
optimize the reactivity such that each absorbed photon produces one desired
product. Downstream applications of the findings from this research may include
solar energy conversion, as well as the photosynthesis of high-value organic
compounds. The project lies at the interface of photochemistry and inorganic
chemistry, with a focus on electron transfer reactivity that is well suited to
the education of scientists at all levels. The Meyer research team endeavors to
support the training of students underrepresented in science. Outreach
activities involving K-12 students in the Research Triangle and rural North
Carolina are being planned as part of the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project seeks to obtain mechanistic insight into photo-initiated electron
transfer between a photosensitizer and a quencher that will allow optimization
and a means to predict quantum yield. Focus will be placed on excited state
electron transfer and charge recombination within the ‘encounter complex’
inherent to bimolecular redox reactions. Charge recombination within the
encounter complex is known to significantly lower the yield of most
photochemical reactions to values far below one, yet the origin(s) of such
behavior remain largely unknown. Professor Gerald Meyer and his team propose
systematic electron transfer studies that will exploit the charge-transfer
excited states of vintage second- and third-row transition metal
photosensitizers, as well as emerging earth abundant photosensitizers-based on
cobalt, iron, zirconium, and copper. Electron donor and acceptor quenchers with
tailored charge, size, and reduction potentials are expected to provide the
insight into encounter complex structure that is necessary to understand the
factors that control escape of desired products, i.e., the cage escape yield. A
fundamental question to be addressed is whether the photosensitizer and/or the
quencher structure can be tuned at the molecular level to impact the encounter
complex and thereby the cage escape yield. Supramolecular assembly will be used
to quantify the impact of non-covalent interactions within the encounter complex
on electron transfer and cage escape. Variable temperature kinetic measurements
are proposed to quantify the electronic coupling within the encounter complex
and to determine the adiabaticity of the excited state electron transfer
reaction. The proposed research is fundamental in nature yet are expected to
impact approaches used in solar energy conversion and organic photoredox
catalysis. In the long term, insights gained from these studies have the
potential to provide a rational means for the molecular-level design of
photosensitizer encounter complexes capable of efficiently harvesting solar
photons, driving electron transfer reactions, and releasing the sought-after
products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.