* 2247003
* I-Corps:  Nanoparticle-based smell test device for COVID-19 screening
* TIP,TI
* 10/01/2022,09/30/2023
* Asahi Tomitaka, University of Houston - Victoria
* Standard Grant
* Ruth Shuman
* 09/30/2023
* USD 16,457.00

The broader impact/commercial potential of this I-Corps project is the
development of reliable rapid screening for COVID-19. The global COVID-19
diagnostics market is expanding rapidly. The market size is valued at $19.8
billion in 2020 and is expected to grow at a compound annual growth rate (CAGR)
of 3.1% from 2021 to 2027. Compared to the existing smell tests, the proposed
technology facilitates remote-controlled switching capacity of multiple odor
molecules and instant auto-evaluation. The proposed device allows standardized
emission of multiple odor molecules using a single device. Moreover, results
from the device may be delivered directly through the app or over the web
enabling testing in telemedicine settings. Since there is no reliable testing
for rapid diagnosis of asymptomatic and presymptomatic COVID-19 cases, this
technology may potentially change the paradigm of
diagnosis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This I-Corps project is based on the development
of a nanoparticle-based smell test device. The proposed nanoparticle-based
system triggers the controlled release of specific molecules on demand. This
smell test device has potential application in the diagnosis of diseases
affecting the sense of smell. Since an impaired sense of smell is a distinct
sign of COVID-19 in both asymptomatic and presymptomatic cases, this technology
has the potential for screening and early diagnosis of the disease. Moreover,
unlike traditional smell tests, the proposed technology is designed such that it
may be configured into any form factor from a plate to a pen to incorporation in
an inhalation device. This technique allows quantitative control of multiple
scent intensities facilitating a new layer of detailed data that has hereto not
been available. Understanding the impact of COVID-19 in olfaction will open new
doors in diagnosis and disease management.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.