* 2247744
* CAS: Iron-Catalyzed Three-Component Coupling Methods via Iron Azametallacyclobutene Complexes
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Jamie Neely, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 06/30/2026
* USD 500,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Jamie Neely of Saint Louis University is studying iron-catalyzed processes that
join together three distinct chemical building blocks to generate products that
are of value to medicine, agriculture, and materials science. The choice of iron
complexes as the catalysts for these methods is rooted in their ability to
interact with the three coupling partners in a controlled fashion, each at a
specific stage of the reaction pathway. The catalysts of interest have the added
benefit of being based on the most abundant transition metal in the Earthâ€™s
crust, as well as one of the least expensive and least toxic, accentuating the
sustainability and potential practical utility of the processes under
development. The broader impacts of the funded project will extend to providing
evidence that the distinct behavior of Earth-abundant metals can complement the
reactivity of the rare precious metals that are more commonly deployed in
current transition metal-catalyzed technology. Students participating in the
funded research will gain a comprehensive education encompassing all aspects of
transition metal catalysis, providing them with the capacity to become
knowledgeable and insightful contributors to the scientific community. The
activities supported by the award include outreach efforts directed toward
establishing an undergraduate summer research program for students from minority
groups underrepresented in science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
(STEM) from the Saint Louis area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funded research is
focused on the development of iron-catalyzed three-component coupling reactions
of nitrene precursors (e.g., azides), alkynes, and nitrile or isonitrile
substrates for the synthesis of value-added, nitrogen-containing compounds. The
methods under investigation capitalize on [2+2] cycloaddition reactivity of
sterically congested iron imide complexes that is highly sensitive to the nature
of the alkyne substrate, allowing for the incorporation of unsymmetrical alkynes
with high regioselectivity. Reactions of nitrile coupling partners will provide
a general and modular route to imidazoles, a pervasive structural motif in
biologically active compounds, with further application to the preparation of
diversely substituted N-heterocyclic carbenes. Early efforts in imidazole
formation will focus on translating the stoichiometric behavior observed in
preliminary studies to catalytic reactivity, with later work aimed at optimizing
reaction conditions and exploring the scope of the process with respect to each
of the three substrates. Iron-catalyzed coupling using isonitriles will be
explored to access imidoyl ketenimine products that have broad utility as
synthetic intermediates. Initial stoichiometric studies will target conditions
that favor three-component coupling over a competing process identified in
preliminary experiments. These observations will inform later efforts to render
the reaction catalytic in iron.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.