* 2247771
* Harmonic Analysis in Convex Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Artem Zvavitch, Kent State University
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Tyson
* 05/31/2026
* USD 365,144.00

This project investigates questions in convex geometry using methods originating
in harmonic analysis. The definition of convexity is elementary: a set is convex
if it contains the straight-line path between any two of its elements. Yet the
study of such sets leads to a rich and intricate branch of modern geometry,
exhibiting unexpected connections to diverse areas of pure and applied
mathematics, including probability, number theory, linear programming,
computational geometry, and tomography. Significant parts of the project will
rely on new techniques for constructing convex bodies and exposing their
geometric properties using the Fourier transform, which represents mathematical
objects via their frequency decomposition. The project will provide research
opportunities for students and postdoctoral fellows. In addition, the principal
investigators will continue their organization of seminars and other meetings
including the Informal Analysis Seminar, a twice yearly meeting where
researchers from around the world present lectures aimed at early career
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project involves the study of questions in
convex geometry using tools from harmonic analysis and differential geometry.
Some of the proposed research questions arose in the context of earlier work of
the principal investigators, where Fourier analytic approaches were used to
study inequalities involving volumes and mixed volumes. These approaches have
proved indispensable in the solution of longstanding problems in convex geometry
and geometric tomography. Many natural questions in convex geometry involve
relationships between volumes of pairs of convex sets; among these is an open
question posed by K. Mahler in 1939. Another source of inspiration is the so-
called `Scottish Book’, an informal collection of about 200 problems in
mathematics which originated in the 1930s. Stanislav Ulam’s 19th Problem, taken
from the Scottish Book, asks for a characterization of the convex sets of a
fixed density (less than one) which float in an equilibrium position in every
orientation (in water, of density one). Surprisingly, round balls are not the
only such sets, due to a recent result of one of the principal investigators of
this project. Part of the current project involves a further study of Ulam’s
19th Problem in relation to the properties of sections and projections of convex
bodies. A second research direction involves the Mahler conjecture for volumes
of three-dimensional convex bodies. This conjecture is known to hold under an
additional symmetry assumption, and the project will consider the general
version of this conjecture in three dimensions. The project will provide ample
opportunities for participation in research by early-career researchers,
including graduate students and postdocs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.