* 2247222
* NSF-GACR: An Optical Biosensing Platform for Simultaneous Detection and Quantification of Exosomes and Exosomal Cargo Biomarkers
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Qiuming Yu, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Aleksandr Simonian
* 06/30/2026
* USD 360,000.00

Biosensors have proven extremely valuable in biomedical research, healthcare and
pharmaceutics and are envisioned to become an integral part of modern medical
diagnostics. Recently, circulating exosomes (tiny sac-like structures that were
formed inside cells and contain some of the cell's proteins, DNA, and RNA) have
emerged as promising biomarkers for medical diagnosis because they contain
information about their cells of origin. Despite exosomes having been reported
to be present in all major body fluids, effective detection and molecular
analysis of exosomes remains particularly challenging due to the high
variability in exosome subpopulations, small amounts of cargo molecules, and low
recovery and reproducibility of exosome purification. This international
collaborative project between Cornell University (Ithaca) and the Institute of
Photonics and Electronics, Prague (IPE) will address these challenges by
developing a new biosensing methodology that enables simultaneous detection and
quantification of exosomes and exosomal cargo molecules to take full advantage
of the richness of information contained in exosomes. Simultaneous
identification and quantification of exosomes and exosomal cargo biomarkers have
broader applications from biomedical diagnosis to the characterization of new
drug delivery carriers based on exosomes. This project provides training
opportunities for the next generation workforce in STEM fields in the US and the
Czech Republic. Graduate and undergraduate students from underrepresented groups
will receive training in this highly interdisciplinary research project.
Graduate students will visit the collaborative labs each summer to foster the
collaboration and gain experience on conducting research in a diverse
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to bring together
two research institutions, one located in the US and the other in the Czech
Republic, to develop a new biosensing methodology that enables simultaneous
detection and quantification of exosomes and exosomal cargo molecules in order
to take full advantage of the richness of information contained in exosomes. The
biosensing platform will be based on optically excited surface plasmons that
enable rapid and sensitive detection of biomolecules and investigation of
biomolecular interactions in real time without the need for labeling. The
specific objectives of the project are: (1) to develop a novel method for the
capture, quantification, and profiling of selected exosomes based on a plasmonic
biosensor; (2) to develop methods for controlled lysis of exosomes captured in
the plasmonic biosensor and for the ultrasensitive detection of miRNA
(microRNAs) and protein cargo molecules released from the lysed exosomes; and
(3) to integrate these methods into a single biosensing platform for selective
capture and profiling of exosomes and detection of multiple exosomal cargo
miRNAs and proteins. The project will advance fundamental knowledge of utilizing
exosomes as emerging biomarkers and nanoscience and nanotechnology in
biosensing. The results of this work will make significant impacts not only in
the field of biosensing but also in the fields of medical diagnosis, cell
biology, biomaterials, surface chemistry and
plasmonics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.