* 2247613
* HOLOMORPHIC DYNAMICS AND RELATED THEMES
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Mikhail Lyubich, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Tyson
* 06/30/2026
* USD 369,435.00

The theory of dynamical systems studies the long-term behavior of trajectories
described by iteration procedures, and how such behavior depends on the
parameters of the system. Intricate fractal objects (like Julia sets and the
Mandelbrot set) may appear as phase and parameter diagrams for such systems.
This project focuses on complex and real low-dimensional dynamical systems
described by simple quadratic equations. Despite the simplicity of the model,
such systems are known to display complicated chaotic behavior indicative of
various phenomena appearing in celestial mechanics, fluid dynamics, statistical
mechanics, biology, and other branches of natural science. The proposed activity
will result in deeper insights into the small scale structure of dynamical
systems, in the training of highly qualified postdoctoral fellows and graduate
students, in broader interactions between senior and junior experts in various
branches of real and complex dynamics, and in the preparation of a book to
assist the research community in acquiring background in the area. In addition,
the Principal Investigator will facilitate communication within the field
through the organization of international conferences and scientific programs
and by maintaining a dynamics-related web site.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
addresses several geometric themes within complex low-dimensional dynamics,
making a gradual transition from the one-dimensional to the two-dimensional
world. In connection with dynamics in one dimension, renormalization will be
investigated as a unifying and powerful tool for elucidating the small-scale
structure of dynamical objects. Specific topics under consideration include a
semi-local theory of neutral maps and a priori bounds for infinitely
renormalizable quadratic polynomials with applications to the problem of local
connectivity of the Mandelbrot set. Other topics of study include the dynamics
generated by Schwarz reflections in quadrature domains and the dynamics of
dissipative complex Henon maps. In connection with the latter, specific themes
include the construction of two-dimensional examples of real and complex wild
attractors and the development of a general theory of unimodal Henon maps. The
project will also explore applications of higher dimensional holomorphic
dynamics to the spectral theory of self-similar groups. Finally, the principal
investigator will continue to work on a multi-volume book on the conformal
geometry and dynamics of quadratic polynomials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.