* 2247708
* CAS: Enabling Synthesis through Small Molecule Liberation
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Jon Tunge, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 08/31/2026
* USD 575,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Jon Tunge of the University of Kansas is studying the development of
strategies that utilize the innate energy in molecules to enable new
environmentally sustainable processes for chemical manufacturing. Specifically,
the liberation of small stable molecules (carbon dioxide and/or hydrogen) from
simple feedstocks, sometimes in combination with harvesting light energy, will
provide the energy to drive chemical reactions without the need for traditional,
more wasteful, methods of energy input. To further lessen the environmental
impact of the chemical processes being designed, catalysts based on earth-
abundant cobalt metal will be utilized as reaction promoters in lieu of
traditional expensive noble metals. These new catalysts will also allow the
design of new types of reaction pathways. It is anticipated that the methods
developed will be applicable to the synthesis of a wide variety of materials
with potential applications as pharmaceutical agents, agrochemicals, and other
substances of value to science, engineering, and commerce. The broader impacts
of the funded project extend to the benefits accrued to society as Professor
Tunge and his coworkers engage in outreach and educational activities designed
to integrate the goals of this research with training and recruitment programs
that incorporate the promotion of 'green chemistry' principles. A significant
goal of these activities will be to engage in outreach to educate area K-12
students on common chemistry that occurs in their everyday environment and to
connect these observables to contemporary challenges in sustainable chemistry. A
further goal is to utilize these community connections to attract students from
diverse backgrounds, including individuals belonging to groups underrepresented
in STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) fields, to careers
that address critical issues of sustainability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The funded
project is focused on the development of chemical transformations based on the
catalytic generation of reactive intermediates via the cleavage of C–C and C–H
bonds. The catalytic pathways being developed utilize decarboxylation to provide
an efficient strategy for the in situ formation of synthetically useful reactive
intermediates directly from inexpensive carboxylic acids. Other processes under
investigation utilize the hydrogen evolution reaction for atom-economical
functionalization. Cobalt catalysts replace traditional, expensive, palladium
catalysts in decarboxylative coupling reactions and are anticipated to allow for
new transformation types that are inaccessible using current technologies.
Additionally, photoredox-catalyzed hydrogen evolution will allow for the site-
specific functionalization of amino acids and peptides, while also enabling
regiocontrolled decarboxylative Heck-like acylations and regiochemically
complementary allylations. Performing these new transformations in series will
further allow construction of complex molecules through temporally- and
kinetically-controlled iterative decarboxylative couplings. The ongoing studies
will advance a general paradigm for synthetic chemists to use for accessing
reactive species under mild conditions, while generating minimal waste using:
(1) visible light photoredox catalysts for redox shuffling of transition metal
catalysts, and (2) hydrogen evolution to allow oxidative couplings through
liberation of the smallest molecule, hydrogen.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.