* 2247959
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Understanding and Reducing Barriers to Entry and Participation in the Vulnerability Discovery Community
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Daniel Votipka, Tufts University
* Standard Grant
* Sara Kiesler
* 04/30/2026
* USD 599,999.00

The current vulnerability discovery workforce consists of experts who search for
software security bugs. This workforce lacks gender and socioeconomic diversity,
causing inequitable access to high paying jobs, limited diversity of thought,
and workforce shortages endangering Internet safety. This project aims to
identify root causes of limited diversity in the vulnerability discovery
community. Little research has addressed vulnerability discovery education and
challenges faced by new professionals. This project is conducting studies to
identify challenges faced by marginalized populations and is developing and
evaluating interventions and policies grounded in these populations'
experiences. This project will provide guidance to community leaders, policy
makers, and educators to improve diversity, inclusivity, and equity in the
vulnerability discovery workforce.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;To improve community
equity and inclusivity, the research team is conducting a broad survey to
identify disparities among demographic groups and is interviewing leaders
organizing diversity, equity, and inclusion initiatives to identify domain-
specific decision-making challenges. The research team is conducting a community
organizer workshop to discuss their findings and to collaboratively develop
domain-specific guidance to address gaps and challenges in diversity
initiatives. To reduced barriers to learning, the team is conducting controlled
experiments with students to understand their information search processes and
online resource use, and to generate and evaluate novel approaches to student
educational support. Findings are to be synthesized into research-based
guidelines to help educators best support a diverse group of students who would
be prepared to work productively in the vulnerability discovery
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.