* 2247214
* RUI: New Porphyrinoid Architectures with Extended Conjugation Pathways
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Timothy Lash, Board of Trustees of Illinois State University
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 07/31/2026
* USD 463,149.00

With support from the Chemical Synthesis program of the NSF Division of
Chemistry, Professor Timothy Lash of Illinois State University is exploring the
synthesis, characterization, and reactivity of compounds that resemble naturally
occurring porphyrins. Metalated porphyrins are widespread in nature, e.g. hemes,
and play crucial roles in photosynthesis and oxygen transport. Porphyrins also
have numerous applications in a number of diverse areas, including materials
science, catalysis, and medicine. Porphyrins have 4 nitrogen atoms within a
central cavity that allow the structure to bind metal ions. However, an
important class of related compounds, called carbaporphyrins, have a carbon atom
in place of one of these nitrogens. Carbaporphyrins have modified properties
that often complement those of naturally occurring porphyrins. The supported
work is leading to the development of efficient routes to novel carbaporphyrins
and related porphyrin-like systems that have unique reactivity and unusual
properties. The results are increasing our understanding of fundamental
chemistry concepts such as aromaticity, a fundamental property of molecules that
leads to enhanced stability. Furthermore, structures of this type act as ligands
to form stable complexes with important catalytic metals such as palladium and
rhodium. Professor Lash and his students are studying applications of these
metalloporphyrins in the preparation of fine chemicals. In addition, related
such complexes are being explored for use as photosensitizers in photodynamic
therapy. These projects are not only providing an excellent environment for
training undergraduates and Masters level graduate students for careers in
science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) but are also exposing
these students to the multidisciplinary nature of modern scientific
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research, new synthetic routes to
porphyrin-like systems are being developed, including methodology that makes use
of cyclopropane dialdehydes. Applications of the “3 + 1” variant of the
MacDonald reaction will provide structures having extended conjugation with
alternative properties. For instance, porphyrin-like structures with fused
aromatic rings, including phenanthrene, pyrene and acenaphthylene, will extend
the platform and are expected to substantially alter the properties of these
systems. Other examples of unique porphyrins include carboporphyrins
hydroxyporphyrinoids, and tripyrrolic porphyrins. All these molecules have
unique conjugation pathways and, as a result, interesting properties. The
strategy to synthesize these substrates should be applicable to virtually all
fused aromatic ring systems. These investigations are quite fundamental,
providing access to important new porphyrinoid systems, and thus have the
potential for major impact on the field of porphyrin
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.