* 2247139
* Conference: Arkansas Spring Lecture Series
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2023,03/31/2024
* Zachary Bradshaw, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 03/31/2024
* USD 20,000.00

This award provides participant support for the Spring Lecture Series (SLS) on
"Transport, mixing and fluids" at the University of Arkansas in Fayetteville,
Arkansas, on May 5-7, 2023. The SLS has a rich history of bringing together
junior and established researchers in cutting edge areas of mathematics and
statistics with the goal of educating and elevating the next generation of
talent. Turbulent mixing is a subject of broad importance in physics,
engineering, geosciences and mathematics. Over the course of five lecturers, the
principal speaker for the series, Anna Mazzucato, will introduce fundamental
elements of the mathematical study of turbulent mixing and present state of the
art results. Additionally, there will be ten one-hour lectures by invited
speakers on related topics as well as a poster session by young researchers. A
career panel will be included to foster the career development of junior
participants. Finally, a public lecture presented by Lisette de Pillis will
present the art and applications of mathematical modeling at a level suited to a
broad audience. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When a tracer is carried by a turbulent
incompressible flow, it is rapidly dispersed throughout the fluid medium, that
is, it becomes mixed. This dynamic is important to many areas of research,
including atmospheric and oceanographic science, biology, and chemistry.
Recently, major mathematical developments have improved society's understanding
of mixing. These advances connect disciplines within analysis, namely partial
differential equations (PDE), dynamical systems, and geometric measure theory.
Results of this progress have been used to explore other problems in the
analysis of PDE, such as the loss of regularity for transport equations. The
lectures will present the mathematical fundamentals behind these processes as
well as advanced results by the principal and invited speakers in order to
provide participants with a broad and current perspective on the field. More
information is available at
https://fulbright.uark.edu/departments/math/research/spring-lecture-
series/index.php&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.