* 2247235
* Synthesis of Ligand-Centered Boron Cations to Access Tandem Reactions with Transition Metals
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Scott Daly, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2026
* USD 528,550.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis program in the Division of Chemistry
and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), Scott
Daly of the University of Iowa and Jason Keith of Colgate University will study
metal complexes that enable tandem, multistep molecular assembly of targeted
organic compounds in one-pot reactions. The innovative concept to be explored is
the development of reactive boron molecules that bind metals and allow two
different catalytic reactions to be performed using a single metal catalyst.
This strategy holds promise for establishing more efficient and cost-effective
methods to transform simple chemical building blocks into complex molecular
scaffolds used in pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals, and other fine chemicals. This
research will also provide important workforce development and scientific
training for graduate and undergraduate students from diverse backgrounds. The
recruitment and support of nontraditional and at-risk STEM (science, technology,
engineering and mathematics) majors will be facilitated by continued development
of the Chemistry Platoon, an acclaimed outreach project at the University of
Iowa aimed at assisting veterans and Military affiliates in introductory
chemistry courses, and by intensive undergraduate research efforts at Colgate
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tandem reactions are coupled catalytic
reactions that sequentially transform a substrate via two or more
mechanistically distinct processes. These reactions are often limited by co-
catalyst incompatibility when two or more catalysts are required, as well as
difficulties generalizing the reactivity for broad classes of important chemical
transformations. It is proposed that these problems can be addressed using
single multifunctional metal complexes containing reactive boron ligands capable
of performing catalytic reactions in tandem with the metal. Using cycloaddition
catalysis as a tool, the Daly team will assess how chemical changes at the boron
ligand affect stereoselectivity and reaction yields, catalytic stability under
different reaction conditions, and tandem cross-coupling scope at the metal.
Synthetic efforts will be complemented by density functional theory calculations
by the Keith research team and by cutting-edge synchrotron spectroscopy
measurements-B and P K-edge XANES (X-ray absorption near edge spectroscopy)-to
map out reaction mechanisms and underlying electronic structure variations that
govern desirable reactivity. These collaborative efforts are expected to
illuminate chemical factors that yield desirable tandem metal-ligand catalysis,
and provides a possible alternative to established methods. These studies are
anticipated to have cross-cutting relevance to main-group chemistry and
catalysis while also affording new structure-reactivity insights germane to
other types of catalytic reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.