* 2247712
* GEM: The Sources and Pathways of Ions in the Warm Plasma Cloak
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Jing Liao, University of New Hampshire
* Continuing Grant
* Lisa Winter
* 06/30/2027
* USD 196,303.00

The radiation belts surrounding the Earth consist of different populations of
particles. The warm plasma cloak is an ion population that plays a critical role
in wave-particle interactions impacting magnetospheric dynamics. This work
studies this population. The project is led by a mid-career female scientist who
is returning to the space physics research field from the technology sector,
addressing a goal of the Division of Atmospheric and Geospace Sciences to
support mid-career scientists. The research group supported by this award
includes several women scientists. A graduate student is
supported.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of this project is to: Identify
the sources of the warm plasma cloak and the pathways and processes that lead to
their characteristic distributions. To achieve the goal, the work will answer
the following questions: (1) What are the circulation pathways of the warm
plasma that bring it to the dayside magnetosphere? What are the characteristic
distributions along their path? (2) Is the source of the warm plasma cloak
plasma the direct outflow of ionospheric ions or the inward convection of the
plasma sheet population? Is there heating observed during the transport? (3)
What is the impact of depolarization in the warm plasma cloak formation? To
understand the source and transport path of the warm plasma cloak population,
the team will perform a statistical study of the field aligned low energy H+ and
O+ throughout the inner magnetosphere, using data from NASAâ€™s Magnetospheric
Multiscale Mission and Van Allen Probes, combined with Fast Auroral SnapshoT
Explorer observations of the outflows at lower altitude and Cluster for cross-
calibration. This allows characterization of the origin of the warm plasma cloak
ions, their transport pathways and possible heating mechanism, as well as the
controlling factors (e.g. dipolarization). A database of observed field-aligned
warm H+ and O+ population will be established to address the three science
questions listed above. This work will extend our understanding of warm plasma
populations within the inner magnetosphere and provide important characteristic
properties of the warm plasma cloak population for global simulation and machine
learning studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.