* 2247154
* No Catalyst Required: New Thermally-Promoted Transformations of Iminyl Radicals for the Synthesis of Complex Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Steven Castle, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 07/31/2026
* USD 554,751.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Steven L. Castle of Brigham Young University is developing new
reaction methodology for synthesizing organic molecules. These reactions are
triggered by thermal energy (i.e., microwave irradiation or conventional
heating) and do not require the addition of external catalysts. The advantages
of this approach when compared to other, more conventional strategies to similar
entities include its simplicity, the lack of expensive or extravagant reagents
or catalysts, the scope of the molecules that can be subjected to and generated
from this chemistry, and the relatively short reaction times that are required
for initiation and product formation. As a result, these new methods provide
efficient synthetic routes to important classes of compounds, including some
with potential as pharmaceuticals. In addition to developing the chemistry,
Professor Castle and his students plan to advance STEM (science, technology,
engineering and mathematics) education by creating lesson plans that will help
high school chemistry teachers to incorporate organic chemistry into their
courses. By exposing students to organic and medicinal chemistry far sooner than
they normally would be, it is hoped that high school students will develop a
deeper appreciation for chemistry and this has the potential to encourage them
to consider pursuing STEM pathways in their education and professionally. The
students that are directly participating in this project are receiving training
in experimental techniques, troubleshooting chemical reactoins, communication,
and critical thinking that will provide them with valuable tools to pursue
careers in STEM fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this award, Professor Steven
Castle and his research group will generate iminyl radicals under thermal
conditions by inducing the homolytic cleavage of relatively weak N-O bonds that
are present in readily available O-aryl oxime ethers. This process affords high
energy iminyl radicals that are capable of undergoing a variety of chemical
transformations including intramolecular processes. These include cyclization
reactions with pendant alkenes and hydrogen atom abstraction reactions with
hydrogens that are a prescribed distance from the iminyl nitrogen atom. The
radicals are also capable of being trapped intermolecularly to forge new C-C,
C-N, C-O, C-S, or C-X (X = halogen) bonds. In addition to studying the
fundamental generation and reactivity of iminyl radicals, the utility of this
methodology is to be demonstrated through the planned convergent synthesis of
fortuneicyclidin, with iminyl radical cyclization being the key step. This
architecturally novel alkaloid natural product has yet to be synthesized in the
laboratory and the proposed route has the potential to demonstrate real utility
of the proposed iminyl radical-based tandem cyclization
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.