* 2247034
* GEM: Fundamental Properties of Dawnside Auroral Polarization Streams and Their Role in Magnetosphere-Ionosphere Instabilities and Dramatic Events
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Lawrence Lyons, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 08/31/2026
* USD 523,629.00

This work focuses on a unique phenomenon of a strong electric field that flows
in Earth’s upper atmosphere (or ionosphere), called Dawnside Auroral
Polarization Streams (DAPS). The DAPS is an essential component of the energy
circulation of the near-Earth space environment and is related to the
instabilities responsible for dramatic energy releases in the system. Occurring
frequently, DAPS can significantly modify the ionosphere temperature and thus
its composition and density, which impact the drag of low-altitude spacecraft
and the scintillation of radio wave transmission. Aiming at understanding the
formation and consequences of DAPS, this project will provide crucial
information for advanced modeling of the near-Earth space environment and space
weather prediction. This funded work will promote the development of an early-
career scientist (the PI) and a very early-career female researcher. It will
also involve undergraduate students interested in space physics as volunteers
and for research course credit. This project involves auroral phenomena, so it
naturally appeals to the general public. Appropriate materials from the products
will be conveyed to the public (including K-12 students) via education and
public outreach efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The strong southward electric
field and associated eastward flow that extends within the Region 1 current
portion of the auroral oval are referred to as the Dawnside Auroral Polarization
Stream (DAPS). A DAPS’ strong electric field can significantly modify
magnetosphere-ionosphere convection and energetic particle drift and heat the
ionosphere and thermosphere. This project aims to determine fundamental DAPS
properties and their impacts, including how DAPS vary under different
conditions, what contributes to these variations, and their role in
instabilities responsible for dramatic M-I events. The team will use low-
altitude spacecraft observations (Swarm and DMSP) to measure a magnetic field
vector and east-west flow, from which they can identify FAC structures and DAPS
with automated methods. Applying these methods to ~20 years of data, the team
will conduct comprehensive statistical studies to answer the questions. The
research results will provide crucial information on DAPS’ generation mechanism
and its impacts on the M-I system's convection, heating, and instability. The
outcome of the studies will thus provide important implications for the M-I
energy circulation. Given the frequent occurrence and strength of DAPS and their
relationship to a major ionospheric conductivity change, the findings will
likely be transformational for M-I-T modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.