* 2247363
* Investigation of Nonequilibrium States and Photoinduced Transitions in Topological Superlattices
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Michael Zuerch, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Mun Chan
* 04/30/2026
* USD 700,077.00

Nontechnical description: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates new
ways of manipulating quantum materials with ultrashort laser pulses, which can
have a significant impact on developing energy-efficient future technologies.
The material of interest is a thin film made up of alternating layers of two
types of complex oxides that exhibit different electric polarization properties
but are structurally similar. The resulting thin film has a highly periodic
pattern of polarization domains with typical sizes in the range of 10
nanometers. By shining laser pulses on the material, the investigators
dynamically modify the spatial order of these patterns. Studying the temporal
evolution of these patterns by stroboscopic measurements with a temporal
resolution fast enough to observe electron movements provides an understanding
of the underlying mechanisms of pattern formation. Finding routes to optically
control polarization patterns could have far-reaching applications. These
patterns can encode information that can be rapidly changed by light. This
reduces the amount of energy used compared to conventional electronics while
enabling many orders of magnitude faster switching in non-volatile memories or
computation devices. This project includes educational activities aimed at
training the next generation of scientists and engineers at the interface
between physics, chemistry, and materials science. These activities will engage
with K-12 students, undergraduate and graduate students, and other members of
the community to promote diversity in STEM fields and provide valuable training
opportunities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Technical description:
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates nonequilibrium states and
photoinduced transitions in topological superlattices. The research focuses on a
ferroelectric/paraelectric heterostructure composed of alternating strontium
titanate and lead titanate layers (STO-PTO). These heterostructures exhibit a
variety of topological arrangement of local electric polarization forming long-
range orders of polar vortices and skyrmions near equilibrium. While traditional
tuning knobs like composition, strain, and temperature only affect near-
equilibrium properties, rapid improvements in ultrafast laser technology
presents a new opportunity to dynamically manipulate these spatially-complex
polarization properties. Ultrafast pump-probe schemes specific to parts of the
intrinsically complex STO-PTO system is used to investigate the temporal
evolution of out-of-equilibrium phases and local topology. Novel experimental
tools, including ultrafast broadband extreme-ultraviolet absorption spectroscopy
(UBXAS) and extreme ultraviolet second harmonic generation (XUV-SHG), are used
to measure superlattice order parameters, trace energetic relaxation processes
following photoexcitation, and detect proximitized broken-symmetry states at the
interface in real-time. Ultrafast electron microscopy (UEM) is applied to
unravel real-space dynamics of the polar skyrmion order and the impact of
topological defects on long-range order. The project provides novel insights
into interface and defect-mediated correlations in mesoscale
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.