* 2247728
* RUI: Molecular Alkali Metal Catalysts for Selective Reduction of Oxygen-Containing Functionalities
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Guoqi Zhang, CUNY John Jay College of Criminal Justice
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 06/30/2026
* USD 300,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Guoqi Zhang of the John Jay College of Criminal Justice at the City University
of New York is studying alkali metals (lithium, sodium, and potassium) in
combination with specially designed ligands to promote processes of potential
utility for the manufacture of fuels and other commodity chemicals of benefit to
society from renewable biomass-derived feedstocks. Alkali metals are among the
most abundant metallic elements in the Earth’s crust but their ability to
catalyze chemical reactions is underexplored as compared to rare and expensive
precious metal-based catalysts, which are commonly used in the contemporary
chemical industry. The supported research focuses on the development of simple
methods to create well defined alkali metal-ligand complexes from readily
available starting materials and investigation of their effectiveness as
catalysts for a range of relevant chemical processes. The experiments necessary
to pursue the aims of the project are rigorous but designed to be
straightforward enough to be conducted by entry-level undergraduate students, or
even high school students, and the research will provide a diverse group of
young scientists with the opportunity to gain hands-on laboratory experience.
John Jay College is classified as a major Hispanic-Serving Institution and its
Science Department serves a large number of students belonging to groups
traditionally underrepresented in STEM (science, technology, engineering and
mathematics) fields. As such, it is anticipated that the funded activities will
not only provide education and training at the interface of chemical catalysis,
organic chemistry, and inorganic chemistry, but also serve as a vehicle to help
diversify the pool of future science professionals. The broader impacts of the
award are further extended by the participation of Dr. Zhang in nationally
recognized mentoring programs such as the Program for Research Initiatives for
Science Majors (PRISM).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is currently great interest
in exploring the replacement of precious metal-based catalysts used in many of
today's important chemical processes with catalysts instead derived from earth
abundant metals. Such a change would likely reduce the costs of chemical
manufacturing while also improving its environmental sustainability. Alkali
metal complexes have emerged in recent years as platforms for catalysis and
their successful application in reduction chemistry could improve the
sustainability of biomass processing. Accordingly, the funded project is focused
on the study and development of well defined complexes of Li, Na, and K cations
ligated with 2,2':6',2''-terpyridines (or crown ethers) for the reduction of a
wide range of oxygen-containing functionalities, including carboxyl derivatives
(e.g., carboxylic acids, esters, amides) and ethers, using silanes or molecular
hydrogen as stoichiometric reductants. Functional group compatibility within
more complex substrates will be explored alongside other important parameters
such as the regio-, stereo-, and chemo-selectivity of the various catalytic
reductive transformations. These investigations will be concentrated on
discovery of the most active and selective catalyst candidates and on scrutiny
of a putative dual-activation reactivity mode based on a frustrated Lewis pair,
through which the complexes are proposed to exert their catalytic effects.
Mechanistic studies will be conducted via a combination of experimental and
theoretical, density functional theory (DFT)-based methods in order to
understand both the observed structure-activity relationships and the importance
of metal-ligand cooperativity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.