* 2247157
* Fostering Communities of Practice Through Research and Peer Mentoring
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2028
* Patricia Morreale, Kean University
* Continuing Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 04/30/2028
* USD 2,359,520.00

This project aims to develop a national model for STEM education at Hispanic-
Serving Institutions that engages all members of the university community.
Central to this effort is the development of a “Scholars Academy,” a cohort-
based program to support undergraduate students with peer mentoring,
undergraduate research opportunities, and additional support. The academy is
designed to improve undergraduate success, particularly for Hispanic students.
The project will address a number of well documented challenges to undergraduate
student success, including the fact that Hispanic STEM students persist in STEM
at a lower rate than their non-Hispanic peers. Communities of Practice (CoPs) –
groups of people who share a common concern and work and learn together – will
be developed among students, faculty, and administrators to ensure longer term
retention of students and create institutional transformation by sustaining best
practices. Through this project, Kean will increase the number of faculty
engaging in research with undergraduates, and who are also trained in culturally
responsive mentoring. These practices are intended to increase student
retention, job readiness, and improve participants' sense of
belonging.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Key to this Scholars Academy will be three CoPs
fostered as part of the project activities. To foster these communities,
activities will be implemented based on smaller programs already piloted in two
academic units at Kean. The first such activity is to build a community of
student scholars, and meet the needs of students during critical attrition
points, by offering a STEM major-specific version of the "Transition to Kean”
first-year seminar. First- and second-year courses with high D, F, and
withdrawal (DFW) rates will be targeted for supplemental instruction using peer-
mentoring and peer-led team learning. Secondly, students will engage in small
faculty-led research teams using the Computing Alliance for Hispanic Serving
Institutions’ (CAHSI) Affinity Research Group model, with progress over multiple
years and mentoring by senior-level students. A third activity involves
implementing signature practices from CAHSI and Kean’s Center for Teaching and
Learning to provide a variety of faculty professional development experiences
aimed at enhancing advising and faculty pedagogy. A fourth and final activity is
to form a team of faculty and administrators who will participate in an
institutional transformation CoP that will help the project iteratively improve
and institutionalize key project components. Project research will generate new
knowledge on the effectiveness of the project's main interventions and what
mechanisms supported the persistence and institutionalization of specific
practices. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden
participation in STEM, and build capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given
the diverse nature and context of the HSIs, requires innovative approaches that
incentivize institutional and community transformation and promote fundamental
research (i) on engaged student learning, (ii) about what it takes to diversify
and increase participation in STEM effectively, and (iii) that improves our
understanding of how to build institutional capacity at HSIs that are supported
by this program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.