* 2247254
* Topics in Discrete Harmonic Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Michael Lacey, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 05/31/2026
* USD 400,134.00

Averages give basic insights into a wide range of objects, since they aggregate
complex data into a single number. They appear, in different forms, in many
areas of mathematics. The central topic will be a study of averages over prime
numbers as they appear in an important class of generalizations of prime
numbers, the abstract number field settings. This infinite class of prime number
fields sheds light on the underlying principles that govern prime numbers. It
turns out that the commonalities and differences in proofs about these questions
in the number field settings give new insights into traditionally evasive
questions about prime numbers. These questions include the so-called Goldbach
conjectures, patterns that emerge in prime numbers, as well as related and new
questions. The research will be conducted in parallel with a training program
for a next generation of STEM students, and emerging researchers. For example,
continued training of graduate students will take place, and as well lead a
program instructing 700 High School students from about 70 High Schools across
the state of Georgia in dual enrollment classes such as Linear Algebra and
Vector Calculus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A vigorous program of study in discrete
harmonic analysis will be carried out. A range of questions in the number field
setting promise new insights into even classical questions like the Goldbach
conjecture in the number field setting. These insights come about by a delicate
analysis of the Fourier transforms of averages over prime numbers, as the most
accessible example. So, questions about Goldbach conjecture are then related to
the second and third order convolutions of the averages. Further questions about
multilinear averages in the number field setting will be pursued. Subject to
research will be novel questions concerning averages over surfaces that combine
important elements of continuous and discrete elements. This research will
complement the continuing study of commutators, with a range of new results
about the Schatten norms of the operators under
investigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.