* 2247020
* The Catalyst-Controlled Regioselective Functionalization of Aromatics
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Jeffrey Gustafson, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 06/30/2026
* USD 556,583.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis and Chemical Catalysis Programs in
the Division of Chemistry, Professor Jeffrey Gustafson of San Diego State
University is studying new approaches to modifying fine chemicals and
pharmaceutical intermediates. Aromatic compounds are common building blocks
throughout synthetic and pharmaceutical chemistry, however the chemical
reactions of aromatic molecules to give value-added commodities is often
hindered because it results in the generation of multiple products,
necessitating costly purification sequences. Dr. Gustafson and his team are
studying new chemical reactions aimed at controlling the selective modification
of both simple and complex aromatic scaffolds, ultimately resulting in more
efficient synthetic strategies towards molecules of interest to the academic and
pharmaceutical communities. In addition to providing training in organic
chemistry for graduate and undergraduate students, this project also impacts the
education more broadly in that it proposes to incorporate Virtual Reality
experiences to aid students in the 3-dimensional visualization of molecules.
Virtual Reality will also be utilized in outreach programs aimed at SDSU’s
general population, as well as local high schools and community colleges.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Gustafson and his team of collaborators and
students design ‘organocatalysts’ that affect the regioselective C-H
functionalization of simple and complex aromatics through electrophilic aromatic
substitution and related aromatic radical functionalization reactions. These
transformations traditionally yield poor regioselectivities, often preventing
them from being adopted as viable synthetic strategies, particularly in more
complex settings. For the addition of electrophiles into aromatics, the
Gustafson group designs bifunctional Lewis basic catalysts that intercept and
direct the electrophile, or electrophilic radical to a specific position. The
Gustafson group is also exploring similar strategies for the functionalization
of aromatics with nucleophiles in the context of nucleophilic aromatic
substitution and vicarious nucleophilic substitution. For the regioselective
addition of nucleophiles to aromatics, they utilize a broad array of classic
organocatalytic strategies including cation directed catalysis and hydrogen-
bonding catalysis. The ability to site-selectively modify simple and complex
aromatic systems greatly simplifies the syntheses of molecules and opens the
door for these chemistries to be used in the context of late-stage
functionalization strategies. In order to allow for the design of better and
more efficient catalysts, the Gustafson group is also performing mechanistic
studies with collaborators in computational chemistry and electrochemistry. The
site-selective modification of complex intermediates that this work enables has
the potential to transform how the late-stage structural optimization of
pharmaceuticals, materials and other functional molecules are carried
out.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.