* 2247651
* Transforming Amines into Complex Polycyclic Molecules and Bioactive Natural Products
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Andrew Roberts, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 05/31/2026
* USD 550,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Andrew G. Roberts of the University of Utah will develop new synthetic
methodology for the generation of complex polyaromatic compounds and
biologically important natural products. The new methodology involves iterative
carbon-nitrogen bond formation and cleavage en route to the construction of new
carbon-carbon bonds to generate the desired products. The planned research is
grounded in fundamental organic chemistry principles. Dr. Roberts and his
research team will establish the use of nitrogen-containing molecules (tertiary
amines) as templates for the assembly of carbon–carbon bond-containing compounds
that are difficult to obtain by other synthetic routes. These research efforts
will serve to train multiple students at the graduate and postdoctoral levels in
the practice of modern organic synthesis. The planned Broader Impacts activities
will align the chemistry research with productive outreach programs that include
chemistry visualization workshops and science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) promotion efforts through the integration of organic
chemistry-based scientist spotlight assignments in a sophomore-level organic
chemistry course.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The scientific goal of this research is
to understand the fundamental reactivity of tertiary amines and amine-derived
intermediates in transformations that involve carbon–nitrogen bond cleavages.
Efforts toward this broader goal will establish amine rearrangement and
deaminative methods for complex molecule synthesis. Preliminary research shows
that tertiary amines can undergo iterative methylation; rearrangement reactions
to enable the formation of difficult carbon–carbon bonds. The proposed research
will involve the design and application of synthesis logic to prepare simple
tertiary amine substrates, the use the tertiary amine to template carbon–carbon
bond forming cyclization reactions, and rearrangement or deamination of the
template with the formation of difficult-to-access carbon–carbon bonds of the
target products. The planned experiments will optimize reactivity for amine
methylation and ammonium-based group transfer chemistry, establish mechanistic
understandings for amine rearrangement and deaminative reactions, and
incorporate developed methods to complete concise syntheses of important
polycyclic molecules and bioactive natural products.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.