* 2247800
* CAS: 2D-WS2 Supported 2D-ZnO Nanoislands for Visible-Light-Driven Photocatalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/15/2023,08/31/2026
* Arjun Dahal, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* Francis D'Souza
* 08/31/2026
* USD 300,893.00

With support from the Chemical Catalysis (CAT) program in the Division of
Chemistry, and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive Research
(EPSCoR), Dr. Arjun Dahal of the University of South Alabama is studying
designing of innovative heterostructure photocatalysts, which have the potential
to become disruptive photocatalysts for environmentally benign and sustainable
energy production. Scientific breakthroughs in developing innovative and green
energy technologies can move economies away from fossil fuels, reducing the
effects of climate change. Hydrogen possesses the highest energy content per
weight among combustion fuels and produces only water as the product; therefore,
hydrogen is regarded as a promising "green fuel." Hydrogen production from the
photocatalysis process by splitting water utilizing sunlight and photocatalyst
materials is a promising method of generating clean energy. Designing innovative
photocatalysts is the primary step to realize efficient hydrogen production. Dr.
Dahal is developing innovative, low-cost, and potentially highly efficient
heterostructure photocatalysts comprising two-dimensional (2D) metal oxides and
2D transitional metal dichalcogenides. As part of the project, Dr. Dahal will
also examine the correlation between the photocatalytic efficiency of the
heterostructures to their size, density, chemical composition, and electronic
properties. The project will offer opportunities to train students in cutting-
edge nanoscale science within the context of modern energy and environmental
applications. The proposed research is strongly interdisciplinary and teaches
students physics and chemistry concepts that better prepare students for entry
into advanced degree programs and/or careers in academia and industry.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the Dahal research group is studying
fabrication methods and growth mechanisms of heterostructures incorporating
2D-ZnO and 2D-WS2. Dr. Dahal will implement the physical vapor deposition (PVD)
approach to grow 2D-ZnO nanoislands on the 2D-WS2 support prepared using the
chemical vapor deposition (CVD) method. PVD is a desirable method because it
enables the control over morphology, size, density, chemical composition, and
electronic properties of the heterostructures. Dr. Dahal will characterize
nanostructure morphology, size, and density using atomic force microscopy.
Photoemission will give insight into the chemical composition and electronic
states of these heterostructures, and the conducting mapping measurements should
provide additional insight into the quality of the interfaces. The PVD and CVD
growth methods have the potential to enable the formation of high-quality
interfaces. Dahal and his team will evaluate the photocatalytic efficiency by
measuring the rate of degradation of an organic dye solution in the presence of
these heterostructures under UV/visible irradiation. The group will also
directly quantify hydrogen evolution efficiency from water-splitting reactions
under light irradiation using the gas chromatography technique. Due to the
synergistic effects, the proposed heterostructures can potentially be more
efficient than conventional photocatalysts because they can offer a wider light-
harvesting range, enable a low probability of charge recombination, and provide
many active reaction sites on exposed surfaces. In terms of broader scientific
impact, this project has the potential to bring forward a new class of
photocatalysts using 2D metal oxides and 2D transition metal dichalcogenides and
is expected to provide useful information on the properties of the target
heterostructures such as crystallinity, crystallinity phases, surface
structures, band gap modifications, and defects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.