* 2247217
* Modular chemocatalysts for tunable and predictable C-H functionalization
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Jennifer Schomaker, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 05/31/2026
* USD 502,889.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis and the Chemical Synthesis Programs
in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Jennifer M. Schomaker of the University
of Wisconsin is studying the development of new earth abundant and inexpensive
catalysts to transform feedstock chemicals from petroleum and biorenewable
sources into valuable building blocks for pharmaceuticals, agrochemicals,
polymers, and fuels. The carbon-hydrogen (C–H) bond is the most common type of
chemical bond in organic compounds and it can be transformed into more valuable
bonds, including carbon-nitrogen (C–N) bonds. However, it is challenging to
achieve selectivity for a desired reaction at only one specific C–H bond when
there are multiple different C–H bonds in a molecule. In this project, Professor
Schomaker’s group is expanding the design of low-cost silver catalysts to
transform C–H bonds into C–N bonds in high yields and using this knowledge to
develop even less expensive catalysts based on the earth abundant metals iron
and copper. These catalysts generate less waste, deliver several useful products
from a single starting material, and streamline the preparation of selected
commercial drugs that contain at least one C–N bond. In terms of broader
impacts, Professor Schomaker participates in outreach programs to educate and
engage the general public, especially young women, in science. Her studies are
aimed at making her laboratory’s research and new catalysts appealing to
industry by showing how water can be used as an environmentally sustainable
solvent, exploring efficient electrochemical methods to reduce waste streams,
and collaborating with industry partners. Graduate and undergraduate students
benefit from these broader impacts through exposure to real world applications
of their chemistry and by receiving co-mentoring from industrial
colleagues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work being carried out in this project is
expected to lead to the development of low-cost, modular catalysts based on
silver, iron and copper for the tunable functionalization of C–H bonds to
upgraded C–N bonds. To address this issue, Professor Schomaker is pursuing both
the fundamental understanding and the practical applications of new catalytic
systems able to achieve predictable catalyst control of the chemo-, site-, and
stereoselective transformations of C–H bonds to C–N bonds through metal-
catalyzed nitrene transfer processes. She also plans to extend the utility of
these catalysts to selectively transform C–H bonds into more valuable C–C and
C–O bonds. These investigations will combine mechanistic, spectroscopic, and
computational studies (density functional theory and higher-level ab initio
methods such as CASSCF) to understand how the features of diverse and easily
prepared N- and P-donor ligands influence: 1) the electronic structures of the
resulting metal nitrenes and carbenes, 2) the dynamic behavior of reactive
intermediates, 3) non-covalent interactions between the substrate and catalyst
to control site-selectivity of the C–H functionalization, and finally, 4) the
ability to develop general, modular, and readily accessible catalysts for
enantioselective nitrene transfers. Ultimately, this work aims to establish
universal design principles to sustainably facilitate non-directed C–H
functionalization that overrides innate reactivity preferences. The scientific
broader impacts of this work will be expanded by applying these principles to a
diverse range of transition metal-catalyzed C–H bond oxidations. Additional
broader impacts include the ability to use non-chlorinated solvents for these
transformations, the employment of electrochemical methods to replace
stoichiometric oxidants, and the collaboration with industrial partners in
targeting late-stage modifications of drug scaffolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.