* 2247774
* GEM: Responses of Waves, Particles, and Precipitation to Solar Wind Dynamic Pressure Impulsive Changes
* GEO,AGS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2027
* Qianli Ma, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Chia-Lin Huang
* 05/31/2027
* USD 688,588.00

Solar wind dynamic pressure pulses are one of the most important sources that
can largely affect the Earthâ€™s magnetosphere-ionosphere system and include
positive pressure pulse (PPP; step-like increase with time) and negative
pressure pulse (NPP; step-like decrease with time). This research addresses a
fundamental question regarding the effects of PPP and NPP on various
magnetospheric waves, energetic electrons, and their precipitation, using multi-
point satellite observations and modeling. The scientific results will
significantly advance our current understanding of the Solar wind-Magnetosphere-
Ionosphere coupling, specifically the wave-particle dynamics, and interactions
in driving electron precipitation after solar wind dynamic pressure changes.
This project will support three early career researchers and a graduate student.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project uses solar wind dynamic pressure and Sym-H
index from the OMNI dataset to identify PPP and NPP events that hit the
magnetosphere and are geoeffective. Satellites near the equator (i.e., THEMIS,
Van Allen Probes, and MMS) provide plasma wave and electron measurements to
evaluate their properties after pressure pulses. Low-Earth-Orbit (LEO)
satellites (NOAA POES/MetOp) provide electron precipitation measurements to
quantify the global distribution of pressure pulse-induced electron
precipitation. Moreover, the Full Diffusion Code based on the quasi-linear
theory will be used to calculate bounce-averaged diffusion coefficients, which
will be further used to quantify electron precipitation driven by observed
plasma waves (i.e., hiss, chorus, and electromagnetic ion cyclotron waves). By
accomplishing these, the following science questions will be addressed. (1) How
do magnetospheric plasma waves, including hiss, chorus, and electromagnetic ion
cyclotron (EMIC) waves, respond to positive and negative solar wind pressure
pulses at various L shells and magnetic local times (MLTs)? (2) How do the
trapped energetic particles respond to positive and negative pressure pulses at
various L-MLT regions? (3) How does the energetic particle precipitation respond
to positive and negative pressure pulses at various L-MLT regions? (4) What are
the relative roles of these magnetospheric waves in causing energetic particle
precipitation during positive and negative pressure pulse
events?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.