* 2247096
* Shape Optimization, Free Boundary Problems, and Geometric Measure Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Dennis Kriventsov, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 08/31/2026
* USD 246,115.00

Optimizing a shape to have the best physical properties or make the most
efficient use of a material is a basic type of problem in applied mathematics,
appearing in the design of electronic components, insulation, aerodynamics,
imaging, acoustics, manufacturing, as well as in physical processes like the
formation of liquid drops and crystals. Mathematically, such optimal shapes are
interpreted as solutions to free boundary problems, a kind of generalized
differential equation where the edge of the shape is one of the unknowns being
solved for. Free boundary problems are a classical but difficult topic in
mathematical analysis, and the goal of this project is to develop more robust
tools for understanding the local and global characteristics of wider classes of
such equations. Better mathematical understanding may lead to smarter and safer
approaches to the applied problems through rigorous approximation schemes,
analysis of stability under perturbations, and rigid qualitative properties of
solutions. This project offers training opportunities for undergraduate
students, graduate students, and postdoctoral researchers, in a mathematical
area with important industrial applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific
topics to be considered include multi-phase or vectorial Bernoulli problems,
two-phase parabolic free boundary problems of various types, discontinuous
semilinear problems lacking scale invariance, free boundaries for nonlocal
operators, and transmission problems. One approach will focus on quantitative
monotonicity formula methods combined with geometric measure theory to prove
estimates for problems with little rigid structure. Another will be to develop
linearization arguments for situations currently outside the scope of known
approaches, where the tangent objects are relatively poor approximations for the
problem locally. A major focus of the project is on novel and improved
techniques which may be useful in a variety of contexts rather than on
individual problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.