* 2247755
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: Hardware Security Insights: Analyzing Hardware Designs to Understand and Assess Security Weaknesses and Vulnerabilities
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Ryan Kastner, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 06/30/2027
* USD 163,064.00

This project’s goal is to develop better methods for understanding how
information flows in computer hardware designs, and thus increase their
security. The microprocessors, wireless modems, graphics processing units, and
other hardware components at the heart of all computing devices are designed by
engineers using low-level hardware description languages. These designs are
complex, making it difficult to reason about security vulnerabilities that may
allow attackers to extract valuable secret information like cryptographic keys
and personally identifiable information. Hardware security verification aims to
identify hardware weaknesses, patch potential vulnerabilities, and mitigate the
harm of attacks. Understanding how information flows in hardware designs can
help verification engineers to assess whether secret data can be extracted by an
attacker and to develop designs that prevent those vulnerable
flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is structured around three main aims
that together will lead to improved tools for insights around hardware
information flow tracking. The first aim is to automate the generation of
information-flow properties, which can then be verified by existing tools. The
second is to develop testbenches that fully exercise possible information flows
through a design, using angelic execution oracles designed to maximize coverage
of possible information flows. The third is to develop a new “hyperflow
analysis” framework that provides both analytic representations to support
algorithms for hardware design and verification, and visual representations that
help verification engineers explore hardware vulnerabilities through an
information-flow lens. The work will involve a number of undergraduate and
graduate students, contributing to the development of the computer security
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.