* 2247729
* CAS: Molecular Design of Photoactive Covalent Organic Frameworks Capable of Reductive and Oxidative Degradation of Perfluoroalkyl Substances
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Rafael Verduzco, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Francis D'Souza
* 06/30/2026
* USD 434,507.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professors Thomas Senftle and Rafael Verduzco of Rice University are studying
the development of new photocatalytic materials for treating waters contaminated
with poly- and perfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS). PFAS molecules are collectively
known as “forever chemicals” because they do not break down naturally in the
environment and can accumulate in water, soil, and sources of food. Given the
health risks posed by such forever chemicals, new methods are urgently needed
for removing PFAS contamination from our waterways. To address this problem, the
research team will develop nanostructured, highly porous materials that are also
photocatalytically active, enabling the simultaneous adsorption and degradation
of PFAS to convert them to benign products. Specifically, the team is developing
photochemically-active covalent organic frameworks (COFs) for removal of PFAS
from water. COFs are fully organic macromolecules with a honeycomb-like
molecular structure, and the Rice scientists will seek to engineer these
materials to interact strongly with PFAS for both adsorption and photochemical
degradation. This project has the potential to advance the development of low-
cost approaches for remediating PFAS-contaminated water, toward ultimately
developing sustainable and economically viable approaches for water treatment.
The project also will establish new outreach activities. The PIs will host
students from a local community college to provide hands-on laboratory
experience for students who otherwise would have limited research opportunities.
The PIs also will work with teachers from a local high school through a Research
Experiences for Teachers (RET) program at Rice University, which will produce
high-quality learning modules to bolster K-12 STEM education in the Houston
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this project, Drs. Senftle and Verduzco and
their team will apply computational and experimental methods to develop covalent
organic frameworks (COFs) as photocatalysts for the degradation of poly- and
perfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS). The modular nature of COFs offers several
avenues for tuning their interactions with PFAS molecules, which can be used to
enhance adsorption and control catalytic degradation mechanisms. The group will
study a series of COF structures with variations in backbone and side-chain
functionalization, which is expected to enhance to provide knowledge of the
structure-property relationships that govern photocatalytic PFAS degradation
mechanisms in COFs. The combined use of simulation and experiment is expected to
lead to an improved understanding of the physical mechanisms that influence COF
performance both as an adsorbent and a photocatalyst. Studies will focus on
clarifying the influence of optoelectronic properties at the electronic scale to
better understanding molecular diffusion and adsorption at the atomic scale. The
project aims to deliver new design principles for enhancing PFAS adsorption and
degradation in photocatalytic COF materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.