* 2247798
* Magnetization and Electron Spin Dynamics of New Molecular 4f Architectures
* MPS,CHE
* 12/15/2023,11/30/2026
* Michael Nippe, Texas A&M University
* Standard Grant
* Francis D'Souza
* 11/30/2026
* USD 561,800.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms-B Program of
the Chemistry Division, Michael Nippe and his students in the Department of
Chemistry at Texas A&amp;M University are targeting the synthesis and study of
the magnetization and electron spin dynamics of several interesting classes of
compounds with potential as molecular magnets. Identifying structure-function
relationships of molecular spin manifolds is essential for the understanding of
how spin dynamics can be controlled and tuned and will lead to new molecular
platforms for quantum information science. Graduate students working on this
project will become experts in synthetic chemistry as well as in magnetic and
spectroscopic techniques that are needed to study the new molecules. The PI is
particularly dedicated to increasing diversity in the STEM (science, technology,
engineering and mathematics) areas as well as an ambassador for laboratory
safety and is a promoting and improving the departmental safety culture. The PI
also advocates for career paths in the STEM areas and takes a leading role as
regional coordinator in the national US Crystal Growing Competition. This active
outreach program targets K-12 students and teachers across the country and
provides first hands-on experience in crystal growth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under
this award, the research team led by Michael Nippe at Texas A&amp;M University
aims to provide synthetic access to hitherto unknown spin manifolds and in so
doing increase fundamental understanding of spin dynamics in organometallic
superparamagnets. The program will study (1) high-performance single-molecule
magnets (SMMs) based on novel strong field borolide complexes of 4f elements,
(2) temperature and magnetic field dependence of heterometallic 4f metal
complexes with strong 4f···4f interactions and magnetically coupled ground
states, and (3) electron spin coherence times of new organometallic platforms
that exhibit spin frustration and toroidal magnetic ground states that can be
coupled to electron spins of a rare earth ion. In terms of broader scientific
impact, the molecular spin manifolds being developed in this project have
potential for future application in quantum information
technologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.