* 2247027
* Topics in the Analysis of Nonlinear Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Vladimir Sverak, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2026
* USD 582,898.00

Some of the most useful models of natural phenomena use classical field theories
and continuum mechanics. In these models, the objects aiming to describe reality
are functions defined in regions of space-time and satisfying certain partial
differential equations. The research carried out by the PI focuses on the
equations arising in the context of fluid mechanics. The solutions of partial
differential equations are usually described by an infinite number of
parameters. This is a complication, but the reward is that the resulting models
are in some sense canonical. For example, once we make a small number of very
reasonable assumptions about fluid motion, we necessarily end up with the
incompressible Navier-Stokes equation. There is essentially no ambiguity about
what the model should be, and the Navier-Stokes equation is widely used in
science and engineering, from airplane design, weather prediction, and climate
modeling to computations of various water flows. To be able to perform computer
simulations of the equations, it is necessary to reduce the continuum models to
models described by finitely many parameters. However, this step is not
canonical, there are many reasonable ways of doing it. When the continuum model
is well-understood mathematically, its reductions to finite-dimensional models
and their relations are relatively well understood. Of course, one should not
overstate this - even in that case there are still many interesting open
problems. However, our mathematical understanding of the Navier-Stokes equation
is quite incomplete, and that makes the interpretations of the results from its
finite-dimensional reductions harder. One way to think about the research in
this project is that it aims to contribute to filling this gap in our knowledge
and ultimately make our modeling more efficient. The project provides research
training opportunities for graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;At a more
technical level, this project focuses on the following topics: (i) Well-
posedness, (non)-uniqueness, backward uniqueness, and critical situations for
basic equations. In recent years, important advances have been made concerning
well-posedness and non-uniqueness for the Navier-Stokes and related equations,
but important basic questions still remain open. For example, can the solution
operator be continuously extended from smooth solutions to spaces with
topologies generated by natural physical quantities such as energy? Are
regularity estimates in two-dimensional domains with boundary saturated by some
solutions? (ii) Steady-state solutions of the three-dimensional Navier-Stokes
equation and deformations of Serrinâ€™s swirling vortex. The study of steady-state
solutions, in addition to being of independent practical interest, provides
insights for improving our understanding of time-dependent solutions. In this
project, the focus is on deformations of certain known classes of solutions (due
to Serrin) with symmetries to solutions with fewer symmetries. It is worth
pointing out that both Serrin's solutions and the deformations envisaged here
have connections to tornadoes; (iii) Liouville Theorems and related linear
problems. Liouville theorems aim to describe global bounded solutions in all
space-time and are closely related to open regularity questions about the
equation. In this project, they are studied mostly in the steady-state setting.
Their study also leads to interesting linear problems that will be addressed;
(iv) One-dimensional models, including the study of possible avoidance of
singularities by generic forcing for the quaternionic Burgers model and the
global well-posedness and more detailed solution behavior for the De Gregorio
model. There are many open problems even at the level of the one-dimensional
models. These problems should provide good steppingstones towards improving our
understanding and eventually applying the lessons learned from studying these
models to higher dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.