* 2247900
* Addressing Water Security: towards Student Retention, Improved Relevance, and Increased Readiness
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2025
* Howard Marquise, Northwest Vista College
* Standard Grant
* Mary Crowe
* 04/30/2025
* USD 100,000.00

San Antonio is one of the fastest-growing regions in the nation and represents
an urban center whose natural resources are struggling to keep up with the
demand. In Texas, total water demand is predicted to increase by 17% between
2020 and 2070. Texas A&amp;M University-San Antonio (TAMU-SA) is a burgeoning
Hispanic-Serving university, with a rapidly increasing enrollment despite
decreasing national trends. It has a unique water resources program that aims to
generate graduates capable of responding to the region's water security
challenges. This project will help increase student recruitment to this
signature STEM program supportive of diverse students, including those currently
employed in the water sector, to tackle water-related issues in the region.
Importantly, this project will generate data that will be broadly useful in
understanding factors that can increase enrollment in these types of degrees
across the country. This data will be of use to other programs with a focus on
water across the country as well as those serving a post-traditional student
population.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to address three
challenges associated with the Water Resources Science and Technology (WaTR)
program at TAMU-SA. First is low enrollment in the program, particularly of
women. Second is the opportunity to integrate consideration of local water
issues into the existing WaTR and STEM curricula. Third is limited access to
opportunities for pre- and in-service professional and career development for
students and current water professionals. This project will promote water
workforce readiness and advancement for those currently employed in the water
workforce. It will improve recruitment by working with admissions personnel and
through outreach activities at high schools and community colleges. The project
team will work alongside local water utility providers and stakeholders and
utilize peer mentoring by current students and alumni of the program, and
current graduate students enrolled in the M.S. degree component. The project
leaders will develop a sustainable educational pathway of enhanced courses that
is amplified through connecting coursework to issues of local concern; student
engagement with cutting-edge and emerging water science technology; culturally
relevant, context-based pedagogies; field experiences and tours of local plants;
and internships with water-related collaborators. Lastly, the project will
promote readiness for all students, through community science programs, high-
impact projects, classroom-based undergraduate research experiences, and new or
revised research-intensive courses to lay the groundwork for research careers
and training. Through recruitment, relevance, and readiness, the project seeks
to diversify the pre- and in-service professionals addressing water issues in
regional, state, national, and international contexts, and to respond to the
local pressing issues of water access, protection, and conservation. The HSI
Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in
STEM, and build capacity of transformational improvement at HSIs. Achieving
these aims, given the diverse nature and context of the HSIs, requires
innovative approaches that incentivize institutional and community
transformation and promote fundamental research (i) on engaged student learning,
(ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase participation in STEM
effectively, and (iii) on developing understanding of how to build institutional
capacity at HSIs are supported by this program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.