* 2247716
* Developing a Conceptual Framework for the Rare Dual-release Photochemistry of Sulfoximines and Sulfondiimines.
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Ryan McCulla, Saint Louis University
* Standard Grant
* Francis D'Souza
* 06/30/2026
* USD 495,964.00

With the support of the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms-B (CSDM-B)
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Ryan McCulla of the Department of
Chemistry at Saint Louis University will investigate the photochemistry of
sulfoximines and sulfondiimines which are capable of releasing two different
reactive intermediates upon irradiation with light. The goal of this research is
to establish general principles that govern the sequence of photorelease of
reactive intermediates by sulfoximines and sulfondiimines. Sulfoximines are one
of the few classes of compounds that are capable of undergoing dual-release
photochemistry, and this project is expected to establish which properties
regulate the sequence of release. By providing a basis to control the sequence
of photorelease, this project is expected to facilitate the development of dual-
release photochemistry for uses in biochemical assays and phototherapies. Summer
research opportunities and events promoting scientific career options for high
school students from underrepresented groups will also be part of the funded
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The generation of two different reactive
intermediates from a single chromophore is a rare occurrence in photochemistry.
One of the few examples is the release of nitrenes and atomic oxygen from
dibenzothiophene sulfoximines upon irradiation with light. The scarcity of
systems capable of undergoing dual-release photochemistry means there is no
conceptual framework to predict which properties will control the sequence of
release. Thus, the overall objective of this project is to establish the general
principles that govern dual-release photochemistry by investigating the
photochemistry of thiophene-based sulfoximines. Specifically, the effect of
modulating the bond dissociation energies and the excited state properties on
the sequence of release will be interrogated with computational and
spectroscopic methods. The second important objective of this proposal is to
test the generality of the proposed framework by examining if the principles
observed for sulfoximines can predict the sequence of release for
sulfondiimines. The intriguing potential of dual-release photochemistry arises
from the proximity that two reactive intermediates can be produced, which is
expected to allow two transient intermediates to combine to form new
intermediates that are inaccessible by other means.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.