* 2247582
* Geometry of Wasserstein and Transportation Cost Metrics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Christopher Gartland, Texas A&M University
* Continuing Grant
* Constanze Liaw
* 06/30/2026
* USD 31,626.00

The “Wasserstein-1 metric”, also known as earth mover's metric, is a measurement
of distance between probability distributions quantifying the least cost needed
to transport the mass of one distribution onto the other. This metric appears
not only in pure mathematics, but frequently in applied mathematics and computer
science as well. For example, a digital image may be modeled abstractly as a
probability distribution over a 2-dimensional region, and the Wasserstein
distance provides a natural measurement of similarity of images under this
model. Despite their pervasiveness, these metrics are often difficult to
compute, and large aspects of their geometric properties remain poorly
understood. This project aims to advance this theory, with a particular emphasis
on approximations of Wasserstein metrics through simpler metrics, such as the
classical p-metrics on Euclidean spaces. The project also serves to increase the
participation of underrepresented groups in mathematics through organization of
conferences and seminars with diverse speakers and
participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In calculating the Wasserstein distance
between two distributions, the cost of transporting mass depends on the geometry
of the underlying metric space on which the distributions are defined. A main
goal of the project is to classify those metric spaces whose Wasserstein-1
metric admits a biLipschitz embedding into the Banach space L1. One side of this
question will involve showing the nonexistence of L1-embeddings for certain
metric spaces, and on this side the methodology to be used will largely be based
on concepts from analysis on fractals. The other side of the challenge will be
to show that L1-embeddings do exist for other metric spaces, and towards this
end an incorporation of tools from geometric measure theory and metric geometry
is planned. Finally, the current methods of proof for existing results rely
heavily on the linear theory of Banach spaces. Another main goal of this project
is to develop nonlinear methods that yield new insights into existing results as
well as provide approaches toward solutions of questions unattainable via linear
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.