* 2247194
* CAS-SC: Elucidating the Electrocatalytic Coupling of Nitrate and Carbon Dioxide: Toward Electron Efficient C-N Coupling
* MPS,CHE
* 04/15/2023,03/31/2026
* Suljo Linic, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 03/31/2026
* USD 322,833.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Nirala Singh, Bryan Goldsmith, and Suljo Linic of the University of Michigan are
studying the production of urea, an important fertilizer, using renewable
electricity, carbon dioxide, and nitrate from wastewater. Urea is currently
manufactured using ammonia. Ammonia production for urea synthesis emits large
quantities of carbon dioxide because ammonia is produced by first converting
natural gas to hydrogen and carbon dioxide, then combining hydrogen and nitrogen
at high temperatures. The proposed process will instead use low-temperature
electrochemical methods powered by renewable electricity to couple carbon
dioxide and nitrate to directly produce urea with much less carbon dioxide
emissions. This research has the potential for a paradigm shift in the
production of urea while mitigating two harmful air and water pollutants. The
project will engage elementary schoolers about STEM (science, technology,
engineering and mathematics) through the Grizzly Scholar program and provide
high school students with research experience each summer through a Summer High
School Apprentice Researchers Program. These educational programs aim to foster
development of the next generation of STEM students.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Under
this project the team of Nirala Singh, Bryan Goldsmith, and Suljo Linic of the
University of Michigan is studying electrocatalytic C-N coupling using carbon
dioxide and nitrate. Through a joint computational and experimental approach,
they will study the reaction mechanism of carbon dioxide and nitrate coupling on
metal alloys with a target of increasing selectivity to urea. They will measure
the effects of partial pressure of carbon dioxide and concentration of nitrate
to identify potential reaction mechanisms and compare with atomistic modeling
studies to identify rate-determining and selectivity-determining steps. They
will use Raman and X-ray absorption spectroscopies to characterize the
electrocatalysts under reaction conditions to better understand the reaction
mechanism. They will also investigate the role that linear adsorbate scaling
relations have on limiting the urea selectivity, and how the use of novel alloy
compositions can avoid these limitations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.