* 2247387
* Planar Capillary Electrophoresis
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Robert Dunn, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Jose Almirall
* 08/31/2026
* USD 308,318.00

With support from the Chemical Measurement and Imaging (CMI) Program in the
Division of Chemistry (CHE) and co-funding from the Established Program to
Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), Professor Robert Dunn and his group at
the University of Kansas are developing innovative, cost-effective approaches
for rapidly analyzing complex mixtures. Mixtures such as blood and urine contain
thousands of molecules that reflect the normal functions taking place within the
human body. Hidden within these complicated fluids can be molecular clues about
diseases or disorders, that if detected early can aid in their treatment. Dr.
Dunn and his group are developing new approaches to rapidly detect these
molecules by separating mixtures through small capillaries that are as thin as a
human hair. The thin wall of the capillary enables unique control over
fundamental separation parameters which will be developed to enhance detection.
The research plan combines fundamental studies with applied measurements and
elements of engineering, thus exposing students to a highly interdisciplinary
and collaborative research environment. Combined with a novel sample droplet
delivery system, the fully integrated analysis platform has the potential to
provide significant new capabilities for separations science. This research
project will train undergraduate and graduate students in a highly collaborative
and interdisciplinary environment, leading to enhanced opportunities for
professional development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Planar capillary electrophoresis
(PCE) uses a short length capillary to rapidly separate and detect species in
complex mixtures. The PCE uses a 10 cm total length capillary (50 um i.d. x 80
um o.d.) with an ultra-thin capillary wall (15 um) that efficiently dissipates
heat and mitigates the effects of Joule heating. The utiization of an ultra-thin
wall provides particular opportunities for developing new approaches and probing
fundamental processes. For example, it facilitates the use of an externally
applied field to modify the zeta potential and control electroosmotic flow
(EOF). This allows facile control of the EOF and leads to a significant increase
in peak efficiency. The mechanism for the latter will be fully explored through
experiment and simulation and optimized to improve performance. The thin
capillaries are also highly flexible, enabling looped geometries that bring the
separation path across the detection zone multiple times. This will be developed
for kinetic studies of ligand-binding. Finally, the small capillary diameter
will enable coupling with digital microfluidics (DMF) to develop fully
integrated analysis and economical platforms that have great potential in terms
of versatility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.