* 2247797
* Taming the Complexity of High Entropy Alloy for Catalysis using Multinary Intermetallics
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Michael Janik, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Michel Dupuis
* 05/31/2026
* USD 599,814.00

With support from the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Robert Rioux and Michael Janik of the Pennsylvania State University will examine
the reactivity of multinary alloys for selective hydrogenation catalysis.
Catalysts made with many metal constituents, referred to as “high entropy
alloys,” may offer new avenues for improved performance. However, understanding
the multi-metal interactions is complex due to the large number of structures
that form when mixing many metals together. This collaborative research team
will pursue an effort to identify and quantify these complex interactions in
catalysts with up to five different metals using a structurally defined alloy,
called an intermetallic, to reduce the structural complexity. These alloys will
contain from three to five different metals allowing the team to probe these
complex metal interactions by systematically incorporating more metals into the
alloy structure. Using a combined experimental and computational approach, the
team aims to understand the origin(s) of the catalytic behavior of
compositionally-diverse intermetallics for selective hydrogenation of alkynes
and alkenes. Through this project, Drs. Rioux and Janik will help to train the
next generation of catalytic scientists to solve fundamental and applied
problems in chemical catalyst design and optimization. There will a significant
participation of undergraduates in research as part of this projecting,
leveraging established recruitment programs at Pennsylvania State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The γ-brass intermetallic structure offers
well-defined and controllable distribution of its atomic constituents among four
symmetry inequivalent sites. Precise stoichiometric control during solid-state
synthesis enables preparation of M8-11Zn44-41 systems that distribute M (Pd, Ni)
atoms either isolated by all Zn nearest neighbors or in small M3 clusters. Rioux
and Janik of the Pennsylvania State University will prepare, characterize, and
examine the reactivity of ternary, quaternary, and quinary γ-brass systems
generated by substituting some number of Pt, Ir, Cu, and/or Au atoms. Controlled
introduction of compositional complexity is designed to enable the development
of a quantitative catalysis science of high entropy materials through a
combined, multi-faceted experimental and computational study. H2-D2 exchange and
ethylene hydrogenation are highly sensitive to the composition of the trimer
sites, while selective hydrogenation of 1,3-butadiene will probe selectivity on
the trimer active site composition. Interpretation of the observed catalytic
activity-selectivity will be aided by rigorous characterization of γ-brass
intermetallic microstructure, crystal structure, and methods to characterize the
trimer sites present on γ-brass HEIs. Computational efforts based on DFT- and
cluster-expansion calculations will define stable bulk and surface trimer
assemblies as a function of multinary γ-brass intermetallic composition. DFT
calculations of elementary reaction energetics will inform microkinetic models
to compare rates, with the hypothesis that rates on surfaces distributing an
array of site compositions will be a simple sum of rates on individual sites due
to site isolation in the Zn host.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.