* 2247351
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Creation and implementation of an early warning system for sand dune remobilization
* SBE,BCS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Ronald Dorn, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Tom Evans
* 05/31/2025
* USD 31,381.00

Approximately one-third of the global population lives in arid regions, where
drought has been increasing in duration and intensity under modern climate
change. Drought conditions have been connected to dune remobilization, which is
the transition of a dune field from stable to active. Remobilization can have
detrimental effects on those living in arid lands, including impacts on
infrastructure, agriculture, and human health. To date, remobilization and its
impact on surrounding communities has been noted in several studies from around
the globe. While studies on dune remobilization exist, they often focus on dune
fields after movement has begun. However, if remobilization can be detected in
its early stages, it allows communities to engage in proactive dune management
strategies rather than the reactive approaches being used in many places today.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This doctoral dissertation project investigates sand dune
remobilization to inform an early warning system for remobilization. First, a
study of paleoclimate-dune interactions is undertaken to determine the climate
required for modern remobilization. Sand dune formation, activity, and
stabilization have often been correlated with changes in climate, so determining
the climatic impact on sand dunes from the past can inform climate-dune
interactions in the future. Second, connections between historical climate,
drought, and vegetation change are established under the prediction that
increased drought conditions will reduce vegetation. Vegetation is a landscape
stabilizer, so tracking vegetation loss over time can provide an early warning
of a soon-to-be remobilizing dune field. Lastly, dune color is presented as a
proxy for the presence of sand grain coatings, which are comprised of iron and
clay and act not only as a landscape stabilizer but also exhibit an orange-red
color that can be observed using remotely sensed imagery. Research
investigations will combine a suite of methods, including paleoenvironmental
analyses, remote sensing, and scanning electron microscopy that have not yet
been used together for dune remobilization studies. Research products and
findings will inform an early warning system for dune remobilization in arid
regions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.