* 2247822
* CAS: Collaborative Research: Mapping Excited State Trajectories of Multi-metal Centered Complexes by Two-Dimensional Electronic Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 08/15/2023,07/31/2026
* Felix Castellano, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Francis D'Souza
* 07/31/2026
* USD 288,227.00

With support of the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms B Program of
the Chemistry Division, Professor Lin X. Chen of the Department of Chemistry at
Northwestern University and Professor Felix N. Castellano of the Department of
Chemistry at North Carolina State University seek to understand the effects of
vibronic coherence in excited state photochemical and photophysical processes
for energy and electron transfer reactions. This project aims to gain new
insights into light-matter interactions at the levels of electrons and atoms and
use this knowledge to leverage controlled reactivity in condensed phases,
molecular photonics, and photocatalysis via both chemical structural tuning and
light modulation. The knowledge obtained through the proposed studies has the
potential to significantly enhance our ability to rationally design chemical
materials/devices for catalysis, optoelectronics, and energy sustainability. The
proposed research engages University graduate students in advanced laser
spectroscopy for characterization, incorporates state-of-the-art computational
chemistry, and utilizes advanced chemistry laboratory facilities for molecular
syntheses and structural characterization, engendering multidisciplinary
scientific expertise. The proposed research and education activities are
integrated with K-12 public outreach events at both institutions.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The collaborative team will investigate the effects of
vibronic coherence in excited state electron transfer in three classes of multi-
chromophore synthetic platforms using two-dimensional electronic spectroscopy
(2DES) and broadband transient absorption (BBTA) spectroscopy. The three
specific molecular platforms are (1) new generation Pt(II) co-facial dimers
featuring terminal tridentate cyclometalating ligands bridged by a single
substituted pyrazolate, hydroxypyridine, mercaptopyridine, or diphosphine
featuring metal-metal-to-ligand charge transfer (MMLCT) excited states where a
metal-metal bond is transiently formed following light excitation; (2) Pt(II)
dimers from (1) whose terminal cyclometalating ligands are decorated with
naphthalenediimide (NDI)-based electron acceptors; and (3) co-facial self-
assembled polynuclear aggregates formed from Pt(II) monomer building blocks with
and without electron acceptors. These experimental systems are engineered to
tune electronic coupling in their excited states, which are either responsible
for or can be correlated to electronic and vibronic coherence originating from
in-phase nuclear motions induced by photon excitation. The detection of
electronic and vibronic coherences in these designed molecules will be assessed
using broadband 2DES featuring ~7 femtosecond time resolution and sufficiently
broad spectral bandwidth. The measured coherences will be correlated with
photophysical processes and photoinduced intramolecular electron transfer
chemistry, rationalized using continuously developing theory to assess the role
of electronic and/or vibronic coherence in these fundamental primary processes
related to light activation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.