* 2247514
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Medium: Understanding and Combatting Impersonation Attacks and Data Leakage in Online Advertising
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2027
* Paul Pearce, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* James Joshi
* 06/30/2027
* USD 101,118.00

Online advertising networks track which websites people visit and what they do
on those websites. Ad networks perform such tracking to develop a comprehensive
understanding of people's activity across their devices in order to sell
advertisements related to those activities. Unfortunately, the way ad networks
combine information from different devices into a singular understanding of a
given person is insecure and can allow a malicious party on the Internet to
learn sensitive information about the user such as what websites they visit,
what products they purchased, or what hotels they visited. This project's novel
contributions are the identification of this new kind of threat to user privacy,
ways of identifying when ad networks track users across their devices, and
developing tools to help people understand what information ad networks know and
retain about them. The project's broader significance and importance are how it
will help protect people's privacy while also educating them on the
pervasiveness and specificity of online tracking, allowing them to make more
informed decisions about their online
activities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Identifying and combating ad network privacy
threats requires an investigation of ad networks, web browsers, and measurement
methods. This project will improve user privacy via three interconnected
investigations. The project will: 1) Define and enumerate a new class of privacy
threat stemming from ad networks' efforts to correlate user activity across
devices, including systematizing an understanding of this threat's full attack
surface and impact on user privacy across the Internet. 2) Develop a suite of
robust statistical methods to detect when ad networks link devices together
based on observed advertising behaviors that will enable understanding how ad
networks track users independent of environment or computing platform. 3) Create
a set of tools that will educate and empower users to understand what data and
inferences ad networks have made, and if ad networks are respecting data
deletion requests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.