* 2247230
* Flexibility and Rigidity in Dynamics and Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Alena Erchenko, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Jan Cameron
* 06/30/2026
* USD 200,377.00

The field of dynamical systems aims to understand how mathematical systems
change over time according to a set of rules. It is an active and growing area
of mathematical research that is vital in its own right, and has profound
interactions with many other fields. Dynamical systems can model a variety of
phenomena, from the motion of the human heart to the spread of disease within a
population. Since systems often demonstrate chaotic behavior, it is natural to
study them through the lens of their underlying geometric structure and
dynamical invariants. By studying flexibility and rigidity phenomena in
dynamics, the PI will investigate various relationships between these invariants
and structural properties, thereby revealing new features of smooth dynamical
systems and the geometry of manifolds. Thus, structural aspects of dynamical
systems will be clarified with the goal of making the tools of dynamics more
readily applicable in other areas of mathematics, as well as other scientific
fields. As part of the proposed project, the PI aims to involve undergraduate
and graduate students in exploring the behavior of some low-dimensional systems
with computer experiments in the context of flexibility and
rigidity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goals of the project split into two
distinct directions. First, the PI will develop techniques to construct
uniformly hyperbolic systems, such as geodesic flows on negatively curved
manifolds and Anosov volume-preserving diffeomorphisms, in a fixed class with a
particular collection of invariants such as entropies and Lyapunov exponents.
Concurrently, the PI will determine the natural restrictions on those invariants
in a fixed class and search for relations that imply new instances of dynamical
and/or geometric rigidity. The second main goal is to produce natural measures
that encode dynamical behavior and have good statistical properties in new cases
with a focus on non-conformal repellers and geodesic flows on CAT(0) spaces.
This project is jointly funded by the Analysis Program of the Division of
Mathematical Sciences and the Established Program to Stimulate Competitive
Research (EPSCoR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.