* 2247525
* Light Detection and Ranging Technology Instruction for Future Technician Education and Development
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Jay Seidel, Fullerton College
* Standard Grant
* Paul Tymann
* 06/30/2026
* USD 345,514.00

Light detection and ranging technology, also known as LiDAR, underpins advanced
remote sensing systems used to detect, identify, and create a precise 3D virtual
image of an object. The automotive industry has driven much of the current
interest in LiDAR. Many modern safety features found in cars and trucks rely on
LiDAR. Autonomous vehicles use LiDAR to identify and avoid obstructions, other
vehicles, and people. In addition, LiDAR is now being used in a wide range of
other applications such as mapping, infrastructure inspection, utilities, and
architecture, resulting in a growing demand for technicians skilled in LiDAR
technology. This project will address the demand for skilled LiDAR technicians
by creating a certificate program that will allow students in various majors and
fields to become proficient in the use of LiDAR technology. Students will learn
how LiDAR can be applied to their industry of interest, resulting in an increase
in the number and variety of students prepared for employment as LiDAR
technicians.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will focus on the use of LiDAR
use in a wide range of areas, such as three-dimensional (3D) structure scanning,
precision roof and building inspection, and site analysis for development, to
include realistic 3D scans of buildings for virtual walkthroughs, accurate
measurements, virtual inspections of structural integrity, and many other
applications. There are three overarching goals of the project. First is to
create two LiDAR courses that address the emerging need for skilled technicians.
Second is to create a certificate program to address the use of LiDAR in
architecture. Third, and finally, is to recruit and retain a diverse population
of successful students who represent the surrounding community with an emphasis
on marginalized populations. This project will serve as a model for other
academic institutions interested in developing a comprehensive program aimed to
help address the shortage of well-qualified and skilled LiDAR technicians. This
project is funded by the Advanced Technological Education program that focuses
on the education of technicians for the advanced technology fields that drive
the nation's economy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.