* 2247747
* A Comprehensive Program in Rigidity
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Andriy Gogolyev, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Jan Cameron
* 07/31/2026
* USD 309,585.00

The focus of this research project mainly lies within the field of hyperbolic
dynamical systems, a subfield of mathematics which encompasses a wide range of
real-world systems that undergo changes over time. These systems can vary in
complexity, ranging from the free motion of a simple mechanical system to the
behavior of gas in a closed vessel. Hyperbolic dynamics studies the properties
and long-term behavior "on average" of such systems. The project will address
fundamental questions in hyperbolic dynamics that could potentially impact areas
such as physics, chemistry, and engineering, where chaotic dynamical systems
naturally arise. Additionally, the project has an educational component and
provides support for the training of graduate students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
rigidity program in rank one dynamics aims to establish a stronger form of
equivalence (such as smooth conjugacy) from a priori weaker forms of equivalence
(such as orbit equivalence or topological conjugacy), assuming the vanishing of
obstructions that are usually associated with periodic orbits (such as periods
of periodic orbits or eigenvalue data at periodic points). Recent ideas proposed
by the PI and collaborators open up a lot of new ground, especially for higher
dimensional systems. The PI will explore these new avenues for rigidity in
dynamics. Even more importantly, some of these ideas also enable progress in
neighboring areas. Accordingly, the PI plans to expand the rigidity program
beyond smooth dynamics questions, where tools of smooth dynamics could
potentially be transferred. For example, the PI plans to pursue marked and
weighted marked length spectrum rigidity on negatively curved
manifolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.