* 2247809
* Promoting Inclusive Teaching through the Scholarship of Teaching and Learning: A Faculty Learning Community Model
* EDU,DUE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Kathleen Quardokus Fisher, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 04/30/2026
* USD 423,900.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this project aims to support the adoption of
inclusive teaching practices by Science, Technology, Engineering, and
Mathematics (STEM) faculty through establishing a faculty learning community
focused on systematic inquiry into student learning. The focus of the learning
community’s efforts will be on inclusive teaching practices and concepts
centered on serving student needs while taking into account students’ complex
experiences; these practices will engage students, across their differences, in
learning activities. Faculty adoption of inclusive teaching practices is key to
realizing students’ academic success, and this project will address challenges
faculty face in implementation of inclusive teaching practices by determining
the necessary support they need to achieve this vision. Faculty learning
community members will collect data in their classrooms to investigate how their
students' backgrounds and classroom context influences the implementation of
evidence-based educational practices relating to inclusiveness and servingness.
This process will result in faculty translating education research results into
teaching practice, both to improve local outcomes and to disseminate broadly to
other STEM faculty. A faculty learning community built around the process of
inquiry focused on student learning will empower faculty to explore, adopt, and
use evidence to refine teaching practices. This project will contribute novel
findings and knowledge through the faculty's research projects on inclusive
teaching, as well as through the work of the research team who will investigate
how this systematic inquiry into student learning can be a mechanism for
supporting faculty change towards inclusive teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific aims of the project at Florida International University (FIU) are to
develop a three-year faculty learning community in which faculty will learn
educational theory regarding inclusiveness and servingness and Scholarship of
Teaching and Learning (SoTL) skills to investigate their application of these
practices. Through interviews, observations, and analysis of learning community
documents, the research team will investigate questions related to SoTL as a
mechanism for building faculty-level support for teaching initiatives. This
research will provide insight into ways in which implementing a faculty learning
community could enable HSI administrators to build local support for their
institutional vision. The project will also explore the articulation of the
complementary roles of scholarly inquiry and discipline-based education research
(DBER) at FIU, and additionally determine the contributions SoTL and DBER make
to each other, in the classroom, to a department, and to the university. The
project’s faculty SoTL investigations will likely result in improved classroom
experiences for students and significant change in faculty teaching practices
that could improve the classroom experiences of their future students. In
addition, the project will create structures and resources for other faculty to
conduct SoTL investigations and to build relationships with DBER faculty. The
HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation
in STEM, and build capacity for institutional transformation at HSIs. Achieving
these aims, given the diverse nature and context of the HSIs, requires
innovative approaches that incentivize institutional and community
transformation and promote fundamental research (i) on engaged student learning,
(ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase participation in STEM
effectively, and (iii) that improves understanding of how to increase
institutional capacity at HSIs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.