* 2247610
* Collaborative Research: Evolving thicker skin: Understanding how adaptations to a universal trade-off dictate the climate vulnerability and ecology of an imperiled vertebrate clade
* BIO,IOS
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Molly Womack, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Theodore Morgan
* 07/31/2026
* USD 498,279.00

Climate change is pushing many organisms towards their limits, forcing species
to move, evolve, or risk extinction. Frogs are among the most vulnerable species
on the planet with roughly a third already under threat of extinction. Frogs,
and other amphibians, can breathe across their skin. However, their permeable
skin leaves frogs sensitive to changes in temperature and humidity, which is
expected with climate change. Thus, understanding frog skin is key to
understanding how frogs will react to climate change. Yet, knowledge of anuran
skin evolution is surprisingly lacking. This project aims to measure variation
in skin form and permeability and determine how skin variation affects key
survival traits, like their ability to breathe and avoid dehydration. This
project accomplishes a major goal in ecology by incorporating organismal
physiology into predictions of climate vulnerability while simultaneously
expanding our knowledge of a critically threatened animal group. Furthermore,
frog “skin breathing” provides a framework to communicate complex topics ranging
from evolution (e.g., convergence and adaptation) to physiology (e.g., oxygen
transfer and water loss) to conservation (e.g., climate change). This project
will: 1) mentor Native American students at USU and historically excluded
students at ISU in research and 2) generate a low-cost, interactive, and
publicly accessible frog skin activity focused on inquiry and discovery-based
learning of evolutionary concepts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work
seeks to understand how a universal constraint underlying gas exchange dictates
climate vulnerability and ecology in an imperiled vertebrate clade. Balancing
the need for gas exchange with the risk of dehydration creates predictable
evolutionary trade-offs across the tree of life and has selected for adaptations
that decouple gas exchange from water loss (e.g. unique nasal morphologies in
mammals and birds, stomata density and size in plants). Despite understanding
the role of these clade-specific adaptations for promoting life in xeric
environments,relatively little is known about the evolution of universal
structures, such as skin. With their nearly worldwide distribution and reliance
on their skin for gas exchange, anurans are an ideal system to investigate how
skin has evolved to balance oxygen uptake and water loss in response to varying
environmental selection pressures. The proposed project has three aims: 1)
quantify how frog skin has evolved over the past 200 million years and in-
response to what abiotic and biotic factors, 2) experimentally test anuran
skin’s ability to decouple respiration and water loss, and 3) incorporate
physiological data into activity budget models to improve an understanding of
current anuran distributions and life-history evolution and predict species’
vulnerability to future climate change. Our integration of morphology,
physiology, and modeling will tie skin form and physiology to anuran ecology and
biogeography to improve our understanding of anuran distributions, life-history
evolution, and species’ vulnerability to future climate
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.