* 2247238
* Snowball Earth in Space and Time
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2025
* Francis Macdonald, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Yurena Yanes
* 06/30/2025
* USD 263,163.00

At least twice during the Cryogenian Period (720-635 million years ago), ice
covered the Earth for millions of years in Snowball Earth events. These are the
most extreme episodes of climate change in the geological record, but the
duration of glaciation and the rate of ice movement remain poorly constrained.
The research team will use sediment core of glacial deposits in Antarctica,
coupled with drone-based mapping and precise isotopic dating on Snowball Earth
deposits in Namibia, to construct a rate-dependent stratigraphic model. They
will also develop a research exchange between University of Namibia and UCSB to
train students in the field in Namibia and in the lab in California. This
training will occur during the course of geological field mapping and sample
analysis that is essential context for their research goals of constraining the
tempo and nature Snowball Earth, and will prepare students for careers in
Geosciences, including critical minerals. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The largest
uncertainty in the timeline of Cryogenian glaciations is the onset age of the
Marinoan glaciation, which is not only important for constraining the rate and
nature of glacial processes, but also mechanisms for initiation and
deglaciation. Previous studies have suggested that water-lain sediments
deposited during Snowball Earth are incompatible with a weak hydrologic cycle. A
proposed reconciliation is that during late stages of Snowball Earth with high
CO2, ice-sheets could respond to orbital forcing leading to a more active
hydrological cycle. However, because these studies have not been able to
constrain rate, it is unclear if the apparent cyclicity in these stratigraphic
sections is due to Quaternary-like orbital forcing or autogenic processes
internal to the ice sheet that have little to do with external forcings. The
researcher's preliminary U-Pb zircon geochronology and drone-based mapping data
document multiple datable volcanic horizons that can be used to constrain the
rate of grounding-line oscillation, and provide the first temporally
quantitative facies model for Snowball Earth glacial
deposits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.