* 2247211
* Boron-Functionalized pi-Conjugated Materials with Tailored Properties
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Frieder Jaekle, Rutgers University Newark
* Standard Grant
* John Gilje
* 06/30/2026
* USD 556,878.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis program of the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Frieder JÃ¤kle of the Department of Chemistry at Rutgers University-
Newark will investigate conjugated materials that are functionalized with boron-
nitrogen Lewis pairs. Conjugated materials are ones where electrons are
delocalized easily over extended distances. They play major roles as in organic
electronic devices and displays, photocatalysis, bioimaging, and therapeutics.
By introducing boron into a conjugated material its electronic structure can be
altered, which can result in desirable properties, for example, the absorption
and emission of near-infrared light and are important characteristics for bio-
imaging and biotherapeutic applications. This research addresses the need to
develop new methods to prepare such compounds in order, in the longer term, to
fully leverage their favorable properties in applications such as electronic
materials development and catalysis, and for deployment in biomedical
applications. In addition to the training of undergraduate and graduate
students, high school outreach programs are planned that allow students and
their teachers, including those from underrepresented groups, to experience
University research first-hand, learn about modern research tools, while also
being introduced to career opportunities in the science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics (STEM) fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
project explores the functionalization of organic conjugated materials with
boron-nitrogen (B-N) Lewis pairs as a means of tuning their electronic
structure, photophysical properties, and chemical reactivity. In one direction,
the research will target B-N Lewis pair-functionalized polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons that feature reduced gaps between the highest occupied and lowest
unoccupied molecular orbitals. Such systems are expected to absorb or emit in
the near-infrared region and/or exhibit electrochromic properties. In another
direction, heteroaromatic systems will be explored as potential chromophores for
photoredox catalysis. Finally, macrocycles are being developed that combine
luminescent, oxygen-responsive, and host-guest properties. The results are
expected to offer new fundamental insights into the properties of organic
materials that are functionalized with B-N Lewis pairs while also contributing
to the development of luminescent, electrochromic, photocatalytic, host-guest,
diagnostic and therapeutic materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.