* 2247232
* Computational Prediction of Enantioselectivity in Metal-Catalyzed Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Paul Helquist, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 05/31/2026
* USD 620,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professors Olaf Wiest and Paul Helquist at the University of Notre Dame are
developing computational methods for the fast and accurate prediction of the
stereochemical, or three-dimensional, outcomes of chemical reactions. In many
reactions, two different products known as enantiomers or mirror images can be
formed. For applications such as pharmaceuticals, sometimes only one of the
enantiomers is beneficial while the other may have no benefit or may even have
deleterious effects. Traditional methods based entirely on experimental studies
to find a means to selectively generate only one enantiomer are slow and
expensive. They make use of largely trial-and-error approaches often requiring
hundreds of experiments to be performed with expensive reagents and catalysts
and, in the meantime, generate unnecessary chemical waste. In contrast, the
computational methods that are the basis of the current project are a fast and
cost-efficient means to predict specific catalysts that will produce the desired
enantiomeric outcome. These predictions accelerate and support follow-up
experimental studies. This work will likely have a significant broader impact
because it is performed in close collaboration with AstraZeneca, a major
international pharmaceutical company. They not only incorporate the Notre Dame
methods into their process research to foster innovation, but also provide
unique professional development opportunities for the students working on the
project through industrial internships, interdisciplinary training at
AstraZeneca in Sweden, and regular interactions with industrial researchers. The
two lead investigators are strongly committed to broadening participation with a
long track record of offering undergraduate research opportunities to students
from underrepresented groups, as instructors in the Galvin Scholars Program for
students from less well-prepared educational backgrounds, and by serving as
mentors in the Building Bridges Program for underrepresented minority
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professors Helquist and Wiest at the University
of Notre Dame continue the development of a virtual screening tool for
enantioselective catalysis (CatVS) that uses transition state force fields
(TSFFs) derived using the quantum-guided molecular mechanics (Q2MM) method. This
includes several new methods for the optimization of TSFFs that improve the
accuracy of TSFF combinations with literature force fields, the semi-automation
of the fitting procedure using a hybrid epsilon-constraint/PSO method; improved
workflows for the generation and screening of virtual libraries (LibGen), new
interfaces to other programs for conformational searching and TSFFs for new
reactions selected by the team in collaboration with their industrial partners.
Once tested and validated, all new developments will be incorporated in the
Q2MM/LibGen/CatVS code that will continue to be available to the scientific
community free of charge at github.com/q2mm. The impact of this method will be
demonstrated in applications ranging from Ir-catalyzed hydroaminations of
unactivated alkenes through novel nickel-catalyzed cross-coupling reactions to
the computer-assisted design of new ligand classes for enantioselective
synthesis. The combined computational and experimental approach, combined with
the close collaboration with AstraZeneca, provides a unique interdisciplinary
training environment for undergraduate and graduate
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.