* 2247038
* RUI: Large Kinetic Isotope Effects as Mechanistic Indicators in Organometallic Chemistry
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Miriam Bowring, Reed College
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 05/31/2026
* USD 300,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms B Program of
the Chemistry Division, Miriam A. Bowring of the Department of Chemistry at Reed
College is working with undergraduate researchers to study the fundamental
mechanisms of chemical reactions with potential applications to greener
alternative fuels. One main tool for finding out how reactions work is the study
of reaction rates. It has been observed that some reactions involving hydrogen
are much faster than expected compared to the corresponding reactions with
deuterium. The researchers aim to determine the mechanisms that cause such
unusual observation, which could lead to improved understanding of chemical
reactivity. Furthermore, the group is collaborating with high school chemistry
teachers on research in reclaiming palladium in road dirt as a catalyst, which
may attract broader student interests in STEM (science, technology, engineering
and mathematics). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Anomalously large kinetic isotope
effects (KIEs) are occasionally observed during mechanistic investigations of
promising organometallic catalysts. The mechanistic origins of large KIEs are
not well understood, and are often ascribed to proton tunneling. The proposed
research encompasses mechanistic study of two systems with large observed KIEs:
protonolysis to release methane from platinum methyl complexes, and formic acid
dehydrogenation with an iridium-ruthenium bimetallic catalyst. To determine the
origins of the large KIEs in these systems, kinetic studies will be performed
while systematically adjusting variables such as reaction concentration,
stoichiometry, and temperature, properties of the organometallic fragments, and
the acid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.