* 2247748
* CAS: Bidirectional Molecular Catalysts to Control Dinitrogen Reduction and Ammonia Oxidation
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Michael Mock, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 06/30/2026
* USD 545,771.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Michael Mock of Montana State University is studying ways to store energy by
developing metal catalysts to convert dinitrogen gas found in air to a fuel such
as ammonia. Understanding the transformation between nitrogen and ammonia offers
a potential carbon-free fuel cycle to interconvert chemical and electrical
energy. The project will focus on the synthesis of new catalysts using
inexpensive metals such as chromium, iron, and nickel. By design, the novel
behavior of these catalysts will be used to both form ammonia and convert
ammonia to nitrogen. The project will establish strategies for the
interconversion of nitrogen and ammonia by removing and attaching hydrogen atoms
using chemical reagents, electricity, and/or light energy in conjunction with
the metal catalysts. Additionally, the Mock group will host Native American
undergraduate students from Montana Tribal Colleges to work in the laboratory to
learn about synthetic chemistry and catalysis, and to acquire hands-on
laboratory skills. Providing hands-on experience in chemistry to Native American
students will serve to increase the involvement of underrepresented minorities
in chemistry and will contribute to strengthening the technical workforce in
Montana and in the United States. This project will enable outreach activities
at area primary and secondary schools to engage students on the topics of
renewable forms of energy and new energy technologies. Science outreach
activities at area schools will engage students on the topics of renewable forms
of energy and new energy technologies that have a positive impact on the
environment and society. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under this project, Professor
Michael Mock of Montana State University is studying molecular catalytic systems
to develop a nitrogen-based cycle to store and utilize energy in N–H bonds.
Catalysts using chromium and iron will be designed for the interconversion of
dinitrogen (N2) and ammonia (NH3). The project will likely lead to a better
mechanistic understanding of H-atom transfer reactions of the same catalyst for
both N2 reduction and NH3 oxidation. hence assessing the concept of microscopic
reversibility for two challenging multi-proton, multi-electron reactions
involving making and breaking N–N and N–H bonds. A common strategy of delivery
of H-atoms to N2 and the removal of H-atoms from NH3 ligands will be
accomplished by using chemical reagents, electrocatalytic conditions, and/or
light energy. The project will measure thermodynamic N–H bond strengths and
characterize metal-NxHy intermediates to advance catalyst design. The proposed
work will use Ni-based platforms for understanding homolytic N–H bond cleavage
and N–N coupling steps en route to dinitrogen
formation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.