* 2247572
* Ergodic Properties of Smooth Systems on Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Adam Kanigowski, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Jan Cameron
* 05/31/2026
* USD 215,673.00

This project focuses on the chaotic properties of smooth dynamical systems, a
very active area of current research in mathematical analysis, with connections
and applications across the mathematical sciences. Chaotic behavior in dynamical
systems is characterized by sensitive dependence on initial conditions, which
occurs when small changes in a system’s present state may produce large
fluctuations in its future state. This occurs in many natural systems, such as
the human heart, fluid flows, and global weather patterns. The PI plans to
develop a general framework and new approaches for understanding chaotic
behavior in a large class of dynamical systems. Activities in the project will
lead to progress in our understanding of fundamental dynamical phenomena, with
possible consequences and applications in other mathematical fields, such as
geometry and number theory, and other scientific areas, such as physics and
economics. The project will also involve the training of several students and
postdocs. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is part of a program of research
studying ergodic and statistical properties of smooth systems on manifolds and
their interactions with geometry and number theory, with three main areas of
focus. One area concerns some classical properties that are expected to hold for
chaotic systems: K and Bernoulli properties, quantitative mixing (and higher
order mixing) and limit theorems. The PI will investigate relations between
these properties and their appearance for partially hyperbolic (or non-uniformly
partially hyperbolic) systems, and continue developing a geometric framework for
problems related to quantitative mixing and the Bernoulli property. The PI also
plans to construct examples of exotic dynamical systems with new ergodic and
statistical behavior. A second research direction relates to recent developments
on parabolic systems, of not necessarily algebraic origin. Despite recent
progress, many fundamental questions for such systems are still open, for
instance, the Rokhlin problem on higher order mixing. The PI will build on
techniques from his earlier work and try to develop a general theory for ergodic
properties of parabolic systems. A third part of the project will continue the
PI’s research on sparse equidistribution problems, using methods from dynamics
(such as quantitative equidistribution and mixing) and analytic number theory
(such as sieve methods and exponential sums).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.