* 2247721
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Small: Enabling Programmable In-Network Security for an Attack-Resilient Smart Grid
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Christopher Farnell, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2026
* USD 328,000.00

Modern energy systems are increasingly adopting Internet technology to boost
efficiency, which opens new security frontiers. On the one hand, the underlying
network infrastructure used by existing power grids significantly limits the
performance of current security measures. On the other hand, Internet companies
are undergoing a foundational change in their network infrastructure, mainly
driven by deploying advanced programmable network architectures. This project
aims to create and quantify programmable in-network security measures for an
attack-resilient power grid. Achieving this objective involves integrating the
advancement of data-plane programmability into energy system cyber
infrastructure, and based on this, further exploring numerous applications
across attack detection, mitigation, and prevention to secure todayâ€™s energy
systems. The outcomes of the project will have significant impacts on industrial
practice through the suitable adoption of the proposed programmable cyber-
infrastructure to realize a defense-in-depth approach for future energy systems.
The work will also train students and workforce with cutting-edge and cross-
disciplinary knowledge in power systems, networking, and cyber-security.
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The project aims to build the next-generation
programmable cyber-infrastructure for energy system protection with three
research thrusts: (i) an in-network cyber-attack detection system with high-
speed and customizable packet inspection; (ii) a self-healing system that
automatically restores network connectivity and recovers corrupted measurements
by considering characteristics from both communication networks and physical
devices; and (iii) an in-network traffic scheduler that disrupts attack
reconnaissance while maintaining quality-of-service requirements. The impact of
the proposed research will lay a scientific foundation for system design through
the development of models, algorithms, and tools that incorporate both cyber and
physical system properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.