* 2247952
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Small: Measuring, Validating and Improving upon App-Based Privacy Nutrition Labels
* CSE,CNS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Adam Aviv, George Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Dan Cosley
* 05/31/2026
* USD 199,996.00

Smartphones collect a large amount of personal data as people use them, which
can cause privacy violations when smartphone applications (“apps”) use or share
the data in ways people don’t expect. Existing text-based privacy policies are
hard to read and make sense of, making it hard for people to understand what a
mobile app will do with their data. This has led major app stores to require
apps to use standardized “privacy labels”—akin to nutrition labels—to help
people make informed choices about the apps they use; however, it is unclear how
well these labels work in the real world. This project will attack this question
by studying how privacy labels work for three main groups: app developers who
must select correct labels for their apps; app store administrators that create
the policies and standards for the labels; and end users who must use them to
make privacy decisions. The team will also analyze mobile apps to see how well
they adhere to the promises made by their privacy labels, and how both people’s
understandings of privacy labels and apps’ adherence to them changes over time.
Together the work will lead to better understanding, design, and use of privacy
labels for both regulators and people who use mobile apps.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;To address these questions, the project will apply a mixed-methods
approach. For studying end users, the research team will perform iterative
usability testing and longitudinal comprehension studies to gauge understanding
of these new privacy labels and how it changes over time. The team will also use
factorial vignettes analyzed by multivariate regressions to identify factors of
both existing and hypothetical privacy label designs that might impact user
decision making around installing, using, and granting permissions to apps. For
studying developers and platforms, the team will conduct quantitative
measurement studies using a “privacy label observatory” that will periodically
collect a number of versions of both apps and their privacy labels, using
dynamic software analysis of the apps to determine their use of private
information. This will help answer questions about whether privacy labels become
more accurate over time as developers become more familiar with them, as well as
how the app ecosystem reacts to events like regulatory or company policy changes
and enforcement actions. The primary outcomes of this project will be empirical
data on whether these new privacy tools are working, how and why they might be
failing both app developers and consumers alike, and how platforms can improve
their design to make them more effective. This will include public datasets
about current and historical usage of privacy labels, as well as design patterns
and policy recommendations for improving the state of privacy labels and mobile
app privacy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.