* 2247505
* Computational Studies of Selective C-H Functionalization Reactions
* MPS,CHE
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Peng Liu, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 04/30/2026
* USD 450,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms B
Program and the Chemical Catalysis program, Professor Peng Liu of the Department
of Chemistry at the University of Pittsburgh is applying computational tools to
study catalytic carbon hydrogen bond functionalization reactions. The goal of
this research is to perform computations using density functional theory (DFT)
and other computational methods to model catalytic reaction pathways and
investigate factors that control reactivity and selectivity. These computational
studies will provide mechanistic understanding of various carbon hydrogen bond
functionalization reactions catalyzed by transition metal complexes and
bioengineered enzymes. In addition, new computational approaches to investigate
catalystâ€“substrate interactions and their impacts on reaction outcomes,
including data-driven approaches to rationally design problem-specific
descriptors in regression models for reactivity and selectivity predictions,
will be explored. This project's educational and outreach plan aims to maximize
the power of modern computer technology, such as virtual reality, to enhance
learning of organic chemistry concepts and to facilitate synthetic organic
chemistry research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Computational tools, in particular,
density functional theory (DFT) calculations, have emerged as a potent force to
investigate the mechanisms, reactivity, and selectivity of catalytic carbon
hydrogen bond functionalization reactions. This project aims to explore three
types of new computational strategies to provide robust and meaningful insights
into the origin of catalyst effects on reactivity and selectivity. Professor
Peng Liu and his research team will (1) apply energy decomposition analysis
calculations to analyze non-covalent interactions between catalyst and substrate
and use ring strain energies to analyze transition state distortion; (2) use
mechanistic insights to select and design problem-specific descriptors for
predictive regression models; and (3) perform hybrid quantum mechanics/molecular
mechanics and ab initio molecular dynamics simulations to study stereoselective
reactions catalyzed by bioengineered enzymes. They expect that these new
computational strategies can increase the capability of DFT-based computational
studies of mechanically complex catalytic systems by offering chemically
meaningful, practical insights to guide experimental reaction and catalyst
developments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.