* 2247784
* Conference: Geometry and Analysis of Groups and Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2023,02/29/2024
* Xiangdong Xie, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Swatee Naik
* 02/29/2024
* USD 32,000.00

This award provides travel support for U.S. based early career mathematicians to
attend a week long conference in Pisa, Italy from June 26 to June 30, 2023. The
topic of the conference is “Geometry and Analysis of Groups and Manifolds”. The
conference involves participants and speakers from three different mathematical
communities, namely geometric flow, analysis on metric spaces and geometric
group theory, with emphasis on the connection between these fields. The goal is
to create a conducive environment for collaborations between these different
communities of mathematicians. The participation of early career US
mathematicians in a major conference like this will help maintain and enhance
the leading position of the US in mathematical science research in the relevant
areas. The principal investigators and organizing committee will make a
concerted effort to identify and support participants from under-represented
groups in mathematics. The conference will hold poster sessions for early career
mathematicians to present their works, and select some of them for short talks.
This conference will also disseminate knowledge to the broader mathematical
community as the organizers plan to record all the talks and put the recordings
on the internet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years, there have been strong
interactions between questions in geometric analysis and low dimensional
topology/geometric group theory. On one hand, questions and examples from low
dimensional topology and geometric group theory have inspired rapid development
in geometric analysis. On the other hand, analytic methods have been used to
prove deep theorems in low dimensional topology and geometric group theory.
There are several emerging new connections between these fields, like the recent
work of Kleiner-Muller-Xie where they used ideas from the analytical side of
geometric mapping theory to study rigidity and regularity of quasiconformal maps
between certain spaces and groups, work of Kleiner-Lang where they used metric
currents in geometric measure theory to study the large scale geometry of high
rank analogues of Gromov hyperbolic spaces, work of Song on the spherical
Plateau problem on group homology which connects a geometric variational problem
with algebraic and topological properties of groups, etc. The goal of the
conference is to bring together experts from these various different fields to
exchange views and collaborate on important questions in these fields. More
details can be found in the conference website:
https://sites.google.com/view/geometryandanalysis/&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support
through evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts
review criteria.