* 2247636
* Latinas Resistance Behaviors in Engineering Programs at Predominantly White Institutions (PWIs) and Hispanic Serving Institutions (HSIs): An Intersectional View
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Qi Shi, Loyola University Maryland, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Chrystal Smith
* 06/30/2026
* USD 498,271.00

Latinas’ experiences in engineering programs can be unique due to the multiple
layers of challenges and assets in their science, technology, engineering, and
mathematics (STEM) journey: being a woman, being Latinx, being a bilingual
speaker of Spanish and English. The disparities in Latinas’ engineering access
and attainment are the result of historically oppressive racist and sexist
structures embedded in STEM space that perpetuate sexism and racism. However,
there is limited research on the nuanced experiences of how Latinas resist
inequities in different STEM educational settings and how they succeed. Another
major shortcoming of the current literature on Latinx STEM education is that
they are mostly viewed from a deficit perspective. This project aims to
investigate how Latinas choose to engage in various resistance behaviors in
different engineering cultures and campus climates and how these different
cultures and campus climates influence their resistance. This project uses an
anti-deficit view to interpret and make meaning of the experiences and assets
that may have impacted Latinas’ resistance and persistence in engineering
programs. Findings from this study can be used to develop inclusive policies and
counseling strategies to broaden the participation of Latinas and increase
theirpersistence in STEM at both Predominantly White Institutions (PWIs) and
Hispanic-Serving Institutions (HSIs).&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Guided by a
combination of LatCrit theory of resistance, intersectionality, and Cultural
Wealth Model (CWM), the goal of this project is to investigate how Latinas
choose to engage in various resistance behaviors in different engineering
cultures and campus climates and how these different STEM cultures and campus
climates influence their resistance. Specific research questions include: (1)
How do Latinas engage in different resistance behaviors in undergraduate
engineering programs? (2) How do different engineering cultures and campus
climates at Predominantly White Institutions (PWIs) and Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSIs) influence Latinas’ resistance behaviors in engineering
programs? and (3) How do Latinas’ intersectional identities and their cultural
wealth influence their resistance behaviors in different engineering cultures
and campus climates? Using an interpretive phenomenological design, this project
will conduct individual interviews with Latina students and qualitative surveys
with faculty members and administrators from three PWIs and three HSIs in
California, Florida, and Texas. Expected findings include more nuanced
information about Latinas’ resistance behaviors in engineering programs at PWIs
and HSIs. Through sharing finding reports with participating institutions and
broader STEM and Latinx communities, this study will provide needed information
to promote Latinas’ access and persistence in engineering programs. PWIs and
HSIs could utilize the findings from this study to develop retention and
recruitment policies and practices to broaden the participation and promote
equity and inclusion for underrepresented minority students majoring in
engineering and entering STEM careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is
supported by NSF's EDUCore Research (ECR) program. The ECR program emphasizes
fundamental STEM education research that generates foundational knowledge in the
field. Investments are made in critical areas that are essential, broad and
enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning environments, broadening participation
in STEM, and STEM workforce development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.