* 2247546
* Conference: Conversations Across Boundaries: Bringing PreK-2 Mathematics Experts Together
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2025
* Jessica Jameson, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 07/31/2025
* USD 673,241.00

Leaders in mathematics and elementary education are organizing and hosting a
conference that brings together researchers from mathematics education,
cognitive science, and special education. The work is grounded in a common goal
via constructive conversations and is purposefully framed to bring forth areas
of agreement and disagreement when it comes to early mathematics teaching and
learning. Organized over three face-to-face meetings with follow-up virtual
meetings, the conference is designed to generate a set of teaching and learning
principles as well as a collaborative research agenda among the fields,
reflecting existing agreements regarding early mathematics and uncovering areas
of disagreement where further exchange and generation of knowledge is
needed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conference will foster opportunities for new
insights and collaborations across fields, and new avenues for research and
practice. Expected outcomes include: (a) Collaborative research proposals,
discussion groups, symposia, and working groups at professional conferences
across the different fields, (b) A virtual event to enable all researchers who
are interested in learning more about the products of the work, (c) Preparation
of a Research Coordination Network proposal to expand and continue collaborative
research, and (d) A project website that will share all products created from
the conference that is hosted and maintained by NC State
University.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is supported by NSF’s EDU Core
Research (ECR) program and Discovery Research preK-12 (DRK-12) program. The ECR
program emphasizes fundamental STEM education research that generates
foundational knowledge in the field. Investments are made in critical areas that
are essential, broad, and enduring: STEM learning and STEM learning
environments, broadening participation in STEM, and STEM workforce development.
The DRK-12 seeks to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science,
technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by preK-12 students and teachers,
through research and development of innovative resources, models and tools.
Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental research in STEM education
and prior research and development efforts that provide theoretical and
empirical justification for proposed projects. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.