* 2247817
* CAS: Collaborative Research: Electronic Structure/Function Relationships Underpinning Atom Transfer Reactivity
* MPS,CHE
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2026
* Theodore Betley, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 06/30/2026
* USD 361,035.00

With the support of the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms-B Program
of the Chemistry Division, Professors Theodore Betley of the Department of
Chemistry and Chemical Biology at Harvard University and Kyle Lancaster of the
Department of Chemistry and Chemical Biology at Cornell are investigating the
electronic structure of radicaloid ligand transition metal complexes. This
collaborative project seeks to synthesize and characterize novel metal-ligand
multiple bond (MLMB) systems that can deliver diverse functionalities into
carbon hydrogen bond substrates. The ability to selectively incorporate
functionality into unactivated carbon hydrogen bonds represents a significant
advance in converting inexpensive chemical feedstocks (e.g. hydrocarbons) to
value-added molecules (e.g., pharmaceutical precursors). The joint project will
leverage the combined expertise of the Lancaster group to perform inorganic
spectroscopy and the Betley group’s expertise in synthesis to explore periodic
trends in the electronic structure and reactivity of mono- and trinuclear
transition metal complexes bearing nitrenoid and nitrido ligands. The project
lies at the interface of inorganic and organometallic chemistry and is therefore
well suited to the education of scientists at all levels. These groups organize
and participate in interactive demonstrations for students at the K-12 level
from local grade schools and high schools. Here the students are invited to
participate in a series of experiments and observe chemical phenomena at their
laboratories. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overarching goals of the project are to
probe how metal-ligand compositions and their changing oxidation levels alter
the resultant physical properties and reactivity for these coordination
complexes. To this end, they seek to synthesize mono- and trinuclear complexes
featuring nitrenoid and nitrido functionalities to examine and harness their
reaction chemistry. Thus, they aim to address the following questions: (1) How
are molecular redox processes distributed along the primary redox pair in MLMB
associations? (2) How do molecular redox changes of MLMBs alter oxidative group
transfer processes? (3) For cluster-bound imido/nitrido complexes, how is the
redox load localized? (4) For cluster-bound functionalities, can ligand hole
character accumulate under oxidative processes? The target open-shell units will
be designed to support a breadth of molecular oxidation states, altering the
electronic structure of the MLMB or cooperatively bound moiety. They will
leverage N K-edge XAS as means to probe the sub-octet character of coordinated
N-donors and to quantify M–N covalency in coordination complexes. These data
will be used to rationalize periodic trends in the reactivity (nucleophilic vs.
electrophilic) of MLMB and cluster-based complexes across the late first
transition series.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory
mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the
Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.