* 2247790
* AI Institute for Adult Learning and Online Education (ALOE)
* EDU,DRL
* 11/01/2022,12/31/2026
* Ashok Goel, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Cooperative Agreement
* Abby Ilumoka
* 12/31/2026
* USD 7,059,903.00

Based on decades of study of human learning, it is known that much of human
learning is mediated by others (guided by teachers), is a social/collaborative
process, and uses a range of cognitive strategies. Childhood and adult learning
lie on a spectrum of cognitive abilities. Two characteristics that distinguish
adult learning from childhood learning are first, while much of K-12 learning
pertains to closed, well-defined problems with clear answers, adult learning -
especially adult learning in the workplace - often addresses open-ended, ill-
defined problems that may have no clear answer or that may admit multiple
answers. Second, while most K-12 learning is general-purpose and teacher-guided,
adult learning (especially in the workplace) is task-specific and self-directed,
hence the proliferation of educational resources (often online) in support of
adult learning. Georgia Research Alliance (GRA) will establish a National
Artificial Intelligence Institute titled “NSF AI Institute for Adult Learning
and Online Education (ALOE)”, the goal of which is to make education more
equitable through enhanced availability, greater affordability, and enhanced
potential for success. Enhanced availability is to be achieved through the use
of online educational resources for blended learning; greater affordability is
to be accomplished through low-cost virtual teaching assistants that amplify
teachers’ reach, while enhanced potential for success is to be achieved through
cognitive and social support provided by virtual teaching assistants. The
Artificial Intelligence (AI) project aims to serve the national interest through
the development of transformative AI-driven models of online adult learning that
blend higher and continuing education to radically improve human learning. A
comprehensive and well-organized plan is proposed that uses AI simultaneously to
transform online adult learning and to drive foundational research in AI. GRA is
a 30-year-old private, nonprofit corporation that collaborates with state
government, business community, and university system to advance science and
technology that generates direct economic benefits. The ALOE AI Institute
involves a large interdisciplinary research team that includes two non-profit
organizations (Georgia Research Alliance, IMS Global), three industrial
companies (Boeing, IBM, Wiley) and seven educational institutions (Arizona State
University, Drexel University, Georgia Institute of Technology, Georgia State
University, Harvard University, Technical College System of Georgia, University
of North Carolina at Greensboro). Additionally, Accenture, the multinational
consulting company, is partnering with NSF to provide funding for the
Institute.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Overall, the goals of the project are consistent
with NSF AI Institutes’ vision to advance foundational research, conduct use-
inspired research, and grow the next generation of diverse talent by leveraging
multiple organizations. With regard to foundational research, major synergistic
contributions are anticipated in four areas:(i) cognitively-grounded AI (AI
virtual assistants that are grounded in cognitive theories of adult learning
such as active learning); (ii) AI-based personalization at scale (collection of
learning data from millions of adult learners and development of novel machine
learning and natural language processing techniques for analyzing the data);
(iii) human-AI Collaboration: development of novel techniques for interactive
visualization that enables teachers and learners to build a mutual theory of
mind; (iv) responsible AI: discovery of principles for designing sociotechnical
systems for online adult education in which AI agents work ethically to benefit
humans. With regard to use-inspired research, responsible fundamental AI
research grounded in theories of human cognition and learning will be conducted.
At least two distinct thrusts are in place: (i) development of AI teaching and
learning assistants that enhance cognitive, teacher and social presence in
online adult learning to help make it efficient and effective; (ii) learning
analytics for personalization of large-scale online learning for adult
education. The methodology employed, learning engineering, is an iterative
design approach that brings the rigor of engineering to the discipline of
education. Beginning with human-centered design of AI technologies, where the
human could be a learner, a teacher, or a different stakeholder in the learning
process, the process continues with the deployment of AI technologies and
collection and analysis of large-scale data about learners and learning. The
process then continues to the assessment of learning behaviors and outcomes
followed by the refinement of human-centered AI technologies. A detailed plan is
provided for assessment of impact on both learning and teaching through a mixed
methods approach. Randomized controlled trials will be used to evaluate how the
use of AI technologies facilitates and impacts learning. Quasi-experimental
studies will be carried out to compare learning effectiveness and efficiency of
online versus in-person classes. A plan for evaluation of the process of project
execution is to be overseen by an experienced evaluator who will employ a
values-engaged, educative approach which seeks to capture the viewpoints,
interests, and values of all stakeholders, including those often
underrepresented in the evaluation context. The National Artificial Intelligence
Institutes Program is a multi-agency effort to establish institute-scale AI
research with the potential for long-term payoffs in AI. In addition to
advancing foundational research and conducting use-inspired research, the
program supports efforts to grow the next generation of AI talent, enhance
multidisciplinary AI research, leverage multiple organizations and provide a
nexus point for collaborative efforts in AI research and
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.