* 2247574
* CAS: Collaborative Research: Design, Characterization, and Modeling of Metal Nanocluster Electrocatalysts Linked to Three-Dimensional Graphene
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Mingdi Yan, University of Massachusetts Lowell
* Standard Grant
* Francis D'Souza
* 06/30/2026
* USD 472,244.00

With support of the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms-B Program of
the Division of Chemistry, Kwok-Fan Chow, Jerome Delhommelle, and Mingdi Yan of
the Department of Chemistry at the University of Massachusetts Lowell and Gonghu
Li of the Department of Chemistry at the University of New Hampshire are
developing new classes of graphene-supported nanocomposite materials for
electrocatalytic applications. The goal of this research is to develop a new
strategy for constructing electrocatalysts from metal nanoclusters (MNCs) and
pristine graphene for electrochemical CO2 reduction. Knowledge gained through
the proposed research is expected to improve our fundamental understanding of
how the solid-solid interface impacts the electrocatalytic properties of
nanocomposites. Such understanding could guide the design and fabrication of
innovative devices for renewable energy applications. This project will provide
excellent training opportunities for undergraduate and graduate researchers,
promoting the participation of women and underrepresented minorities in STEM
(science, technology, engineering and mathematics) research. This project also
includes outreach activities (multiple one-day workshops at both institutions)
designed for K-12 students to increase the national talent pipeline in
nanoscience, chemistry, and materials science
disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Graphene-supported nanocomposite materials
have attracted increasing interest among researchers due to their potential
applications in various areas including catalysis. However, in graphene-based
nanocomposite catalysts, the solid-solid interfaces between catalysts and
graphene are often poorly defined. Understanding and optimizing such interfaces
is particularly important for electrocatalytic applications such as CO2
reduction, in which electrons need to migrate from the graphene electrode to the
catalyst. Molecular functionalization of graphene offers enormous opportunities
to prepare new electrocatalysts (particularly MNCs) with enhanced electron
transfer kinetics. Using gold nanoclusters (AuNCs) as the model MNCs, this
project aims to develop a new strategy for constructing innovative
electrocatalysts from MNCs and pristine graphene. Specifically, AuNCs will be
covalently attached onto three-dimensional pristine graphene (3DG) electrodes
through a series of rationally designed molecular linkers. This project requires
complementary expertise from four research groups. A combination of synthesis,
computational modeling, electrochemistry, and spectroscopy will be employed to
investigate how the linker structure affects the performance of the AuNC-3DG
electrocatalytic CO2 reduction. It is anticipated that the results obtained will
enhance our fundamental understanding of how control over solid-solid interfaces
at the molecular level impacts the performance of nanocomposite materials in
electrochemical devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.