* 2247352
* Collaborative Research: SaTC: CORE: Small: Expanding the Realm of Oblivious Transfer: New Tools for Cryptography
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2022,05/31/2024
* Peihan Miao, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip Regalia
* 05/31/2024
* USD 152,232.00

Nowadays, vast amounts of individual information are collected by numerous
entities for providing a variety of services. Due to the sensitive nature of the
collected data, the need for developing techniques and tools that enable
privacy-preserving computation on big data is more necessary than ever. This
project aims to enhance the functionality, security, and efficiency of oblivious
transfer (OT), a fundamental primitive in cryptography, with a broader goal of
improving the efficiency and usability of cryptographic systems in both theory
and practice, especially in the era of big data. The project's novelties are
developing tools that play an integral role in the design of privacy-preserving
protocols. Such protocols have societal benefits, enabling computation on
sensitive data while keeping the data private. The project's impacts include
achieving more efficient protocols for many important real-world applications
and deepening our understanding of efficient constructions and fundamental
limits in many areas in cryptography that are related to OT, such as secure
multi-party computation, zero-knowledge proofs, advanced types of encryption and
more. The investigators integrate their research results into curricula for both
undergraduate and graduate level courses and are committed to mentoring and
advising students at all levels, from undergraduate to PhD, especially those
from under-represented groups in computing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project
focuses on three main thrusts to expand the realm of oblivious transfer. First,
the investigators design efficient constructions of OT with advanced
functionality and strengthened security, which can be better leveraged in
cryptographic systems. These OT notions provide features for reducing
communication and computation costs in various settings, making them
indispensable tools in big-data applications. Second, the project investigates a
specific MPC problem that has close connections to OT. In particular, using
advanced OT tools, the investigators improve the efficiency and enrich the
functionality of private set intersection (PSI) protocols, which have wide
applications in practice. Finally, the project identifies and formalizes
barriers that may exist against the above goals; this is carried out by proving
lower bounds on the assumption complexity or efficiency of constructions for the
above goals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.