* 2247573
* A high throughput approach for building and surveying the emergent properties of synthetic ecologies
* BIO,MCB
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2027
* Yousif Shamoo, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Anthony Garza
* 05/31/2027
* USD 800,000.00

Complex communities of interacting microbes live on practically every surface of
this planet and play critical roles in global ecosystems. Recapitulating
communities synthetically in the lab is a critical step toward understanding how
they form and function and could one day be utilized for new applications in
biotechnology and biomedicine. Towards this end, this project will create new
methods to rapidly build communities of different microbes, to understand their
interactions, and to identify new sources of antibiotics. This project will also
provide educational and technical training aimed at increasing the number of
undergraduates and graduates pursuing careers in STEM fields. Additionally, this
project contains an integrated education component and will develop new courses
for undergraduate and graduate students aimed at increasing the awareness of the
social, ethical, and biosafety/security dimensions of synthetic community
research. This curriculum will be broadly disseminated to the community to
improve bioethics education in STEM degree programs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Microbial communities comprise the predominant social
structures of life and are critical players in our global ecosystems, yet their
potential as contributors to a sustainable future remains largely untapped.
Synthetic microbial communities can provide insights into understanding the
underlying principles of microbial social behaviors, which, in turn, can
catalyze the development of novel translational applications. However, the
emergent phenotypes of synthetic communities have remained largely unexplored
due to their complexity and the need to develop technologies and approaches that
are high throughput, scalable, and permissive of systematic investigation. To
address this gap in knowledge, this project will devise an innovative, high-
throughput method to build synthetic ecologies and screen for emergent
properties focusing on novel biosynthetic and biocatabolic capabilities of
natural and synthetic microbial communities. By screening millions of multi-
strain droplets, with each microdroplet acting as a spatially separate synthetic
ecology, this work will provide important insights into how new functionalities
emerge .&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.