* 2247576
* NSF-BSF: Collaborative Research: AF: Small: Algorithmic Performance through History Independence
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2026
* Martin Farach-Colton, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Peter Brass
* 04/30/2026
* USD 300,000.00

A data structure is said to be history independent (HI) if the way that the data
is stored reveals nothing about the history of operations that lead to the
current state. History independence was introduced to protect data structures
from malicious attacks. For example, voting machines that store votes in the
order they were cast can reveal surprising information about voters, whereas a
history-independent data organization on a voting machine does not.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project considers a new use for history independence.
The project will demonstrate that history independence can be a powerful
analytical tool for designing randomized data structures and algorithms---
especially in the case of oblivious adversaries. The project investigates
problems in: (1) online algorithms, (2) resource allocation, (3) random-acess
memory (RAM) and external-memory dictionary data structures, (4) load balancing,
and (5) scalable concurrent data structures. The researchers have already shown
how to use HI to crack a four-decades-old open problem in list labeling and to
make substantial progress on a well-known load balancing problem. This work
promises to broaden the scope of HI to both sequential and concurrent settings.
The team will continue community-building efforts to introduce randomized
algorithms to the undergraduate curriculum, as well as running workshops that
can expose junior researchers to these techniques. The team will also continue
its efforts to engage members of underrepresented groups in research earlier in
their careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.