* 2247128
* Developing Mathematics Teachers Responsive Pedagogies for Linguistically Marginalized Students
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Sunghwan Byun, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Eric Knuth
* 07/31/2026
* USD 459,848.00

Mathematics teachers rarely receive adequate preparation or support for teaching
multilingual students and, as a result, these students (hereinafter
linguistically marginalized students) often have diminished access to quality
learning opportunities compared to students from dominant language backgrounds.
Yet, many mathematics teachers are teachers of linguistically marginalized
students. When teachers do receive professional development in supporting
multilingual and other linguistically marginalized students, it is typically
content-neutral and sometimes at odds with notions of quality mathematics
teaching, making it difficult to apply in practice. In this project, researchers
will develop and investigate a novel professional development model to support
mathematics teachers’ learning of responsive pedagogies for linguistically
marginalized students. Working with secondary mathematics teachers in diverse
settings in North Carolina, the project team will develop a series of workshops
on linguistically responsive pedagogies tailored to participants’ challenges and
school contexts. In addition to these workshops, as teachers enact
linguistically responsive pedagogies in their classrooms, the research team will
support their learning with video-coaching. Central to this model is classroom
video as a key resource for teachers’ learning, building on the conjecture that
by providing a window into students’ experiences, video can help develop
teachers’ insights for responsive pedagogies. This project will contribute to
large-scale efforts to improve mathematics education and address longstanding
opportunity gaps across the nation, offering a professional development model to
foster linguistically responsive and asset-based forms of mathematics
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using design-based research methods, the research
team will investigate the overarching research question: How do secondary
mathematics teachers learn about supporting linguistically marginalized
students? To investigate this question, the project team will use ethnographic
data collection methods to capture the development of teachers’ learning
trajectories. These data will be analyzed using qualitative methods including
case study, ethnomethodological, and conversation-analytic approaches.
Simultaneously, researchers will engage in conjecture mapping to understand
elements of the model’s design that support teacher learning as well as the
mediating processes of learning, iteratively refining the model as the project
continues. The primary outcomes of this 3-year study include: a portrait of the
challenges and opportunities that mathematics teachers face in supporting
linguistically marginalized students, a replicable model of professional
development for teachers’ learning of responsive pedagogies, and theory about
the nature of—and conditions necessary for—mathematics teachers’ learning to
support linguistically marginalized students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Discovery
Research preK-12 program (DRK-12) seeks to significantly enhance the learning
and teaching of science, technology, engineering and mathematics (STEM) by
preK-12 students and teachers, through research and development of innovative
resources, models and tools. Projects in the DRK-12 program build on fundamental
research in STEM education and prior research and development efforts that
provide theoretical and empirical justification for proposed
projects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.