* 2247088
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Secure and Formally-verified Low-level Languages
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2027
* Stephan Zdancewic, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 09/30/2027
* USD 1,200,000.00

Our modern computing infrastructure, including the Internet and multitude of
applications that run on our phones and in data centers, relies on many low-
level software systems to function correctly. Low-level software includes things
like operating systems and the tools, such as programming language compilers,
that are used by software developers to build those applications. Flaws in the
design of low-level software, or bugs in its implementation, can lead to system
crashes, security vulnerabilities, or incorrect results that can be very costly
to individuals, businesses, and scientific or educational institutions. The
research conducted as part of this project will investigate how to improve the
security and reliability of low-level software. The research focuses on a
specific piece of the modern software infrastructure (something called LLVM IR,
an industrial-strength bit of compiler infrastructure that is widely used in
industry and academia), and develop a formal, computer-checkable, mathematical
model of its behaviors. That model will be used to uncover flaws in the
infrastructure, and as an aid to implementing correct systems using it. Because
such systems are ubiquitous, improving their security and reliability can
potentially have significant positive impact for society as a whole. This
project will also develop educational resources suitable for teaching the
underlying theory and techniques to software developers who use this
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will build on and extend the
capabilities of Vellvm--the "Verified LLVM IR"--a formalization of the LLVM
compiler infrastructure implemented in the Coq interactive theorem prover.
Because the LLVM ecosystem supports many source languages (C, C++, Rust,
Haskell, among others) and target platforms (including almost all modern
processors), it is a natural fulcrum to amplify the impact of formal modeling
and verification efforts. The research conducted here will have three main
thrusts: (1) Improving Vellvm's fidelity and completeness with respect to the
LLVM IR by extending the suite of supported LLVM IR constructs, developing a new
memory model, and concurrency semantics that enable optimizations unavailable
previousl; (2) Designing abstractions that facilitate relational reasoning about
LLVM IR programs. These abstractions will take the form of a collection of
domain-specific logics for reasoning about LLVM IR code at various levels of
abstraction; (3) applying the Vellvm framework to build tools that help identify
undefined behaviors and mitigate security vulnerabilities in LLVM IR programs.
To achieve these goals, the proposed research will develop novel reasoning and
proof automation techniques that are applicable to low-level program semantics.
All of the developments will be implemented and verified using the Coq
interactive theorem prover, yielding a high-degree of confidence in the
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.