* 2247923
* Sustainable Technologies for Building Molecules: Ethers, Phosphines, and Amino Acids
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Vy Dong, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 08/31/2026
* USD 373,948.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Vy Dong of the University of California, Irvine is studying the
development of new catalytic reactions to expedite the synthesis of organic
molecules with improved efficiency and reduced waste. Earth-abundant nickel
catalysts will be investigated for the construction of C-O bonds and unnatural
amino acids with precise control of three-dimensional molecular shape. The
introduction of selenium into small molecules and the construction of new
asymmetric phosphine ligands will also be explored using photocatalysis and
copper catalysis. This project sets out to advance understanding of how to build
challenging chemical bonds, while also reducing reliance on precious metals.
Precisely controlling the shape of molecules is critical for optimization and
fine-tuning the performance of medicines and materials; therefore, this proposal
is creating tools for molecular construction to empower scientists in other
fields to design future therapies and materials technologies. These activities
are further expected to provide training for a diverse group of graduate,
undergraduate, and high school student researchers. Professor Dong is also
leading initiatives to engage students and the public in chemistry discussions
via social media and increasing the visibility of role models and networking
opportunities for women in chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of
new catalysts that enable sustainable methods for the enantioselective synthesis
of organic molecules is essential to achieve continued advances in the
preparation of medicines, materials, and biological probes. This program
features catalytic strategies to address modern challenges in synthesis. Under
this award, Professor Dong and her research team will pursue the following
goals: (1) activating chalcogens for hydrofunctionalization, (2) designing and
constructing phosphines and (3) forging novel routes to amino acids and cyclic
peptides. These three primary objectives feature transition metal catalysts,
including those derived from earth abundant first row metals (e.g., Ni-catalyzed
asymmetric alcohol additions, Cu-phosphido transformations, and Ni-catalyzed
cyano-ester and allene couplings). Efforts in these directions are focused on
accessing organic structures that have been difficult to prepare by current
asymmetric catalysis technologies, including chiral ethers, phosphines, and
peptides. The mechanistic approach to these activities will help enable the
participating graduate students to gain critical analysis and troubleshooting
skills and will also engage undergraduate and high school students in chemical
research at a fundamental level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.