* 2247770
* New Cycloaddition and Annulation Strategies for Organic Synthesis
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2023,07/31/2026
* Rick Danheiser, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* George Richter-Addo
* 07/31/2026
* USD 575,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Rick L. Danheiser of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology will
study the development of new methods for the chemical synthesis of cyclic
organic molecules. Synthesis is often described as the enabling technology of
chemistry. The synthetic methods developed in the proposed research will provide
researchers in both academia and industry with new tools for the synthesis of
important organic compounds with applications in medicine, agriculture,
electronics, and other areas. Carbocyclic and heterocyclic ring systems are
incorporated in the chemical structures of numerous biologically and medicinally
important compounds, and the development of highly efficient methods for their
synthesis has great value in providing improved access to molecules with
important applications in these areas. The goal of this research program is the
development of new strategies with the power to dramatically streamline the
synthesis of these classes of compounds. The utility of these new methods will
be demonstrated by their application to the synthesis of several naturally
occurring compounds that have known activity as antitumor agents, but which are
not available in quantity from their sources in nature. The graduate students
supported under this grant will serve as coordinators for the MIT Outreach
Program, which each year visits ca. 25 high schools in the New England region
providing presentations on chemistry and careers in science. Approximately
1200-1500 high school students attend these presentations each year, with many
of the students being members of underrepresented groups in STEM (science,
technology, engineering and mathematics) fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of
the proposed research is to advance the ability of chemists to develop efficient
syntheses of several important classes of organic compounds including polycyclic
aromatic molecules, heterocyclic systems such as indoles and carbazoles, and
eight-membered carbocyclic compounds. The methods that will be investigated
involve mechanistically novel transformations and these studies are expected to
advance our understanding of the chemistry of unusual reactive species such as
strained carbocyclic rings, vinylketenes, and several other classes of highly
unsaturated conjugated molecules. From the perspective of sustainability, the
methodology under development has several attractive features. Most of the
methods are highly atom economical, i.e., all of the atoms of the reactants are
incorporated in the products, minimizing the generation of chemical waste. In
addition, most of the new cycloadditions to be developed are triggered simply by
heat or light, avoiding the need for even catalytic amounts of reagents
(especially heavy metal catalysts). The graduate students supported under this
program will receive training to develop their skills as synthetic chemists, and
will also receive training in scientific ethics and training to develop their
oral and written communication skills.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.