* 2247314
* Development, Evaluation and Refinement of Metalloenediyne Complex Cyclization Kinetics for Biological Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2026
* Jeffrey Zaleski, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Tingyu Li
* 05/31/2026
* USD 575,000.00

In this project, funded by the Chemical Structure, Dynamics &amp; Mechanisms-B
Program of the Chemistry Division, Professor Jeffrey Zaleski of the Department
of Chemistry at Indiana University is developing structurally and dynamically
tunable molecules for inhibition of undesired, fundamental cell growth processes
based on a new heat-induced reaction strategy. The advantage of the methodology
is that only sites where heat and agent coexist are activated, while all other
sites remain unaffected. Structural modification will also incorporate
compositional variability in an effort to tune the level of heating required to
initiate the effect. The substitutional flexibility of the structures should
allow for existing imaging methods to be used to track these molecules under in
vitro or possibly even, in vivo, conditions. The project rests at the interface
of synthetic, inorganic, and biological research space, providing a diverse
training environment for students that will enter the workforce in these areas.
Moreover, the ensemble plan will enhance educational outreach to increase middle
and high school STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics)
engagement in campus programs through production of research-based animation
learning tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metal-enediyne complexes of Pt(II) have
shown considerable promise for tumor growth inhibition, presumably via Bergman
cyclization to 1,4-diyl diradical species that lead to DNA cleavage. Through
ligand modification and ancillary ligand substitution, their reaction kinetics
at room temperature also demonstrate a remarkable half-life range (0.77-77 hr),
which bodes well for controlling reaction kinetics. However, under physiological
conditions and temperatures, these structures may be insoluble and their
reactions so fast that sample handling is a challenge. Conversely, their Fe(II)
and Fe(III) relatives show considerable promise for delivering parallel reaction
space tuning as a function of substituents, yet on a more stable kinetic
platform, along with enhanced solubility. The isostructuralism that exists
between Fe(III) and Ga(III) further opens these constructs up for PET (positron
emission tomography) imaging and thus sub-cellular tracking. In addition to the
application of these molecules, mechanistic rates for forward and retro-Bergman
reactions will also be evaluated to disentangle true rate constants for these
processes as a function of substitutions which is ultimately expected to produce
better lead construct designs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.