* 2247013
* Forbidden and Colored Subgraphs
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Liana Yepremyan, Emory University
* Continuing Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2026
* USD 68,333.00

An n by n Latin square is an n by n square filled with n different symbols, each
of which occurs exactly once in each row and column. This definition might
remind the reader of a commonly known puzzle called ‘sudoku’ which is a 9 by 9
Latin square with some additional constraints. The study of Latin squares dates
back to the 1700s to the work of Euler. Latin squares have connections to
various subfields in mathematics. For example, they are multiplication tables of
quasigroups from algebra, they are used as error-correcting codes when one
wishes to transmit data via a noisy channel such as power lines, etc. No matter
how one fills a 3 by 3 Latin square, it is always possible to pick three cells,
no two of which share a row, a column or a symbol. Such a collection of cells is
called a transversal. In contrast, it is not possible to find a transversal in a
two by two Latin square. A famous conjecture from the 1960s due to Ryser asserts
that for odd n, it is always possible to find a transversal in an n by n Latin
square. In the graph theoretic language, this is equivalent to the problem of
finding a so-called rainbow matching in a properly edge-colored complete
bipartite graph with partition sizes equal to n. This project aims to explore
various problems which are related to finding certain rainbow structures in
colored graphs. The current project, while combinatorially stated, has
connections to other fields of mathematics, such as discrete geometry and
algebra, and solutions will likely involve some use of algebraic and
probabilistic methods thus creating further connections between combinatorics
and other fields of mathematics. Graduate students will be trained as part of
this project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project we will explore questions
related to the existence of various spanning and non-spanning colored structures
in colored graphs. A rainbow subgraph of a colored graph is a subgraph in which
each edge has a distinct color. We plan to work on questions that have two
common themes at heart. The first one is understanding the structure and
properties of an object, for example, a graph, given it does not contain some
forbidden sub-object, for example, a rainbow subgraph. These can be viewed as
Turan-type problems adapted to the colored setting, where one wants to find, say
the maximum number of edges in a properly edge-colored graph on a given number
of vertices without containing a fixed rainbow subgraph. The second type of
problems we will study is to find out under what restrictions a colored graph
has certain spanning or almost-spanning rainbow subgraphs, such as long or
Hamiltonian paths, spanning or almost spanning trees, a perfect or almost
perfect matching. The problems to study include but are not limited to the
existence of large rainbow matchings in graphs, existence of large matchings in
hypergraphs, the existence of rainbow bases for vector spaces and matroids,
Turan-type problems and their rainbow analogues such as the appearance of a
rational number as a Turan exponent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects
NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation
using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.