* 2247766
* UC Merced STEM Summer Start
* EDU,EES
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Marcos Garcia-Ojeda, University of California - Merced
* Standard Grant
* Sonja Montas-Hunter
* 06/30/2026
* USD 500,000.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 2 project aims to increase success and
retention of first-year undergraduate STEM majors by offering a suite of high-
quality, pre-matriculation summer educational experiences that are accessible to
every student and meet the full range of incoming student academic preparation
needs. Many universities have well-established, intensive Summer Bridge
programs. However, these programs are often high cost to run and reach a limited
range of students. This project will explore a broad range of program formats,
including in-person and online; short-duration and long-duration; community-
based and independent; and review-oriented and acceleration-oriented. For all of
these programs, we will be particularly focused on connecting the summer with
the first semester college experience. We anticipate that the findings from our
studies will be informative to other institutions looking to identify
successful, scalable models for pre-matriculation summer programming and
strengthening connections between summer and first-year academic
experiences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;University of California, Merced proposes the
implementation of a comprehensive STEM early-start summer program for pre-
matriculated incoming students. This program is designed to help historically
underrepresented students make a successful academic and social transition to
their STEM major and to improve the shares of students who are underrepresented
minorities, first-generation and Pell-eligible STEM students who persist in
their STEM major. In particular, the STEM Summer Start Program would be focused
on three goals:1. Provide a suite of high-quality pre-matriculation summer
educational experiences that are accessible to every student and meet the full
range of incoming student academic preparation needs; 2. Create a cohesive,
connected experience between the Summer Start programs and the Fall semester
entry-level STEM courses that supports student development of sense of
belonging, self-efficacy and resilience, in addition to academic content and
study skills and;3. Study the impacts of various pedagogical devices and early-
start programmatic activities on student success, including academic success in
entry-level STEM courses, retention in STEM majors, time-to-degree and selected
psycho-social metrics. The HSI Program aims to enhance undergraduate STEM
education and build capacity at HSIs. Projects supported by the HSI Program will
also generate new knowledge on how to achieve these
aims.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.