* 2247954
* SaTC: CORE: Medium: Symbolizing Viability: Paving the Road to Practical Symbolic Execution
* CSE,CNS
* 05/01/2023,04/30/2027
* Youzhi Bao, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Sol Greenspan
* 04/30/2027
* USD 1,199,992.00

As society increasingly depends on software programs, software vulnerabilities
have become one of the most critical issues in cybersecurity. Researchers have
been developing techniques to address software security issues and protect
programs from attacks. Among these techniques, symbolic execution is a highly
effective technique for software security. Despite its promise, symbolic
execution has struggled to make a real-world impact, due to fundamental
usability and scalability limits when applied to real-world software security
tasks. This project aims to understand the reasons behind the lack of adoption
of symbolic execution and leverage this understanding to achieve viable symbolic
execution for real-world scenarios, to help cybersecurity analysts or software
developers succeed at finding vulnerabilities. The project will create scenario-
specific symbolic execution (S3E), a customizable symbolic execution framework
that will enable diverse users to leverage symbolic execution for various real-
world scenarios. Using task analysis and human subject studies on symbolic
execution, This project will create effective human-machine interfaces and
develop a usable framework that improves symbolic execution's viability for
real-world cybersecurity missions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
systematically identify how well symbolic execution works, or why it fails, in
real-world scenarios, in order to develop the notion of scenario-specific
symbolic execution. The project will develop a human-machine interaction models
and a symbolic execution framework as the basis of scenario-specific symbolic
execution tools. The result will be a new type of symbolic execution technology
– human-boosted symbolic execution – which will enable humans to enhance
symbolic execution’s scalability and make the technology viable for more real-
world scenarios. Open source tools will be released to the public. A bug bounty
program tailored to symbolic execution will be
conducted.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.