* 2247929
* A Learning Environment for an Open-Source Contribution Model
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Marco Gerosa, Northern Arizona University
* Standard Grant
* James A. M. Alvarez
* 06/30/2026
* USD 498,616.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 2 project aims to investigate an approach
to prepare students taking introductory computer science classes in different
STEM programs to contribute to open-source projects. The project will use open-
source software (OSS) projects to engage students in real software engineering
scenarios, entirely online. The project will expand knowledge about how to
leverage an authentic OSS project as a learning environment and how to engage
learners in the activities, particularly learners from historically
disenfranchised groups in STEM. In addition, the project will advance knowledge
about the feasibility of devising a structured learning path that begins with
non-code contributions (e.g., documentation, typo corrections, translations) and
that evolves to other types of contributions. The project will design an online
learning environment where individuals make initial non-code contributions,
acclimate to the open-source contribution model, and establish a relationship
with the OSS community. This environment will promote scaffolding to those
wishing to delve deeper into learning to make code-based and other technical
contributions, and help students build a professional resumé based on OSS
contributions.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A portal called the OSS-Doorway will be
developed as part of this project, focusing on non-programmer learners. These
learners will be able to explore the open-source environment and understand
different project elements and their roles in the open-source contribution
process. Within this informal learning environment, the project will engage a
broad range of students as non-code contributors who will gain knowledge about
the open-source contribution model. Improving the skills of non-code
contributors will also support the sustainability of OSS projects. The first
phase of this project will focus on the feasibility of OSS-Doorway to support
learning of the open-source contribution model. The methods used in this phase
will be participatory design, observational studies, and student surveys. In the
second phase, the project will seek to understand how OSS-Doorway supports the
learning of students who come from groups historically disenfranchised in STEM.
The project team will apply an adapted version of the GenderMag inspection
method to assess how the proposed solution supports diverse populations. The
team will also employ observational studies and surveys with students and
analyze the data in a manner that considers student demographic characteristics
and lived experiences. As such, this project will provide inclusive strategies
for teaching the open-source contribution process. The HSI Program aims to
enhance undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in STEM, and build
capacity at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given the diverse nature and context of
the HSIs, requires innovative approaches that incentivize institutional and
community transformation and promote fundamental research (i) on engaged student
learning, (ii) about what it takes to diversify and increase participation in
STEM effectively, and (iii) that improves our understanding of how to build
institutional capacity at HSIs are supported by this
program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.