* 2247070
* Collaborative Research: Planning: Track 1 for Catalyzing a Paradigm Shift towards an Inclusive Engineering for Community Development
* ENG,EEC
* 06/15/2023,05/31/2024
* David A Delaine, Ohio State University
* Standard Grant
* Regina Pope-Ford
* 05/31/2024
* USD 62,497.00

This planning grant will enable the development of a competitive and
collaborative Centers for Equity in Engineering (CEE) Phase I project proposal.
The Center proposal seeks to enable the research and practice of an Engineering
for Community Development (ECD) that provides transformational experiences to
all students, especially students of color. Through creating a distributed
center across selected partner institutions, we are seeking to initiate and
sustain a shift within ECD towards the principles of inclusive pedagogy. Such a
shift will eliminate the limitations of traditional ECD, which can often exclude
groups of peoples, reinforce stereotypes, and leave partner communities wanting
more. Replacement with an inclusive ECD can specifically provide for students of
color, their assets, and their needs while positively impacting partner
communities to strengthen efforts of broadening participation in engineering. In
conducting this research, we will understand the ways in which the limitations
of service-learning’s ability to equitably educate all students can be overcome.
More specifically, if service-learning is going to support the education of
students from minoritized backgrounds, then we must research ECD with respect to
the specific needs of students from these various backgrounds. This work will
impact students, community partners, and institutions of higher education
through promoting ECD that is inclusive to all, where students from historically
minoritized demographics will be supported through transformational experiences
that encourage them to remain and succeed in engineering.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Through strengthening and creating a
broad array of inclusive and culturally relevant ECD approaches, contexts, and
data collection methods the research performed by the Center will enable effort
across the research-to-practice cycle that systematically includes historically
marginalized students and communities into ECDinitiatives. To accomplish this
goal and maximize the chances of a funded proposal, the following primary
objectives will be met within the planning proposal: Align core team through
regular virtual meetings; Articulate core concept of research; Develop initial
Delphi prompts; Plan and perform discovery phases of a Delphi method; Conduct an
intensive two day workshop; And write and refine proposal using information from
first two phases of Delphi. This effort will produce new knowledge on what an
inclusive ECD is and how it can be accomplished in practice. Through supporting
inclusive and culturally relevant ECD practice, students from historically
minoritized demographics will be supported to obtain transformational outcomes
within ECD initiatives and by extension increase the likelihood to remain and
succeed in engineering. Ultimately, as promoted by the Office of Science and
Technology Policy of the White House, federally funded research will, moving
forward, try to include community knowledge and interest from its inception
(generating research questions) to its conclusion (research deliverables)
(National Academies, 2022). Hence, this inclusion of communities in research and
design that ECD offers will challenge STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and
Mathematics) education at large to develop a student workforce capable of
effectively interacting and co-developing with local communities and being
diverse enough to empathize with the realities and challenges of racially,
ethnically, and socio-economically diverse communities. Through developing and
exploring inclusive and culturally relevant ECD contexts, this planning grant,
and in turn, the full grant, can enable the use of ECD problem domains and
contexts that critically engage issues of marginalization and social justice to
promote diverse and equitable ECD participation within engineering education.
Collectively, these impacts will strengthen engineering institutions’ ability to
serve as vehicles for broadening participation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award
reflects NSF's statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through
evaluation using the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review
criteria.