* 2247052
* RUI: Photocatalytic Protein-Catalyst Hybrids to Perform Solar Carbon Dioxide Reduction to Carbon-Based Fuels or Chemicals
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Sarah Soltau, BRIDGEWATER STATE UNIVERSITY
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 08/31/2026
* USD 348,850.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Sarah Soltau of Bridgewater State University in Bridgewater, Massachusetts is
studying the development of new mechanisms to reductively capture carbon dioxide
emissions, studies relevant to the greenhouse gas challenges facing society
today and to the carbon cycle in general. This work aims to develop light-driven
systems that convert carbon dioxide into useful reduction products using novel
hybrid catalytic systems under development. These light-driven systems are
comprised of a protein isolated from algae and an earth-abundant transition
metal catalyst. In addition, this project will promote the teaching and training
of undergraduate student researchers who stand to become the next generation of
STEM (science, technology, engineering and mathematics) researchers. In this
project, the Soltau team will also conduct outreach activities with local high
school students on green chemistry, alternative energy, and climate change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Carbon dioxide emissions are a highly significant global
health concern. This project aims to develop new catalytic systems to capture
and reduce carbon dioxide to generate reduction products as formic acid,
methanol, or methane with applications as one-carbon building blocks or as fuel
additives. A photoactive protein, Photosystem I (PSI), will be isolated from the
green algae, Chlorella vulgaris, and then will be covalently attached to a
series of earth-abundant transition metal catalyst complexes for carbon dioxide
(CO2) reduction. These PSI-CO2 reduction catalyst systems will be illuminated
with white light to characterize their efficiency using a sacrificial electron
donor, and an electron transfer protein. The products of these photochemical
reactions will be characterized by using a variety of chromatographic and
spectroscopic techniques to determine the functionality and mechanism of the
PSI-CO2 reduction catalyst systems. Success in this project will provide for new
approach to photodriven CO2 capture and redox
chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.