* 2247435
* A Team-Based Model for Co-Adapting Existing Middle-School Science Curricula for Culturally and Linguistically Diverse Learners
* EDU,DRL
* 07/15/2023,06/30/2027
* Sissy Wong, University of Houston
* Continuing Grant
* David Daniel
* 06/30/2027
* USD 936,409.00

Today’s schools are experiencing increasing cultural and linguistic diversity
and facing the challenge of creating meaningful connections between school
science and student lived experiences outside of school. Middle school is a
critical time to provide fundamental knowledge and encourage interest in STEM
careers. In order to best impact learners during this critical period, science
teachers need improved models to support the development and delivery of
relevant curriculum materials to better serve all students in their classrooms.
Highly supported design teams consisting of researchers, teachers, and both
school and district science specialists will co-adapt existing district-
generated science units to integrate socially and culturally relevant science
practices and draw on students' diverse cultural and language practices as
strengths. This series of studies will evaluate student impact as well as if and
how science curricular co-design experiences impact teaching and productive
collaboration within the schools. This project will provide foundational
knowledge for the development of a teacher-researcher co-design
model.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will focus on middle school grades and
take place in a highly diverse urban school district in Texas in which 44% of
the student population are emergent bilinguals. In this four-year project, the
co-design teams will follow design-based research (DBR) models to iteratively
develop, implement, refine, and test a model that aims to adapt existing
standards-based, grades 6-8 science district curricular units. The project will
support two cohorts of grades 6-8 teachers to co-adapt multiple science units
using a cascade approach. In year 1, 12 cohort 1 teachers (four in each grade)
will co-design, implement, and refine a unit per grade level. In year 2, the
units from year 1 will be used as a model to help cohort 2 of 12 additional
teachers (four in each grade) to co-design a second set of units. In year 3,
both cohorts will revise the previously designed units and adapt additional
units. In year 4, cohort 1 teachers will be followed up with the strategic
decreasing of scaffolding, and cohort 2 teachers will continue another co-design
cycle. Multiple quantitative and qualitative data sources will be collected to
inform the iterative development of co-design cycles and explore ways to
leverage students’ cultural and language practices in lesson design and
implementation, as well as to assess opportunities and constraints teachers
encounter during curriculum adaptation. Teacher outcomes (beliefs about teaching
science for diversity, curriculum development capacity, and instructional
practices) and student outcomes (science learning and use of science language)
will also be assessed. The resulting theory-based and field-tested co-design
model along with the revised and tested unit/lesson plans, tools and strategies
will be shared with school districts and researchers interested in adapting
these resources to their contexts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is funded
by NSF’s Discovery Research PreK-12 (DRK-12) program. The DRK-12 program seeks
to significantly enhance the learning and teaching of science, technology,
engineering, mathematics and computer science (STEM) by preK-12 students and
teachers, through research and development of STEM education innovations and
approaches.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.