* 2247229
* RUI: Improving Activity and Selectivity in Ruthenium-Catalyzed Hydrogenation Reactions Through Mechanistic Understanding
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Anthony Chianese, Colgate University
* Standard Grant
* Jon Rainier
* 08/31/2026
* USD 360,000.00

With support from the Chemical Catalysis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Anthony Chianese and Jason Keith of Colgate University are studying how
catalysts operate at a molecular level to improve their efficiency and
sustainability. A major goal in chemistry is the development of sustainable
chemical reactions that minimize the production of hazardous waste and operate
under energy-efficient conditions. The co-principal investigators (co-PIs), Drs.
Chianese and Keith, are using a combined experimental- and computer-modeling-
based approach to elucidate the mechanisms of catalysts for the epoxide
hydrogenolysis reaction. While this is an important reaction in the
pharmaceutical and chemical industries, current methods for this reaction
produce significant amounts of hazardous waste, which limits the sustainability
of the process. Replacing traditional chemical reagents with hydrogen gas has
the potential to significantly reduce the reaction’s cost and environmental
impact. Understanding how the reaction works at a microscopic level would
contribute basic scientific knowledge and facilitate the design of the next
generation of improved catalysts. The research for this project is being
conducted by undergraduate students in the laboratories of the PIs at Colgate
University. Participation in undergraduate research, especially early in a
student’s career, is increasingly recognized for its positive impacts on
students and for broadening participation in the sciences. Chianese and the
students working in his research group devote a day each summer to an outreach
activity for high school students attending Camp Fiver, a residential summer
camp that hosts a group of at-risk students New York City and rural upstate New
York.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In previous NSF-funded research, PIs Chianese and
Keith used a combined experimental/computational approach to determine the
mechanism of ester hydrogenation catalyzed by a widely used complex, Milstein’s
catalyst, and showed how the catalyst converts from its original form to the
form active in catalytic hydrogenation reactions. In the current project,
Chianese and Keith are applying this knowledge to a new transformation, the
ruthenium-catalyzed hydrogenolysis of epoxides. The project aims to develop
highly active catalysts for epoxide hydrogenolysis that are selective for one
isomer of the product alcohol, and to understand how these catalysts operate at
the molecular level. In another thrust, the Chinese-Keith research team will
revisit the previously proposed mechanisms of related hydrogenation reactions
promoted by Milstein’s catalyst, building on their recent discovery that
Milstein’s catalyst irreversibly transforms upon heating to a different form
with a catalytically relevant hydrogen bound to a nitrogen atom. This project
has the potential to result in new, more sustainable chemical transformations,
and to improve our understanding of how these reactions proceed at a molecular
level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and has
been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.