* 2247426
* Automated Electrochemical Research based on Deep Learning
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Jenny Yang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 08/31/2026
* USD 600,000.00

With support from the Chemical Catalysis (CAT) and Chemical Structure, Dynamics,
and Mechanisms-B (CSDM-B) programs in the Division of Chemistry, the
collaborative team of Chong Liu and Quanquan Gu of the University of California,
Los Angeles and Jenny Y. Yang of the University of California, Irvine is working
to establish an electrochemical research automation platform that requires
minimal human intervention. Successful completion of this project will showcase
the feasibility, caveats, and power of autonomous electrochemical research and
promise a paradigm shift in how scientific research investigation in
electrochemistry and electrocatalysis will be conducted. The project also
introduces the opportunity of training the next-generation researchers and
workforce with diverse skill sets in an interdisciplinary research environment.
The software and methodology developed will be made publicly accessible free of
charge and incorporated into an educational boot camp focused on
electrochemistry. A boot camp on electrochemistry, automation, and artificial
intelligence for undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral participants,
particularly those from socio-economically underrepresented groups, will be
established. This boot camp will engage senior-level undergraduate and graduate
students, as well as postdoctoral scholars, will foster interdisciplinarity and
will help to build an AI-savvy chemistry workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under
this award, the tripartite collaborative of Chong Liu and Quanquan Gu of the
University of California, Los Angeles and Jenny Y. Yang of the University of
California, Irvine are establishing a proof-of-concept platform to autonomously
conduct electrochemistry research with high throughput and at least partly
supplement, if not replace, the manual process. The team will develop algorithms
based on deep learning to automatically analyze electrochemical data and
construct an experimentation platform for mechanistic studies of proton-coupled
electron transfer in electrochemistry. Specifically, the aims of this proposal
are: (1) to develop automatic algorithms based on deep learning that
automatically analyze cyclic voltammograms as a classic example of
electrochemical data; (2) to construct an autonomous experimentation platform
that automates electrochemical testing and iteratively designs new experiments
based on the group's understanding of the deep-learning algorithm and Bayesian
optimization and (3) to employ the established platform to conduct mechanistic
studies of proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET) in electrochemistry and
discover new reactivities in homogenous electrocatalysis of CO2
fixation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.