* 2247151
* Function Theory of Several Complex Variables
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Xiaojun Huang, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Jeremy Tyson
* 05/31/2026
* USD 364,406.00

This project concerns the understanding of complex numbers and complex
functions. Complex numbers and functions of complex variables are indispensable
tools in many areas of mathematics and have deep applications to other areas of
science and engineering. The solutions of many problems in applied sciences
could ultimately depend on improvements in complex analytic tools. Results of
the research to be carried out in this project may lead to the discovery of
novel properties of complex-valued functions. This project also has significant
educational and training aspects. Graduate students, undergraduate students, and
junior researchers will be actively involved in the project. Also, the principal
investigator will continue to organize international conferences on several
complex variables and complex geometry, bringing together many mathematicians to
discuss their research and teaching. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves
work on a number of problems in the broad area of several complex variables and
Cauchy-Riemann geometry. The problems under consideration also have connections
to other mathematical fields, including differential geometry, complex
singularity theory, algebraic geometry, and classical dynamics. More
specifically, the PI will continue his investigation of rigidity problems in
several complex variables, along with their applications and interactions with
complex geometry and algebraic geometry. He will continue his research on the
equivalence problem in several complex variables, pursue his ongoing study of
the complex structure of the holomorphic hull of a real submanifold in a complex
space, and further his investigations on the existence and regularity problem
for Levi-flat submanifolds bounded by real submanifolds with CR singularities.
In addition, he will continue his work on boundary invariants of weakly pseudo-
convex domains, finite type conditions and the Bloom conjecture, and canonical
metrics on Stein spaces with isolated normal singularities. Finally, he will
continue his study on the boundary unique continuation problems for holomorphic
functions and his work on transversality problems in the Cauchy-Riemann
setting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.