* 2247315
* Transition Metal-Catalyzed Reaction Development Toward the Synthesis of Alkaloids
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Brian Stoltz, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Paul Blakemore
* 06/30/2026
* USD 500,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Synthesis Program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Brian Stoltz of the California Institute of Technology is studying new
methods designed to facilitate the preparation of marine-derived chemical
substances with anticancer properties. The methods of interest leverage the
reactivity of transition metal catalysts to enable rapid construction of the
challenging molecular frameworks found within the targeted products and related
bioactive substances. It is anticipated that the developed synthetic tools will
improve access to a range of molecules that could serve as a platform for the
discovery of novel therapeutics against a variety of cancer types. The broader
impacts of the funded project extend to the benefits accrued to society as
Professor Stoltz and his team engage in an extensive assortment of educational
and outreach activities intended to promote interest in STEM (science,
technology, engineering and mathematics) among K-12 students and to widen
participation in scientific disciplines by students belonging to groups that
have been historically underrepresented. The award will also help to support the
ongoing efforts of Professor Stoltz to improve upon the diversity, equity, and
inclusion landscape of the Division of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at
Caltech.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Pyrroloiminoquinone natural products have been of
longstanding interest to organic chemists because of their structural
complexity, which provides a driving force for the development of synthetic
methods and strategies, and also due to the broad range of biological activities
associated with this alkaloid class. Notwithstanding the recognized value of
pyrroloiminoquinone alkaloids, a sufficiently rapid and general approach to
these polycyclic molecules that may enable analogue development and the
synthesis of new congeners is as yet unrealized. The funded project focuses on
the development of two palladium-catalyzed methods that are designed to address
this deficiency while also improving access to other important target molecules,
namely: (1) a Larock/Buchwaldâ€“Hartwig cascade process that facilitates
biannulations and rapid increases in structural complexity from simple
precursors, and (2) a transition metal-catalyzed spirocyclization reaction. The
total synthesis of representative pyrroloiminoquinones, including makaluvamines
A and F and sanguinone B, as well as other indole alkaloids, such as indolactam
V, will be pursued to demonstrate the utility of the developed methods and to
evaluate their scope. In addition, the second method will be studied more
generally for the synthesis of novel heteroatom-containing spirocycles and
enantioselective variants of this technology will be investigated. It is
anticipated that the funded project will lead to fundamental advances in the
practice of transition metal-based organic synthesis while improving access to a
class of alkaloids that are a potentially rich source of lead compounds for the
development of new clinical candidates. Finally, it is noted that the research
supported by the award provides valuable training opportunities for graduate
students to enable their pursuit of future careers in the chemical
sciences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.