* 2247059
* SaTC: CORE: Small: Emerging Security Challenges and a Solution Framework for FPGA-accelerated Cloud Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 10/01/2023,09/30/2026
* Sandip Kundu, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Daniela Oliveira
* 09/30/2026
* USD 299,995.00

Field programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) have been extensively used in data
centers to make their tasks run faster. Unlike conventional computers, FPGAs can
be configured and/or programmed differently for different tasks and shared among
multiple users, adding agility to cloud environments. However, this flexibility
adds security risks. For example, if many users are sharing an FPGA, a malicious
user can steal or corrupt other users’ data. The project’s novelties are
developing novel ways to protect FPGAs from these harmful attacks. The project's
broader significance and importance are making cloud computing safer and easier
to use and promoting education and research in FPGA security.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project aims to address FPGA security concerns by
introducing novel approaches that prevent attacks compromising user data,
causing corruption or physical damage to the data center. By implementing secure
operating mechanisms, controlled sharing of FPGAs among multiple users is made
possible. A security and queue management unit (SQMU) are embedded within the
FPGA to maintain process isolation and allow secure sharing without sacrificing
performance and energy efficiency. The proposed structure enables multiple
applications to securely share the same accelerator or utilize different
accelerators on the same FPGA. Access to FPGA interfaces is tightly controlled
to prevent denial-of-service attacks, and memory access is isolated to
authorized pages. Additionally, the project contributes to FPGA state saving to
support process preemption.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's
statutory mission and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using
the Foundation's intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.