* 2247776
* New Tools and Applications for Kinetics and Dynamics with Broadband Rotational Spectroscopy
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Arthur Suits, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Samy El-Shall
* 06/30/2026
* USD 500,000.00

With support from the Chemical Structure, Dynamics, and Mechanisms-A (CSDM-A)
program in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Arthur Suits of the University
of Missouri-Columbia is developing new tools to permit applications of Chirped-
Pulse Fourier-Transform Micro/Millimeter Wave Spectroscopy to study low
temperature kinetics of radical-radical reactions. The first reactions to be
studied include formyl and acetyl radicals with the stable open shell molecules
NO and O2 as well as reactions involving hydrogen atoms and amino radicals. The
radical-radical reactions that will be the subject of these studies are
important in a wide range of extreme environments. However, they are very
challenging to investigate experimentally, and are not readily treated by the
“gold standard” theoretical approaches. These studies could lead to a better
understanding of chemical reactivity in complex systems, benchmark the
theoretical characterization of inherently multireference systems that are the
subject of active investigation by electronic structure theorists, and have
implications for astrochemistry, atmospheric chemistry, and combustion. Students
and post-docs will be trained in state-of-the-art instrument development
methods, in reaction dynamics and photochemistry, in kinetics and kinetic
modeling, in data analysis, and issues in astrochemistry and atmospheric
chemistry. Techniques developed will be freely shared with the broader
community.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Broadband rotational spectroscopy is a powerful,
near-universal probe technique but there are challenges in coupling it to the
low temperature flow environment for kinetics measurements. Sampling the flow to
a separate detection region is possible but this can introduce shocks and
produce nonequilibrium conditions that interfere with the measurements.
Professor Suits and his students will instead develop an extended nozzle in
which the reactions take place, which is then followed by a shock-free second
expansion to low pressure ideal for detection by rotational spectroscopy.
Professor Suits and his students will also couple Resonance Enhanced Multiphoton
Ionization (REMPI) to the low temperature flow environment to probe low
temperature kinetics, product branching, and dynamics for these challenging
radical-radical reactions. This strategy will be used to detect hydrogen atoms
and other atomic species for kinetics measurements which are otherwise difficult
or impossible to probe in the flow environment. They will also adapt the REMPI
technique to determine the conditions inside the extended nozzle which will be
essential to validate the conditions used for the rate
determinations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.