* 2247976
* Beyond Access: Leveraging Mobile-Friendly Design of Online Course Content to Support STEM Student Success
* EDU,DUE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2025
* Alex Rockey, Bakersfield College
* Standard Grant
* Mike Ferrara
* 05/31/2025
* USD 400,000.00

With support from the Improving Undergraduate STEM Education: Hispanic-Serving
Institutions (HSI Program), this Track 1 project responds to the pervasive lack
of access to reliable home Internet that was highlighted as a barrier to student
outcomes during the peak of the COVID-19 pandemic. A collaborative team of
mathematics faculty, instructional designers, equity-minded practitioners, and
accessibility experts will work together to design mobile-friendly course
shells, or digital containers for course content, grading, and centralized
student-instructor communication. In addition, they will also provide linked
professional development opportunities to faculty. The majority of students in
online courses use mobile devices to access course content. However, research
has shown that women, students of color, students with disabilities, first-
generation students, students who are independent, and students from
disadvantaged socioeconomic backgrounds see their devices as significantly more
important to their success than do their peers outside these groups. While this
establishes a clear need for mobile-friendly courses, there is a lack of
research and guidelines on how to design online courses that are mobile
accessible. In addition, there is a lack of research on how mobile-friendly
courses affect student success in STEM. This project will develop empirically-
based guidelines for designing mobile-friendly courses, as well as an
understanding of how mobile-friendly courses can impact student success in STEM
courses. Three principal outcomes are expected. First is the design of three
mobile-friendly course shells with integrated grading for equity approaches
intended to close equity gaps in anatomy and physiology, introductory physics,
and statistics courses. Second is the completion of a research study that: (i)
explores the impact of mobile-friendly course design on student success, (ii)
develop understanding of student perspectives of mobile-friendly course design,
and (iii) documents the student experiences in mobile-friendly courses. The
third outcome is increased visibility and awareness to encourage broader faculty
adoption of mobile-accessible courses. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;By designing
mobile-friendly STEM courses, this project is taking important strides toward
designing for equity. Courses will be made freely and widely available on Canvas
Commons. To generate interest and awareness of the importance of mobile design,
the project will disseminate outcomes on both key components of mobile design
and the impact of mobile-friendly courses on student experiences and outcomes.
Publication, presentations, and a project website will guide researchers,
faculty and instructional designers who are interested in creating mobile-
friendly courses or engaging in further study. A mixed-method project evaluation
will inform the project's progress towards the HSI Program's aims to enhance
undergraduate STEM education, broaden participation in STEM, and build capacity
for improved STEM learning at HSIs. Achieving these aims, given the diverse
nature and context of the HSIs, requires innovative approaches that incentivize
institutional and community transformation and promote fundamental research on:
(i) engaged student learning; (ii) insights into what it takes to diversify and
increase participation in STEM effectively; and (iii) improved understanding of
how to build institutional capacity for transformation at HSIs are supported by
this program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.