* 2247382
* Combinatorics of Sharing Theorems, Stratifications, Bruhat Theory and Shimura Varieties
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Margaret Readdy, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Stefaan De Winter
* 06/30/2026
* USD 182,748.00

This project is jointly funded by the Combinatorics program, the Established
Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (EPSCoR), and the Algebra and Number
Theory program. Combinatorics is the area of mathematics concerned with
enumerating, understanding and characterizing mathematical structures that occur
within discrete objects. The results of this project will contribute to the
growing connections between combinatorics and other mathematical disciplines.
This includes extending sharing theorems of classical Coxeter groups, using
combinatorial methods to generalize and understand identities involved with the
representation theory of Shimura varieties, and continuing the PI's successful
program involving noncommutative polynomials that have applications to
understanding polytopes, Whitney stratified spaces and the totally nonnegative
flag variety. Results from this award have the potential to give insight into
discrete structures in other sciences including the noncommutative nature of DNA
sequencing in biology, mathematical methods in coding theory and topological
surfaces related to robotic motion. The PI has been vigorously involved in
research, educational and outreach activities to foster the growth of the
mathematical workforce. As a response to the isolation caused by the COVID-19
pandemic, this includes co-organizing a new regional lecture series to
reinvigorate collaboration between students, postdocs and faculty. Support of
the PI's research program reinforces the NSF's goals of scientific progress,
building new talent, fostering innovation and improving
society.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, this project includes four
subprojects involving combinatorics broadly defined, plus ongoing graduate
research projects. Results from the award will contribute to the growing
connections between combinatorics with geometry, topology, algebra and number
theory, and to make fundamental contributions to classical areas of
combinatorics. Project I involves the PI's new work with Ehrenborg and Morel on
extensions of sharing theorems to Coxeter arrangements, and using Herb's theory
of 2-structures to give dissection proofs and generalizations to intrinsic
volumes. Extensions to other geometric settings will be studied, including
regular complex polytopes and the Nandakumar--Rao conjecture. Project II
involves the PI's joint work with Ehrenborg and Goresky on topological face
enumeration of Whitney stratified spaces, more generally, zeta functions of
quasi-graded posets. This widens the research program to understand and make
progress on face vector inequalities for polytopes and singular spaces. The PI
and Ehrenborg develop a non-homogeneous extension of the classical cd-index to
labeled digraphs satisfying a balanced condition to generalize the setting of
Eulerian graded posets and include the family of Bruhat graphs as a special
case. Project III includes a conjecture for balanced digraphs which implies the
Billera--Brenti nonnegativity conjecture for the cd-index of Bruhat graphs.
Project IV concerns extending the combinatorics of the generalized Harish-
Chandra character formula. The PI will continue her educational, regional and
national activities to support the long-range goal to attract, retain and train
more under-represented groups in the mathematical sciences and ultimately
increase the number of STEM-educated individuals in the
workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.