* 2247667
* Developing Late Metal Catalytic Systems for Aerobic Partial Oxidation of Alkanes
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2023,08/31/2026
* Karen Goldberg, University of Pennsylvania
* Standard Grant
* Laura Anderson
* 08/31/2026
* USD 575,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis and the Chemical Structure, Dynamics,
and Mechanism B Programs in the Division of Chemistry, Professor Karen Goldberg
of the University of Pennsylvania is studying the development of catalysts that
will promote the selective conversion of natural gas to useful chemicals.
Methane, the largest component of natural gas, is a significant contributor to
climate change. Currently large amounts of natural gas are flared (burned
without energy capture to produce carbon dioxide and water) because methane is a
more potent greenhouse gas than carbon dioxide, and it is not profitable to
transport it as a gas or convert it onsite to a liquid. The researchers on this
project are working to design metal compounds that will act as catalysts to
directly convert natural gas to higher-value products under mild conditions
using the oxygen in air. Detailed studies of the selective cleavage and
formation of key chemical bonds by specific metal compounds will be carried out
to determine the important design principles for these catalysts. With a strong
emphasis on increasing diversity in science, this project is also training
graduate students and providing them with the research skills needed to
creatively address future challenges facing society.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Transition metal complexes have shown a unique ability to
selectively activate the C-H bonds of alkanes. However, many of these selective
C-H bond cleavage reactions are not viable in the presence of air or oxygen.
This condition presents an impediment to the development of technologies to
carry out the selective partial oxidation of alkanes on a large scale, where
oxygen is considered the most promising oxidant. This project targets the
development of transition metal complexes that can selectively activate and
functionalize C-H bonds using air or oxygen as the oxidant. The researchers on
the Goldberg team will explore new mechanisms for the activation of alkane C-H
bonds that proceed in the presence of oxygen and water. Detailed mechanistic
studies of the reactions of metal alkyl and hydride complexes, the products of
alkane C-H activation, with oxygen will be carried out to learn how to
incorporate oxygen as the oxidant in natural gas upgrading. Students involved in
these activities will learn synthetic skills and a hypothesis-driven mechanistic
approach to catalyst discovery and optimization, while participating in outreach
activities and being encouraged to participate in broadening inclusive thinking
in chemistry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.