* 2247571
* CAS: Heteroatom Dimer and Cluster Catalysis
* MPS,CHE
* 06/01/2023,05/31/2026
* Jingyue Liu, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Moloy
* 05/31/2026
* USD 400,000.00

With the support of the Chemical Catalysis program in the Division of Chemistry,
Professor Jingyue (Jimmy) Liu of Arizona State University will study heteroatom-
dimer catalysts for chemical transformations of important molecules. Catalysis
plays a significant role in energy, environment, and sustainability
applications. Many chemical manufacturing and emission control processes use
expensive precious metals as catalysts to accelerate desired chemical reactions.
Because of their low abundance and high cost, the current industrial precious
metal catalysts are not sustainable. The development of catalysts that make more
efficient use of these metals may address this practical problem. Single-atom
catalysts have been demonstrated for a variety of chemical reactions, but there
remain many desired chemical reactions for which these catalysts do not provide
optimum performance. Professor Liu and his research team are developing
precision-designed dual atom catalysts that may provide the enhanced catalytic
performance needed for those chemical reactions where single-atom catalysts do
not. This project is addressing fundamental principles that govern the catalytic
properties of catalysts and providing design tools for their further
development, with potential long term practical applications of economic and
environmental benefit. Broader impacts include incorporating research results in
an annual Winter Workshop of High Resolution Electron Microscopy (attended
primarily by graduate students from across the US), training of graduate and
undergraduate research students, and mentoring of high school students through
the SCience and ENgineering Experience (SCENE) program dedicated to providing
cutting-edge science research experiences to high school
students.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research led by Professor Jingyue Liu of
Arizona State University aims to develop a fundamental understanding of
synergistic catalysis by supported heteroatom dimers ( for example PtPd, PtRh,
PtCo, PtNi, PdCu, PtBi, PtSn, and CoCu). These dual atoms are localized to
isolated, ultra-small metal oxide islands (for example CeOx or CoOx) which are
uniformly dispersed on high-surface-area, robust supports. With such a catalyst
design, it is expected that the interaction between two different metal atoms,
placed in close proximity, can provide for unique catalytic properties that may
significantly enhance catalytic activity and/or increase selectivity of the
desired reaction products. The use of stable heteroatom-dimers as catalytically-
active centers not only maximizes metal usage efficiency but also makes it
possible to tune their catalytic properties for desired chemical
transformations. This catalyst design strategy enables interactions between two
different metal atoms and opens up design space for developing stable and well-
defined heteroatom-dimer or dual-atom catalysts that possess advantageous
catalytic properties. The heteroatom-dimer and dual-atom catalysts are being
tested for CO oxidation, water-gas shift, reforming, and hydrogenation
reactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission and
has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.