* 2247185
* The Frequency Function Method in Elliptic Partial Differential Equations and Harmonic Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2023,06/30/2026
* Eugenia Malinnikova, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Marian Bocea
* 06/30/2026
* USD 509,874.00

This project is aimed at the study of local properties of solutions of elliptic
partial differential equations (PDE) and their gradients. Examples of such
solutions include the temperature distribution in a body, electromagnetic
fields, and gravitational fields. One of the tools in the analysis of solutions
to elliptic equations is the so-called frequency function, which describes the
local complexity of the solution. The overreaching goal of the project is to
understand how the frequency function controls various local characteristics of
the solution and its gradient. The work on quantitative properties of solutions
of elliptic equations has numerous applications in other areas of mathematics,
including spectral geometry, geometric measure theory, control theory, and
mathematical physics. The project provides research training opportunities for
graduate students. The principal investigator (PI) is active in disseminating
the new ideas and results obtained as part of this project through series of
lectures and minicourses on the frequency function method. As an educational
initiative within this project, the PI will prepare an expository article based
on these series of lectures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The frequency function was
introduced by Almgren and was applied to quantitative unique continuation for
solutions of elliptic equations by Garofalo and Lin. Recent progress in the
understanding of the behavior of the frequency function led to a proof of
Nadirashvili's conjecture and a partial solution of Yau's conjecture. These
results and the geometric combinatorial method on which they are based open up
new possibilities in the study of analytic, geometric, and topological
properties of solutions to second order elliptic PDE. One of the goals of the
project concerns the study of solutions to elliptic equations with bounded
frequency and their applications to Laplace eigenfunctions, which includes
restriction estimates and localization properties of eigenfunctions. Another
goal is to introduce a new framework to study random harmonic functions of
bounded frequency and investigate the typical behavior of such functions. For a
number of deterministic questions on the behavior of solutions of elliptic PDE
that are currently out of reach, the PI studies the typical behavior of the
corresponding random solutions defined by taking random combinations of the
Steklov eigenfunctions with independent Gaussian
coefficients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award reflects NSF's statutory mission
and has been deemed worthy of support through evaluation using the Foundation's
intellectual merit and broader impacts review criteria.