* 0100459
* Function Theory on Symmetric Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2007
* Adam Koranyi, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2007
* USD 132,846.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Koranyi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is concerned with
several lines of investigation, The first one of these is the mapping problem of
domains in several complex variables with the aid of symplectic quasiconformal
maps (with respect to the Bergman metric). It has already been proved that
bounded simply connected smooth strongly pseudoconvex domains can always be
mapped onto&lt;br/&gt;each other by such maps. The present project is concerned
with developing geometric methods for computing or estimating the minimal
qusiconformal distortion. The second line of investigation has to do with
Poisson transforms of sections of vector bundles. Such Poisson transforms
have&lt;br/&gt;been used to extend infinitesimally quasiconformal maps from the
complex unit ball to the interior. They are now to be further investigated for
their injectivity properties and for pairs of differential operators intertwined
by them. Here the machinery of semisimple Lie groups will be used to its full
capacity. A further subject to be studied is generalized conformal maps of
generalized flag manifolds; it is expected that Liouville's classic theorem will
extend to this situation. (This question is related to the preceding one through
the notion of parabolic geometry.) In addition, three further, more or less
related problems will be investigated; these concern analysis on two-step
nilpotent groups, harmonic functions on spaces with negative curvature, and an
application&lt;br/&gt;of the theory of reflection groups to
statistics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of the proposal is to discover
new mathematical facts in the field of analysis of functions. The theory of
functions of one complex variable has been the most central field of mathematics
in the last 150 years. It has innumerable applications to physics and
other&lt;br/&gt;sciences. The theory of functions of several complex variables
has had important successes but has not up to now matched in perfection and
applicability the one-variable theory. The first goal of the proposal is to try
to improve on this situation by studying the so-called mapping properties of
functions of several complex variables. It will also be investigated to what
extent the fundamental notions and facts of this theory can be extended to more
general situations. The project also includes the investigation of some further
related problems, one of these concerns an application to statistics. A
secondary goal of the proposal is to understand more clearly the connections
between certain already known facts in the main subject. This should make them
easier to learn; in this way a contribution to mathematical education is
expected to be made.&lt;br/&gt;