* 0100566
* Research and Development to Support MECO Experiment in RSVP
* MPS,PHY
* 05/01/2001,04/30/2005
* William Molzon, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Morris Pripstein
* 04/30/2005
* USD 1,498,565.00

This proposal requests support for Research and Development of the beamline and
particle detector systems for MECO, one of the two experiments that comprise the
RSVP initiative. The MECO (for Muon to Electron Conversion) experiment will
search for the coherent conversion of muons into electrons in the field of an
atomic nucleus. This is a process that violates muon and lepton number, commonly
referred to as lepton flavor violation. MECO proposes to search for coherent
muon conversion at a sensitivity a factor of 10000 times that of current
experiments.&lt;br/&gt;The MECO experiment will be mounted at the Brookhaven
National Laboratory, using the Alternate Gradient Synchrotron proton accelerator
as a driver for a new, extremely intense muon beam. The muon beam uses a new
technique involving producing muons in the bore of a superconducting solenoid
and transporting them in a second solenoid to the region of a target in a third
solenoid, in which they are stopped by a thin target. The conversion electrons
are momentum analyzed in a set of particle detectors, also located in the bore
of the third solenoid.&lt;br/&gt;While neither the beamline components nor the
particle detectors are beyond the state of the art in their respective
technologies, significant development and detailed design work are required
before construction. The MECO experiment has been approved by the National
Science Board to be included in the President's budget as an MRE project for FY
2002. This proposal is to support design work in five areas: superconducting
solenoids, particle tracking detector and associated electronics, calorimetric
electron detector and associated electronics, active cosmic ray shield, and
modifications to the proton beam line. The work will be done by the MECO
collaboration and by subcontract to an organization with expertise in the design
and construction of large superconducting magnets.&lt;br/&gt;