* 0100238
* Small Grants for Exploratory Research (SGER): Smart Rotating Machinery
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2001,06/30/2002
* Sherif Noah, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Alison Flatau
* 06/30/2002
* USD 60,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PIs: Sherif Noah, Alexander G. Parlos, Suhada
Jayasuriya, Texas A&amp;M University, Department of Mechanical Engineering,
College Station, Texas 77843&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0100238&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Smart Rotating
Machinery&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
exploratory research project addresses the development of smart rotating
machinery. Unplanned machinery downtime and poor machinery performance impact
negatively both industrial productivity and safety at an annual level of $1
trillion. It is therefore timely to develop smart rotating machinery that are
highly adaptive to uncertain dynamic environments while maintaining high level
of performance. Such machinery must incorporate new and innovative breakthroughs
rooted in new information technologies that enable them to exhibit memory, learn
from experience and use this learning ability to improve their adaptability
while performing in an optimal manner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical
approach of the proposed research relies on health monitoring, condition
assessment and early fault diagnosis through a combination of physics-based
nonlinear rotordynamics models and empirical models developed through real-time
sensor data. Closed-loop early incipient fault diagnosis is achieved through the
use of computational intelligence tools, e.g. neural networks, fuzzy logic, and
genetic algorithms, and other advanced signal processing methods, such as
wavelet analysis. Towards making smart rotating machinery a reality, an initial
framework will be explored for a methodology that will enable embedding certain
elements of intelligent behavior into rotating machinery. The proposed limited
effort is considered high-risk because it constitutes a pioneering study in
smart systems with the perceived difficulties in developing an effective
methodology. Furthermore, this research will lead to the experimental
demonstrations of early diagnosis algorithms for controlled rotating machinery,
a subject that has yet to be addressed in the literature. Such algorithms will
control and mitigate impending failures of critical rotating machinery, reducing
the probability of unplanned downtime, emergency shutdowns and catastrophic
accidents.&lt;br/&gt;