* 0100576
* Operatory Theory and Systems Engineering
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2004
* J. William Helton, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2004
* USD 239,072.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;NONLINEAR OPERATOR THEORY. The goal is to find canonical
"nonlinear generalizations" &lt;br/&gt;of analytic function theory and the
related parts of linear operator theory. Many &lt;br/&gt;classical and many new
analytic function theorems have a statement purely in terms of &lt;br/&gt;linear
operators. The surprising thing is that these theorems about linear operators
&lt;br/&gt;do not actually require linearity, and it has become clear that there
will be extensive &lt;br/&gt;nonlinear generalizations of them. This wide open
area is close to control theory.&lt;br/&gt;COMPUTER OPERATOR ALGEBRA. Linear
engineering systems theory and operator theory are rife with calculations in a
noncommutative algebra. Helton's group with M. Stankus &lt;br/&gt;are major
providers of software (called NCAlgebra) for performing general noncommutative
&lt;br/&gt;calculations in Mathematica. One phase of the software is at the
level of a very &lt;br/&gt;powerful `yellow pad', and contains numerous
algorithms they developed. For example, &lt;br/&gt;the "noncommutative
convexity" algorithm discussed below will go in. In another phase
&lt;br/&gt;there is extensive software implementing noncommutative Groebner
basis algorithms &lt;br/&gt;due to Mora and algorithms for sorting and
"shrinking" the output in various ways ( this &lt;br/&gt;is crucial in the
noncommutative case). Since the techniques are new, experimentation on
&lt;br/&gt;traditional problems is important. &lt;br/&gt;NONCOMMUTATIVE
INEQUALITIES. Recently, Helton and collaborators made progress on a
&lt;br/&gt;theory and resulting algorithm which takes a rational function F of
noncommutative &lt;br/&gt;variables Z and outputs a family of inequalities which
determine a domain G of Z on &lt;br/&gt;which F is "matrix convex". Decidedly
non-trivial is showing that the domain G &lt;br/&gt;determined by the algorithm
is "the largest possible" domain of matrix convexity &lt;br/&gt;for F. This is a
first attempt at an automatic method for what engineers now do with
&lt;br/&gt;Schur complement tricks to convert a design problem to Linear Matrix
Inequalities. &lt;br/&gt;OPTIMIZATION OVER SPACES OF ANALYTIC FUNCTIONS.
Qualitative theory, computer algorithms based on this theory, analysis of such
algorithms. These are the key optimization &lt;br/&gt;problems which arise in
designs of linear systems where there are competing constraints, &lt;br/&gt;or
uncertainty in the math model of the physical system one is trying to
control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research is directed at several projects in
parts of operator theory and functional &lt;br/&gt;analysis related to
engineering system theory. Linear operator theory has had a strong
&lt;br/&gt;interplay with analytic function theory and engineering for many
decades. Indeed most &lt;br/&gt;commercial software (at least in the control
engineering community) for solving analytic &lt;br/&gt;function problems is
based on this type of interplay between functions and matrices. &lt;br/&gt;One
branch of analysis closely related to applications is classical Nevanlinna-
Pick-&lt;br/&gt;Nehari theory, or equivalently commutant lifting theory, a part
of the area called &lt;br/&gt;operator model theory. The early development of
this was done for the purest of &lt;br/&gt;mathematical reasons, but in the mid
1970's and early 1980's this was shown to be &lt;br/&gt;critical to the design
of engineering systems where stability of the system is the key
&lt;br/&gt;constraint. This motivated much more mathematical development and now
it is one of the &lt;br/&gt;areas of functional analysis most closely associated
with control engineering. For many &lt;br/&gt;years (since Norbert Wiener)
design tools optimized mean square performance. The theory &lt;br/&gt;above
ultimately lead to (commercially commonplace) tools for optimizing worst case
&lt;br/&gt;frequency domain performance. The goal of much of the proposed
research is to extend &lt;br/&gt;this theory in several radically new directions
and we list the main ones.&lt;br/&gt;HIGHLY NONLINEAR GENERALIZATIONS; the goal
is to find canonical "nonlinear &lt;br/&gt;generalizations" of analytic function
theory and the related parts of linear &lt;br/&gt;operator theory. This wide
open area is closely related to control theory. Many &lt;br/&gt;systems which
people wish to control are nonlinear (e.g., jet
engines).&lt;br/&gt;NONCOMMUTATIVE COMPUTER ALGEBRA; if a signal goes into a
system A, comes out and then goes into B what we get is BA, while if a signal
goes into B and then A what we &lt;br/&gt;get is AB. Seldom does AB equal BA,
thus the design of engineering systems&lt;br/&gt;requires (heavy) noncommutative
calculations. Helton's group has a broad based &lt;br/&gt;effort to develop
methods and theory for computer assistance of such calculations.
&lt;br/&gt;Inequalities with noncommuting elements is now a major topic in
engineering and &lt;br/&gt;Helton's group is working out systematic methods for
treating them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;