* 0100883
* Non-commutative Analysis and Symmetry in Operator Algebra
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2007
* Sorin Popa, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2007
* USD 1,300,000.00

Abstract Effros/Popa/Takesaki The three PI's intend to continue their
investigations on a broad range of problems in operator algebra theory. Effros
and Ruan are continuing their collaboration on operator spaces. Effros and Ruan
are particularly interested in studying the local theory of von Neumann
algebraic preduals. Building on their earlier result with Junge that that all
von Neumann preduals are locally reflexive, and that the injective preduals have
a simple characterization, Effros and Ruan hope to prove that the general
architecture of a von Neumann algebra can be described in terms of the local
structure of the preduals. Effros also intends to look at the quantized
analogues of rotundity. A number of Popa's research projects will be concerned
with his axiomatization of the standard invariant for subfactors. In particular
he plans to work on the most challenging problem in subfactor theory: finding
techniques that would be applicable to the theory of subfactors of hyperfinite
factors. He intends to continue his studies with Bisch of property T in the
context of subfactors. In a very different direction, he will investigate the
structure theory of C*-algebras based in part on his earlier work on the theory
of local approximation by finite dimensional algebras, and of the relative
Dixmier property for C*-algebras. Takesaki plans to continue his development of
a canonical approach to the theory of type III factors. In the next stage of his
research program, Takesaki and his collaborators intend to complete their
studies of outer automorphism actions of a discrete amenable group on an
approximately finite dimensional (or hyperfinite) factor of type III-lambda
(lambda larger than zero) and he expects that the type III-zero case will yield
to this analysis. He will continue his investigation into the most difficult
problem in the area: the classfication of one-parameter groups of automorphisms.
Takesaki expects to apply classfication principles learned from factor theory to
the classification of certain classes of C*-algebras.

Operator algebraists study the mathematics of quantum physics. In 1926
Heisenberg discovered that the paradoxes of atomic particles could be resolved
with a modified version of Newtonian physics. He showed that the equations of
the classical theory were still valid, provided one reinterpreted their symbols.
In the classical theory these variables stand for functions. Heisenberg showed
one can predict the behaviour of atomic particles if one instead regarded the
variables as representing possibly infinite arrays or ``matrices'' of numbers. A
few years later, von Neumann gave a mathematically precise formulation of these
quantum variable in terms of Hilbert space operators. He went on to suggest that
since the classical notions of measurement and geometry that underlie so much of
mathematics no longer correspond to our understanding of the real world, it was
necessary to seek quantized versions of mathematics. As in physics, one must
begin by replacing functions by operators. In the last fifty years, operator
algebraists have succeeded in quantizing a remarkable number of areas of
mathematics, including analysis, topology, differential and Riemanian geometry,
probability theory, and the theory of symmetry. As in quantum physics, the
quantum world of mathematics is remarkable in the completely new phenomena that
occur. The theory has had profound applications to various areas, including knot
theory and low-dimensional topology, index theory on foliated manifolds, the
classification of dynamical systems, and most recently, mathematical frameworks
for both the standard model of quantum field theory (Connes) and renormalization
theory (Connes and Kreimer). In this broad framework, Effros is one of the
founders of quantized functional analysis (operator space theory), Popa is a
leading figure in the theory of quantum symmetries (subfactor theory), and
Takesaki is internationally recognized for his work on the modern theory of non-
commutative integration and its use in studying the structure of von Neumann
algebras and their automorphism groups