* 0100798
* CNPq:  Service Differentiation, Efficiency, and Scalability in Distributed E-Commerce Servers
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Ricardo Bianchini, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Brett D. Fleisch
* 07/31/2005
* USD 155,497.00

The focus of this proposal is the design and implementation
of&lt;br/&gt;cluster-based electronic commerce servers (or simply
distributed&lt;br/&gt;e-commerce servers) that are efficient, scalable, and
capable of&lt;br/&gt;service differentiation. To achieve these properties, our
servers&lt;br/&gt;will efficiently adapt their quality of service, will
efficiently&lt;br/&gt;handle any type of incoming request according to the
client's profile,&lt;br/&gt;will not involve any centralized resources, and will
cache both static&lt;br/&gt;and certain dynamic content. The key challenges are
in determining&lt;br/&gt;the set of policies and mechanisms that should be used
to&lt;br/&gt;differentiate the services provided and to implement truly
efficient&lt;br/&gt;and scalable policies and mechanisms for request processing.
At the&lt;br/&gt;end of the project, we will demonstrate two distributed
e-commerce&lt;br/&gt;servers (an on-line store and an auction server) running on
a cluster&lt;br/&gt;with 64 processors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The contributions
of this project will be the following: (1) A&lt;br/&gt;complete and general
characterization of e-commerce workloads; (2) An&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the
issues involved in service differentiation for&lt;br/&gt;distributed e-commerce
servers, including the use of optimizations&lt;br/&gt;based on the past history
of actions taken by high-priority clients;&lt;br/&gt;(3) The design,
implementation, and evaluation of mechanisms for&lt;br/&gt;shared state
maintenance and transaction support in distributed&lt;br/&gt;e-commerce servers;
and (4) The study of techniques and mechanisms for&lt;br/&gt;improving the
efficiency and scalability of distributed
e-commerce&lt;br/&gt;servers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We believe that the potential
implications of our research and&lt;br/&gt;contributions are far reaching. In
fact, we think that the impact of&lt;br/&gt;our research can be substantial,
given how significantly various&lt;br/&gt;companies have come to rely on their
on-line networking operations.&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, our research can be useful
for operating systems and&lt;br/&gt;distributed systems teaching purposes, as
our software infrastructure&lt;br/&gt;will provide a tool for the study of
distributed e-commerce servers.&lt;br/&gt;