* 0100310
* Control Development and Modelling for Enhanced Crystal Growth: Application to Novel New Technologies and Extenstion of Conventional Capabilities
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Michael Gevelber, Trustees of Boston University
* Standard Grant
* Radhakisan Baheti
* 08/31/2005
* USD 300,000.00

Characterizing these in terms of the control gain can be misleading. The idea of
using feedforward of known effects to assist the feedback control is good, but
well known. Micro-level material objectives have been indirectly incorporated in
the design of controllers for years. However, the idea of explicitly
incorporating the effects of heat flow is a good example of the use of modeling
to help determine the controller explicitly. Although adaptive control is
proposed as an integral part of both the feedback control and the feedforward
control, very little is said about adaptive control per se.

I have a few comments on the interpretations of the graphs. The text in Figure
11 states that the oscillation in diameter indicates the need for adaptive
control. However, without knowing the measurements that determine both the pull
rate and the heater power, and the system dynamics, it is not apparent that
adaptive control is required. Certainly, Figure 11 by itself is insufficient.
Figure 19 shows oscillations of the boule diameter, which is one indication of
nonminimum phase behavior. However, the anomaly near the end of the graph
appears to be due to a nonlinear effect (or a time variation). This graph, if
the anomalous behavior is not uncommon, would present a good argument for the
use of adaptive control.

The modeling of the CZ and EMCZ appears to be appropriate. Experimentation to
validate the models is reasonable, and I expect that it can be conducted on the
available puller.

In summary, I think the primary contribution of the proposed effort will be the
development of models for the CZ and EMCZ processes. There will be no new
contribution to control theory (and the proposal doesn't claim any). Although
the proposal states that controllers for these processes will be developed, the
analysis of the control issues is weak.