* 0100492
* Partial Differential Equations in Several Complex Variables
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2006
* Mei-Chi Shaw, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2006
* USD 102,429.00

Mei-Chi Shaw will investigate topics in partial differential
equations&lt;br/&gt;which arise from function theory in several complex
variables. Problems&lt;br/&gt;in three specific areas are discussed in this
proposal : the&lt;br/&gt;Cauchy-Riemann equations on nonsmooth domains,
tangential Cauchy-Riemann equations and their interplay with singular integrals
and geometric measure theory. Aspects of the Cauchy-Riemann equations on
Lipschitz domains addressed include the complex Neumann boundary value problem
and estimates of the Cauchy-Riemann equations. Function theory will be analyzed
on strongly pseudoconvex Lipschitz domains, as well as the Bergman
projection&lt;br/&gt;and biholomorphic maps. Recent results in harmonic analysis
on Lipschitz&lt;br/&gt;domains are the main tools. Research on the regularity
property&lt;br/&gt;of the global and local solutions of the tangential Cauchy-
Riemann&lt;br/&gt;equation will be continued. This includes the existence and
regularity&lt;br/&gt;theorems on CR manifolds which are Lipschitz or of higher
codimension.&lt;br/&gt;Homotopy formulas, Szego projection, Hodge theory and the
embeddings of&lt;br/&gt;abstract CR manifolds are also studied. Singular
integral theory and&lt;br/&gt;geometric measure theory on Lipschitz curves and
nonsmooth domains will&lt;br/&gt;play a major role in the approach to these
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These problems are at the interface of harmonic
analysis, geometric measure&lt;br/&gt;theory, complex geometry and partial
differential equations with rough coefficients, important fields all in modern
analysis. Classically, harmonic analysis offers a powerful tool to solve partial
differential equations, especially the Dirichlet and Neumann boundary value
problems. Harmonic analysis is also intertwined with one complex variable,
especially for function theory in the unit disc. In its modern version, harmonic
analysis has evolved into singular integral theory and geometric measure theory.
The development of one influences the other and both collectively are viewed as
one of the most important and elegant theories in mathematics. In several
complex variables, these overlapping areas have produced even richer and more
profound results whose impact have shaped modern partial differential equations,
several complex variables and harmonic analysis. Their influence even extends
beyond these fields into other areas, like complex differential geometry,
algebraic geometry and mathematical physics. While great progress has been made
in the past few decades for the case when the domains are smooth, little is
known when the domain is less regular. The investigation of these problems on
nonsmooth domains is already central to the study of classical Dirichlet and
Neumann boundary value problems using harmonic analysis. Built on these solid
foundations, the PI intends to tackle more challenging problems in several
complex variables. Their solution will&lt;br/&gt;advance all the aforementioned
intricately related fields and open up a vast unexplored area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/
&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;