* 0100667
* Instrumentation for the Purification and Quantification of Proteins and Nucleic Acids
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2003
* Stephen Munroe, Marquette University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 06/30/2003
* USD 44,044.00

This award provides funds to enable purchase of storage phosphor screens and a
phosphorimaging device that can be used in combination to locate and measure
radioactive biological macromolecules. Such devices have become essential
instrumentation for a large variety of procedures in the qualitative and
quantitative analysis of proteins and nucleic acids, typically following
separation procedures that make use gel electrophoresis. Latent images, produced
by ionizing radiation emitted by the radioactive biomolecules, are captured by
the storage phosphor screens which are then scanned by the phosphorimaging
device. The resultant image can be stored in digital format to permit image
display, analysis and if required, the preparation of publication-quality images
of the data. The use of storage phosphor screen and phosphorimager replaces the
use of conventional X-ray film and eliminates the need for development and
scanning of film. The imager can also be used to detect molecules chemically
labeled with fluorescent chromophores without the need for screens. The
instrumentation will serve 5 major users and 3 minor users in interdisciplinary
research and education efforts at both the undergraduate and graduate level. The
requested equipment will be housed in a central location in close proximity to
the research laboratories of all the major users. The availability of such
instrumentation will have an enormous impact on the quality and volume of the
research being performed by the user groups, including graduate students and
participants in an NSF-funded Research Experience for Undergraduates - Site
project. The experimental problems being investigated by the user groups include
developmental regulation of drosophila and tetrahymena gene expression, studies
of thyroid hormone receptor m-RNA, and analysis of yeast mitochondria.

