* 0100009
* Characterization of Nanoscale Defects and Pores
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Albert Yee, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 06/30/2005
* USD 300,000.00

0100009&lt;br/&gt;Gidley&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An interdisciplinary research
program is proposed that combines the well-known void-volume sensitivity of
positron annihilation lifetime spectroscopy (PALS) with state-of-the-art
positron beam technology in order to characterize defects and pores in a wide
range of engineering materials where traditional techniques are not adequate.
Porosity control is an important aspect of the emerging field of
nanoengineering. Introducing and engineering porosity in microelectronic "low-K"
dielectric films, in thin polymeric permeation filters, and in catalytic films
is attracting intense research interest. On the other hand, preventing
interfacial defect porosity is a long-standing problem in structural materials
such as adhesives, encapsulants, and composites. Traditional probes are
challenged by the amorphous nature of these very thin films and by the nanoscale
size of the pores/defects. PALS has been demonstrated to be an important new
tool in characterizing nanoscale porosity in such sub-micron film
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a result of the previous NSF-ECS grant beam-
PALS is playing an important role in helping the microelectronics industry
develop next-generation, low-K interlayer dielectric films. The sensitivity of
PALS to the size and interconnectivity of 1-100 nanometer pores has been
demonstrated. A procedure for extracting pore size distributions for closed-pore
systems has been developed. PALS is found to be sensitive to Cu interdiffusion
into the dielectric and the consequently required diffusion barrier layer
integrity can be tested as well. This proposal will expand upon this work. Metal
interdiffusion and barrier integrity/thermal stability will be studied with
particular attention focussed on developing a standardized PALS testing
procedure as requested by Sematech, a research consortium primarily comprised of
the major U.S. electronics corporations. Cross-calibration experiments with
complementary techniques used to characterize porosity, such as small-angle
neutron scattering (SANS) at NIST and solvent absorption ellipsometric
porosimetry at IMEC, will be continued. Such studies help determine the unique
strengths and weaknesses of each respective technique.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
second major thrust of this proposal will be the study of polymer thin films,
surfaces and interfaces. Ibis research builds upon previous work in which beam-
PALS was used to study the structure and dynamics of thin 10 urn polymer films
constrained on silicon wafers. Such films were found to have a highly immobile
"adhesive" layer next to the silicon and an unconstrained "liquid" layer at the
surface. Particular attention will be focussed on the interfacial regions in
order to determine the sensitivity of the immobile layer to the onset of
adhesion failure and delamination. If failure is due to the coalescence of
precursor nano-voids into larger pores due, for example, to fatigue, thermal
stress, or corrosion, depth-profiled beam-PALS should be a very powerful probe
of this pre-failure initiation phase that is otherwise invisible. Specifically,
the role of defect voids in the failure of polymer encapsulants and adhesives
used in microelectronic packaging will be studied. An ancillary study of the
evolution of nanostructure in a chemically amplified photo-resist as it develops
under UV exposure will also be performed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research builds upon a strong existing collaboration between the University of
Michigan Physics Department and the Materials Science and Engineering
Department. To provide critical guidance and clear focus on relevance the PIs
have developed strong working collaborations with six individual companies,
NIST, and with two large industrial consortiums; Sematech in the U.S. and IMEC
in Europe.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;
br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;