* 0100660
* Topics in Degenerate Evolution Equations and Applied Mathematics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Emmanuele DiBenedetto, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2004
* USD 97,500.00

A Hele--Shaw cell consists of two horizontal, slightly separated, parallel
plates, forming a 2-dimensional strip and filled with a viscous fluid (say for
example oil). The oil is then removed by forcing a less viscous fluid (say
water) into the channel. After an initial formation of several invading fingers,
the penetrating fluid reaches a steady state and takes the form of a single
finger. Mathematically one seeks a harmonic function within the set occupied by
oil and vanishing on the set occupied by water. On the free boundary separating
the two fluids, one imposed a kinematic condition guaranteeing conservation of
mass. Saffman and Taylor in the late '50's computed explicitly a family of
profiles of the invading finger, parameterized by the asymptotic upstream width
of the finger. Experimental data however show that such a width is always 1/2 of
the width of the channel.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The mathematical and physical
mechanism by which Nature selects the solution corresponding to the value 1/2 of
the parameter, is not well understood. We have shown that among all the Saffman-
Taylor explicit solutions, the one corresponding to the value 1/2 of the
parameter, maximizes the thrust of the fluid across the channel at the tip of
the invading finger. The problem, which is non--variational, is recast into one
that has a variational form, through a Baiocchi-type transformation. The non-
variational nature of the problem, set in an unbounded domain, is accounted for
by a precise description of the asymptotic behavior at infinity of the solutions
of the corresponding non-linear elliptic equation. Such estimation is achieved
through non-standard applications of the Harnack Inequality and the
identification of the 'nose' of the finger. We have also shown that for the
value 1/2 of the parameter the motion of the finger occurs by mean curvature. An
effort will be made to connect and understand these two features. &lt;br/&gt;In
another direction, we will investigate local behavior and uniqueness of
solutions to the &lt;br/&gt;Buckley--Leverett system. This is a system of two
degenerate (in the principal part) and singular (in the lower order terms) of
parabolic equations. The degeneracy yields &lt;br/&gt;a hyperbolic-parabolic
behavior. Kruzkov observed that uniqueness of boundary value problems for such a
system is linked to the regularity of the solutions. We intend to use recent
ideas developed in connection with hyperbolic--parabolic problems and our long
standing investigations on the regularity of solutions for degenerate evolution
equations, &lt;br/&gt;to investigate the uniqueness of such solutions. More
theoretically, we will continue our investigations on Harnack--type estimates
for solutions of degenerate parabolic equations and quasi--minima in the
Calculus of Variations. The Hele-Shaw problem simulates the penetration of oil
into water. It's importance stems from its applications to the recovery of oil
trapped into layered rocky soil (hence the 2-dimensional model). Physically one
observes that the asymptotic width of the penetrating finger is 1/2 of the width
of the channel. The natural questions we are attempting to understand is why
Nature selects such a value and what's the underlying mathematical and physical
reason for such a specific selection to occur. On the same realm of physical
application one asks whether two fluids one penetrating into another (Buckley-
Leverett system) do so in a unique manner, and if not, what is the reason the a
possible lack of uniqueness. The supporting mathematics to such physical issues
involves fine estimates of the local behavior of solutions of degenerate and/or
singular evolution partial differential equations, such as &lt;br/&gt;for
example the Harnack inequality.&lt;br/&gt;