* 0100487
* Studies in noncommutative dynamics and multivariable operator theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,09/30/2006
* William Arveson, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 09/30/2006
* USD 187,800.00

Abstract Averson

This work relates to two loosely connected areas, a) the theory of one-parameter
groups of automorphisms of the algebra of all operators on a Hilbert space which
posses a certain causal structure, and b) the theory of commuting n-tuples of
operators acting on a Hilbert space. We have been attempting to understand the
nature of noncommutative dynamics for many years, and our approach recently has
been based on the theory of E_0-semigroups. There has been exciting recent
progress on several fronts, the full implications of which are still being
sorted out. In multivariable operator theory, we have introduced a "curvature"
invariant which is somewhat analogous to the integral of curvature of a
Riemannian manifold. We have shown that it is an integer in many cases by
relating it to another invariant, the Euler characteristic of a certain finitely
generated module. However, the key formula is valid only in certain cases, and
we are now in the process of relating the curvature invariant to a more subtle
integer invariant, essentially the index of a "Dirac operator" that can be
associated with the given n-tuple of operators. In quantum theory the observable
quantities are represented by operators. The algebra of operators differs
sharply from the algebra of numbers because the result of multiplying two
operators A and B depends on the order in which they are multiplied: AB is not
the same as BA. This failure of the commutativity law has profound consequences,
the most basic one being the uncertainty principle. The flow of time in quantum
theory is represented by certain transformations, each of which moves operators
in subtle ways, and the dynamics of quantum theory is the study of such groups
of transformations. This "noncommutative dynamics" is very different from the
commutative dynamics of classical physics. Our approach is based on a certain
notion of causality, which involves the technical idea of semigroups of
endomorphisms. Recent progress has been very encouraging - with the discovery of
new connections with probability theory, in which one may now pass back and
forth between noncommutative flows of time and certain random processes which
can be thought of as "off-white" noise, in that they are close to white noise,
but not exactly white noise. In a different but related direction, our work on
sets of (commuting) operators establishes significant connections between sets
of operators and fundamental geometric ideas such as curvature. At issue is a
numerical invariant for sets of operators. While this invariant appears to be a
real number capable of taking on any value, it is in fact an integer. What
integer? The answer that appears to be emerging now is that this number is the
numerical index of a certain Dirac operator. There appear to be significant
connections with other parts of mathematics, including Riemannian geometry and
algebraic geometry.