* 0100249
* Certain operators and operator algebras in perturbation theory and on function spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2005
* Jingbo Xia, SUNY at Buffalo
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 05/31/2005
* USD 91,021.00

The proposer will continue the research that he has been pursuing under the
support of the National Science Foundation. The specific areas of the proposed
research include the following: (1) Simultaneous diagonalization of commuting
tuples of self-adjoint operators modulo various norm ideals. This problem has
been solved (with NSF support) in the case where the norm ideal is the Schatten
p-class when p is strictly greater than 1. The proposer will next consider the
case where p is 1, i.e., where the norm ideal is the trace class. This is a
difficult problem, but this is also an important problem because of its
potential applications. The proposer will also consider a class of ideals which
are related to the Schatten class. (2) The complete determination of
automorphisms of the full Toeplitz algebra on the unit circle which are induced
by homeomorphisms of the circle. This has been accomplished under previous NSF
support in the case where the homeomorphism in question is bi-Lipschitz. The
final goal is to remove the bi-Lipschitz condition. This involves some careful
estimates of norms in the Toeplitz algebra and the use of certain singular
integral operators. (3) Toeplitz algebras associated with minimal flows. The
ultimate goal here is to use K-theory to characterize the invertibility of
systems of Toeplitz operators associated with such flows. (4) Hankel operators
on certain reproducing-kernel Hilbert spaces. Here the main question is the
Schatten-class membership of these operator. The reproducing kernel will be
involved in certain quantitative estimates.

The proposed problems are fairly representative of the current research
interests in operator theory and operator algebras, which is a study of, among
other things, the spectral properties of various linear operators. In part
inspired and demanded by the development of the quantum theory in the early part
of the 20th century, this study was initiated by great mathematicians such as H.
Weyl and J. von Neumann. Because additivity (i.e., linearity) appears in many
fundamental aspects of nature, operator theory provides the right mathematical
tools for scientific fields ranging from atomic physics to optimal control. Many
abstract problems in operator theory and operator algebras owe their origin to
these fields of applications. For example, both for theoretical reasons and for
practical applications, quite often one must deal with, or introduce,
perturbations which are "small" by some measure or other. Problem (1) is about
such perturbations. The root of this problem can be traced back to a paper of
Weyl published in 1909, which asserts that a continuous spectrum can be turned
into a discrete one by a compact (which a measure of "smallness") perturbation.
Problem (2) requires both modern techniques and classical-style mathematical
analysis. A theme which underlies all these problems is the establishment of
various estimates (i.e., bounds or growth rates). In general, the sharper the
estimates, the better theorems one obtains.

