* 0100595
* Nonlinear Hamiltonian PDE
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2005
* Francis Christ, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2005
* USD 72,000.00

The proposed research is designed to advance the recent progress on
nonlinear&lt;br/&gt;Hamiltonian PDE towards three goals:&lt;br/&gt;1. Extend the
local-in-time initial value methods to solve more complicated
&lt;br/&gt;PDE.&lt;br/&gt;2. Adapt the initial value techniques to treat
initial-boundary value &lt;br/&gt;problems. &lt;br/&gt;3. Construct a global-in-
time theory of nonlinear Hamiltonian PDE.&lt;br/&gt;The proposal identifies
specific problems whose solutions contribute &lt;br/&gt;to the three goals for
which there are &lt;br/&gt;methods of attack emerging from the last decades'
spectacular progress.&lt;br/&gt;The studies for Goal 1 aim to extend the sharp
1-dimensional calculus &lt;br/&gt;techniques for proving multilinear estimates
in Bourgain's Xs,b spaces &lt;br/&gt;by carrying out an incremental research
plan, involving&lt;br/&gt;small Xs,b denominators, spatial anisotropy and
vanishing parameters.&lt;br/&gt;A technique for recasting initial-boundary value
problems as initial&lt;br/&gt;value problems with boundary forcing has recently
been developed, in&lt;br/&gt;collaboration with Kenig. The range of
applicability of this method is&lt;br/&gt;the main topic of the proposed
investigations toward Goal 2. A &lt;br/&gt;reinterpretation of the L^2
conservation law for the KdV equation, obtained &lt;br/&gt;in collaboration with
Keel, Staffilani, Takaoka and Tao, has led to a new &lt;br/&gt;method for
showing global wellposedness by constructing almost conserved
&lt;br/&gt;quantities using multilinear harmonic analysis and the local
wellposedness &lt;br/&gt;machinery. The third thrust of the proposed research
will exploit these &lt;br/&gt;quantities to understand the long-time behavior of
nonlinear Hamiltonian PDE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;No specific scientific or
engineering application motivates the proposed &lt;br/&gt;studies; rather the
intention is to contribute toward a general rigorous &lt;br/&gt;theory of
nonlinear phenomena including turbulence, singularity formation,
&lt;br/&gt;scattering and recurrence. The widespread applicability of
Hamiltonian PDE, &lt;br/&gt;across diverse fields of current scientific and
technological significance, &lt;br/&gt;demonstrates the central prominence of
the proposed research to our &lt;br/&gt;science and engineering
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is designed to
advance the recent progress on nonlinear&lt;br/&gt;Hamiltonian PDE towards three
goals:&lt;br/&gt;1. Extend the local-in-time initial value methods to solve more
complicated &lt;br/&gt;PDE.&lt;br/&gt;2. Adapt the initial value techniques to
treat initial-boundary value &lt;br/&gt;problems. &lt;br/&gt;3. Construct a
global-in-time theory of nonlinear Hamiltonian PDE.&lt;br/&gt;The proposal
identifies specific problems whose solutions contribute &lt;br/&gt;to the three
goals for which there are &lt;br/&gt;methods of attack emerging from the last
decades' spectacular progress.&lt;br/&gt;The studies for Goal 1 aim to extend
the sharp 1-dimensional calculus &lt;br/&gt;techniques for proving multilinear
estimates in Bourgain's Xs,b spaces &lt;br/&gt;by carrying out an incremental
research plan, involving&lt;br/&gt;small Xs,b denominators, spatial anisotropy
and vanishing parameters.&lt;br/&gt;A technique for recasting initial-boundary
value problems as initial&lt;br/&gt;value problems with boundary forcing has
recently been developed, in&lt;br/&gt;collaboration with Kenig. The range of
applicability of this method is&lt;br/&gt;the main topic of the proposed
investigations toward Goal 2. A &lt;br/&gt;reinterpretation of the L^2
conservation law for the KdV equation, obtained &lt;br/&gt;in collaboration with
Keel, Staffilani, Takaoka and Tao, has led to a new &lt;br/&gt;method for
showing global wellposedness by constructing almost conserved
&lt;br/&gt;quantities using multilinear harmonic analysis and the local
wellposedness &lt;br/&gt;machinery. The third thrust of the proposed research
will exploit these &lt;br/&gt;quantities to understand the long-time behavior of
nonlinear Hamiltonian PDE.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;No specific scientific or
engineering application motivates the proposed &lt;br/&gt;studies; rather the
intention is to contribute toward a general rigorous &lt;br/&gt;theory of
nonlinear phenomena including turbulence, singularity formation,
&lt;br/&gt;scattering and recurrence. The widespread applicability of
Hamiltonian PDE, &lt;br/&gt;across diverse fields of current scientific and
technological significance, &lt;br/&gt;demonstrates the central prominence of
the proposed research to our &lt;br/&gt;science and engineering
infrastructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;