* 0100255
* Experimental Investigations on Chemically Treated Sulfate Soils For Fundamental Understanding of Heaving Mechanisms
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2001,10/31/2005
* Anand Puppala, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 10/31/2005
* USD 237,816.00

Sulfate-rich cohesive soils are found in several regions of the United States.
When the sulfate-rich soils are treated with calcium based lime and cement
stabilizers for soil improvements, the sulfates in soils react with the calcium
of stabilizers and alumina of clayey soils to form a crystalline mineral,
ettringite. This mineral, upon hydration, undergoes a large amount of heave in
the soils. This heave is termed as sulfate induced heave in the literature.
Buildings, pavements, runways and embankments built on cement and lime treated
sulfate-bearing soils have been affected by this heave distress. Repair and
maintenance of the distressed structures costs millions of dollars annually.
Potential heave problems may arise in the future due to the increased use of
industrial sulfuric waste products for soil stabilization and solidification.
Hence, it is necessary to fundamentally understand sulfate-stabilizer reaction
mechanisms in soils that cause sulfate heave movements.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is designed to investigate the influence of
soil compositional and environmental factors on the heave mechanisms in sulfate
rich soils and establish problematic sulfate levels for various soil
compositional and environmental variables. Four types of clayey soils with
different types of clay mineralogies, two cement and lime treatment levels, five
sulfate amounts, two moisture content levels, and three temperature conditions
will be investigated. Treated and untreated soil samples will be prepared, cured
if necessary, by accelerated curing methods at different temperatures and then
tested under a variety of mineralogical, chemical and engineering swell, suction
potential and shear strength tests. Test results will be analyzed to understand
the possible causes of sulfate heave mechanisms and investigate time periods at
which ettringite formation takes place in soils. Additionally, models will be
developed to predict problematic sulfate levels in soils at which heave distress
can be expected for a given chemical treatment. These models will be verified by
comparing their predictions with the known heave distresses of field
sites.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will make a strong contribution to the
fundamental understanding of the sulfate induced heaving mechanisms in soils.
Potential benefits of this research project are: (1) develop problematic sulfate
conditions for different clayey soils at which cement and lime treatments cause
heave distress, (2) develop better chemical treatment methods in the future by
targeting the factors that influence the ettringite formation, and (3)
facilitate the use of sulfuric wastes for recycling applications in
stabilization. Also, applications of free alumina and electric conductivity
measurements in soils to identify problematic sulfates will be evaluated. This
project will also have a strong impact on the researchers' educational
activities. An integral part of this project is to teach swell, shrink,
mineralogical and chemical characterization methods as well as data acquisition,
data reduction and analysis and data presentation concepts to graduate and
undergraduate students. Both graduate and undergraduate students will be
encouraged to work as a team in performing the research tasks. The research
project information will be made available to interested individuals through the
web address of the geotechnical program. Updates on research status and findings
will be posted throughout the year. Also, the research findings will be
disseminated in various journals and proceedings articles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;