* 0100859
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Responses of Gully Erosion and Sedimentation to Environmental Change in the Upper Republican River Basin, Nebraska
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2001,08/31/2002
* James Knox, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2002
* USD 10,000.00

Many fluvial systems of the central Great Plains have flashy discharge regimes
and high sediment yields. As a result, their sedimentary processes are extremely
sensitive to changing hydrologic conditions. Evidence in the form of cut-and-
fill terraces and alluvial stratigraphy with high resolution depositional units
suggests that both hydrologic and sedimentologic adjustments have taken place
throughout the Holocene. Morphologic properties of currently active gullies and
valley fills also indicate that contemporary gully erosion rates are sensitive
to changes in modern environmental conditions. This general objective of this
doctoral dissertation research project is to quantify gully erosion and valley
aggradation rates in the upper Republican River basin of western Nebraska and to
determine how these rates have varied in response to environmental change. This
research will examine how gully systems have (1) activated and stabilized on
decadal time scales in the late 20th century; (2) incised and aggraded in
response to climate changes of the Holocene; and (3) extended headward to shape
watershed morphology during late Quaternary. This research will integrate field,
laboratory, and GIS analyses. Historical gully erosion will be documented by
examining aerial photographs to determine the magnitude of headward gully
migration on a decadal time scale since the 1950s. The spatial distribution of
gully-derived sediment downstream from active headcuts will be established using
a 137-Cs sediment tracing technique. Holocene valley aggradation rates will be
estimated on the basis of radiocarbon age determinations of organic matter
within alluvial fills and terraces. Sedimentologic and pedologic analyses of
these same fills will permit interpretation of the depositional and soil-forming
processes active during aggradation. Extension of drainage networks will be
investigated by using soil-stratigraphic and morpho-stratigraphic evidence to
infer the headward limits of networks at various times throughout the late
Quaternary. These limits can define network planforms that will be analyzed in a
GIS environment to determine changes in hydrologically significant drainage
network parameters over millennial time- scales.

Results of this research will help document the response of semi-arid fluvial
systems to environmental change. As scientific concern mounts over the potential
impact of future climate change in sensitive semi-arid regions like the Great
Plains, realistic appraisals of past hydrologic variability become increasingly
necessary. This research will improve understanding of that variability by
examining its impact on gully erosion and valley aggradation. By investigating
these processes over temporal scales ranging from decades to millennia, the
project will establish a better understanding of the complete range of potential
process rates, and will document the many factors that may govern changes in
these rates. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award
also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.