* 0100300
* Fundamental and Technological Aspects of Finishing Balls of Advanced Ceramics, Glasses, and Silicon Using Magnetic Field Assisted Polishing
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Ranga Komanduri, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 09/30/2005
* USD 316,000.00

This project is on the finishing of balls of advanced ceramics, glasses, and
semiconductor material using the magnetic float polishing technology.
Conventional finishing of advanced ceramics and glasses by grinding, polishing,
lapping generally leads to several defects including large scratches, formation
of pits due to the dislodgment of grains, viscous flow of the glassy phase in
the case of glass, and surface and subsurface microcracks. These defects affect
the properties and performance of these materials and are traditionally removed
by subsequent diamond polishing. To address this difficult problem, a "gentle"
finishing technology, called the magnetic float polishing was developed (in a
recently completed investigation supported by NSF) without the need to use
diamond abrasives. Surface finish on the order of 4 nm Ra and 40 nm Rmax with
sphericity in the range of 0.25 micrometers were accomplished on Si3N4 balls
with a total polishing time of ~ 20 hours. A better understanding of the
mechanical and chemo-mechanical actions involved in the polishing of Si3N4 balls
has resulted. In this project, the investigators intend to generalize this work
to cover other advanced ceramics (balls of different size and number per batch),
various glasses, and silicon. Advanced ceramics, such as Si3N4, SiC, Zr02, and
Al2O3 are increasing being considered for structural applications of which
Si3N4, in specific, is chosen for hybrid ball and roller bearing applications.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Similarly, various types of glasses are used for optical
applications, such as lenses and recently spherical silicon balls are being
considered for micro-electronic applications (instead of silicon wafers). This
research would be the first of its kind on the finishing of silicon balls
(instead of wafers) by magnetic float polishing. Thus, the finishing technology
proposed is expected to address structural, optical, and electronic applications
that can have a significant impact on the manufacture of balls for various
advanced technology applications.&lt;br/&gt;