* 0100160
* Quantum-Mechanical Matter Interacting with the Quantized Radiation Field
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Marcel Griesemer, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2004
* USD 64,039.00

Within the standard model of non-relativistic quantum mechanical matter
interacting with the quantized radiation field methods are developed to show
that an isolated atom or molecule prepared in a, possibly highly exited, bound
state is unstable and eventually relaxes to its ground state by emitting
photons. Similarly, the exited states of a free charged particle are not stable.
It is shown that photons which are not bound to the electron escape ballisticly
while the particle relaxes to a state of minimal energy followed by a cloud of
soft photons (dressed one-electron state) in which it propagates according to a
reduced dynamics. The key problem in the case of an atom is to show that no
infrared problem occurs. For a free charged particle an infrared problem does
occure and one has to deal with nonequivalent representations of the CCR. - The
proofs require as an ingredient good control over the spectral properties of the
Hamilton operator and, in addition, asymptotic completeness of Rayleigh
scattering and Compton scattering of the respective system. These prerequisites
are established by methods and techniques inspired by similar methods and
techniques in the spectral and scattering theory of $N$-particle Schr\"odinger
operators, such as Mourre theory, propagationestimates, the construction of
suitable propagation observables and others. In addition ideas and methods from
constructive quantum field theory (soft photon bounds, Rosen estimates,
renormalization group analysis) are employed.

This research leads to a mathematically rigorous understanding of physical
phenomena such as the radiative decay of atoms, the photo effect, and Compton
scattering. These are phenomena which are at the heart of many technical devices
and which determine our visual impression of the world. Furthermore the
phenomenon of radiative decay (or the relaxation to the ground state) and the
similar phenomenon of return to equilibrium at positive temperature play key
roles in attempts to understand dissipative, irreversible behavior in the
quantum theory of open systems. The mathematical methods which are developed
apply equally to other physical systems such a particle in a crystal interacting
with quantized lattice vibrations (phonons), and find currently application in
the study of return to equilibrium of matter interacting with radiation at
positive temperature.