* 0100288
* Analytic Number Theory and Multiple Basic Hypergeometric Series
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2001,12/31/2004
* Stephen Milne, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 12/31/2004
* USD 99,000.00

The investigator will continue his research on analytic number theory, algebraic
combinatorics, and the theory and application of multiple basic hypergeometric
series. The investigator recently derived many infinite families of explicit
exact formulas involving either squares or triangular numbers, two of which
generalize Jacobi's (1829) 4 and 8 squares identities to 4n^2 or 4n(n+1)
squares, respectively, without using cusp forms. He similarly generalized to
infinite families all of Jacobi's explicitly stated degree 2, 4, 6, 8 Lambert
series expansions of classical theta functions. These results, depending on new
expansions for powers of various products of classical theta functions, arise in
the setting of Jacobi elliptic functions, continued fractions, Hankel or
Turanian determinants, Lie algebras, and Schur functions. The investigator first
plans to finish his derivation of the infinite families of explicit exact sums
of squares identities (excluding those above) for n^2 or n(n+1) squares,
respectively, that he has already shown to exist. These will include explicit
identities for an odd number of squares. Next, he plans to prove additional Kac
--Wakimoto conjectures for triangular numbers. In the area of algebraic
combinatorics, the investigator will develop the combinatorial and number
theoretic implications of his new formulas for Ramanujan's tau function that are
directly related to the Leech lattice.

The above project utilizes explicit combinatorial and analytic methods to study
the problem of representing an integer as a sum of squares of integers. This
problem is one of the oldest and most significant in mathematics. It goes back
at least 2000 years to Diophantus, and continues more recently with the works of
Fermat, Euler, Lagrange, Jacobi, Glaisher, Ramanujan, Hardy, Mordell, Andrews,
and others. Jacobi's elliptic function approach dates from his epic ``Fundamenta
Nova'' of 1829. He found elegant simple formulas for counting the number of ways
that any fixed positive integer n can be written as a sum of 2, 4, 6, or 8
squares. Applications of modular forms to sums of squares really started in 1917
with Mordell. This approach provides abstract formulas for any given number of
squares as the Fourier coefficients of modular forms. In 1965 Rankin proved that
any one of these formulas, for more than 8 squares, would be highly non-trivial
to compute explicitly. Since 1829, explicit exact non-trivial formulas have only
been found for up to 32 squares, with an even number of squares much easier than
an odd number. The investigator used his combinatorial/elliptic function methods
to derive infinite families of expansions of powers of classical theta
functions, and the corresponding non-trivial explicit sums of squares formulas.
(See http://xxx.lanl.gov/abs/math.NT/0008068). This is the first time that
infinite families of non-trivial exact explicit formulas for sums of squares
have been found. All of this work gives a new elegant extension of the classical
formulas of Jacobi.