* 0100577
* Quantitative and Subsequence Ergodic Theorems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Mate Wierdl, University of Memphis
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2005
* USD 78,858.00

This proposal for research concerns questions of almost everywhere and mean
convergence in ergodic theory, and their connections with harmonic analysis and
probability theory. The first group of questions on convergence which will be
addressed concerns the mean convergence of averages of measurements made on a
stochastic process at a random sequence of times that is chosen in advance.
Other questions concern randomly generated times which yield to sampling along
sequences with big gaps. The second group of questions concerns subsequence
ergodic theorems for subsequences coming from members of Hardy fields, Results
obtained by the PI in the previous grant periods suggest that in the context of
Hardy fields, a meaningful characterization of the ``good'' sequences of
measurements is possible. Indeed, due to a significant advance in the previous
grant period, a complete characterization of good sequences of measurements is
at reach. This work for one dimensional averages gives us confidence to start
exploring possible higher dimensional results, therefore extending the work of
Stein and Weinger. The third group of questions concerns upcrossings and related
oscillatory behavior of the ergodic averages. This line of research was
initiated by Bishop, Bourgain, Kalikow, B. Weiss and others. Wierdl and his
collaborators discovered a fundamental connection between Ergodic Theory and
martingales. This discovery---which often manifests itself as a bounded
squarefunction of the difference between&lt;br/&gt;ergodic averages and certain
martingales---allows one to translate many of the results of Martingale Theory,
such as squarefunction, large deviation or jump inequalities, to ergodic
theoretical and harmonic analytical results. Part of the proposed work is to
extend the investigations on upcrossings to other operators such as higher
dimensional singular integrals and averages over various sequences of domains
with an eye on possible extensions to group actions. These investigations will
reveal deep connections between ergodic theory, harmonic analysis and
probability theory. Ergodic theory grew out of statistical mechanics, the
statistical description of matter. This latter means, for example, that instead
of describing the behavior of each individual water-molecule in a cup
of&lt;br/&gt;water, one is satisfied with finding the average speed, energy etc.
of the molecules. But then the fundamental question arises: how can we measure
the average speed or energy. It is clearly impossible to measure the speed of
each individual molecule and then take the mean of the data. The ergodic theorem
says that it is enough to select a single molecule, measure its speed in each
second, and if we make enough measurements and take the average of the data, the
number will be basically the average speed of all the molecules in the cup of
water. This amazing theorem has one drawback: it requires that the measurements
are taken exactly at every second. But in practice, the measurements might be
made at, say, 1, 3, 4, 6, 11,... seconds or, even worse, at 1.1, 2.4, 2.9,
4.3,... seconds instead of at 1, 2, 3,... seconds. Obviously, we would like to
know whether we still can compute accurately the average speed from the measured
data. The proposed research addresses two basic questions about measurements: 1)
What more practical sequence of times (other than 1, 2, 3,...) for measurements
will still yield the average speed, energy, etc.? 2) How many measurements one
has to make to get a useful approximation to the average speed, energy, etc.?
Note that the ergodic theorem just says "if you make enough measurements, you
get useful information about average speed, energy, etc.", but it does not say
in any way how many is "enough"?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;