* 0100601
* Hard Problems in Hard Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2001,04/30/2004
* Nets Katz, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 04/30/2004
* USD 120,182.00

We investigate four major unsolved problems in or bordering on harmonic
analysis. These are the Kakeya problem, the Lipschitz differentiation problem,
the restriction problem, and global solvability for the Navier Stokes equation.
For the Kakeya problem, we continue our work with Tao on improving exponents in
the sums-differences approach. For the problem of differentiation by Lipschitz
vector fields, we try to apply our work on maximal functions in arbitrary
directions to understand what are the limitations on a counterexample and
hopefully that none can exist. For the restriction problem, we try to apply the
new results on Kakeya and to better understand Bourgain's machine for converting
Kakeya results to ones about restriction. For Navier Stokes, we first discretize
everything in the form of a kind of generalized wavelet coefficients. In work
with Pavlovic, this has already produced a generalization of the Caffarelli-
Kohn-Nirenberg theorem to the case of hyperdissipation. We hope from this point
of view to discover a sort of local dispersion property for the cascading effect
from the nonlinear term. Then we hope to tie in the Clay problem with a dyadic
model in which this dispersion is a given. As might be imagined, we are unlikely
to solve all these problems.

Analysis concerns the proof of estimates on interesting systems by examing the
contributions of all their parts. One such system is the Navier Stokes equation
which governs the behaviour of incompressible viscous fluids. An important open
problem is whether this equation starting with smooth initial data can develop
singularities without a forcing term. This would akin to a cyclone beginning
spontaneously in one's bathtub. It seems rather unlikely but the tools of
analysis are not yet strong enough to rule it out. Our approach is to discretize
the problem, that is to try to approximate the problem by one about a finite
number of objects and investigate possible interactions of those objects by
means of combinatorics. Most physically arising mathematics can be looked at
this way because matter is not continuous but rather composed of particles. We
will work on the above problem and some other important problems which may be
approached with the same point of view.

