* 0100327
* GOALI/Collaborative Research:  Scheduling Methodogies for Electronics and Hardware Manufacturing
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2003
* Chelliah Sriskandarajah, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Janet M. Twomey
* 06/30/2003
* USD 44,580.00

This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award
supports the development of a framework, comprised of models and efficient
solution algorithms, for two different problem domains. One that is
characterized as multi-stage, sequence-dependent group scheduling problem with
carry-over setups, and the other with no carry-over setups. Applications of the
former exist in printed circuit board (PCB) assembly, while the latter is
applicable in hardware (discrete parts) manufacturing such as those supported by
cellular manufacturing. The emphasis is on the development of scheduling models
that truly reflect real operational constraints. In a two-stage PCB assembly
process, these include performing the setup required on either stage based on a
surrogate board group representing all board types, and performing the setup on
the second stage in anticipation of the arriving board group. The impact of
carry-over sequence dependency is assessed by recognizing that the setup time
required of a surrogate board group on either stage is dependent upon the entire
set of preceding surrogate board groups that have so far been processed. A
variety of performance measures including the minimization of total completion
time, mean flow time, and weighted tardiness will be considered in order for the
producer to be highly responsive to a variety of customer needs. Recognizing
that both problems belong to a class of notoriously difficult 'NP-hard'
combinatorial optimization problems, the structure of the problems will be
exploited to develop efficient lower bounds. For the minimization of mean flow
time, special cases will be investigated to identify those that can be optimally
solved in polynomial time. For completely solving problem instances that have
industrial merit, computationally efficient solution techniques that combine the
underlying concepts of branch-and-bound aided by filtered-beam search, and tabu
search will be developed and tested. The lower-bounding mechanisms will be
embedded in these techniques to not only seek solutions with guaranteed quality,
but also use them advantageously to terminate the search to enhance
computational efficiency. For the total completion time minimization problem
with no carry-over setups, an approach based on an equivalent formulation of the
asymmetric generalized traveling salesman problem will be investigated. Finally,
the solution techniques developed will be tested with data obtained from
industrial collaborators to validate their computational efficiency and ability
to obtain solutions with guaranteed quality. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
successful completion of this project will provide both electronics and hardware
manufacturing companies with methodological frameworks for rapidly generating
schedules with guaranteed quantifiable performance. The insightful research
findings so obtained will also enhance the existing graduate courses in
scheduling at Oregon State University and University of Texas at Dallas.
&lt;br/&gt;