* 0100290
* Collaborative Research in Operator Theory on Holomorphic Function Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2004
* Paul Bourdon, Washington and Lee University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2004
* USD 59,588.00

ABSTRACT. Professor Bourdon and his collaborator Joel Shapiro
of&lt;br/&gt;Michigan State University will investigate problems arising from
the&lt;br/&gt;interaction between the modern theory of linear operators and
the&lt;br/&gt;classical theory of analytic functions. The problems to be studied
involve&lt;br/&gt;norms, decomposability, and numerical ranges of composition
operators as&lt;br/&gt;well as the chaotic behavior of both composition
operators and operators&lt;br/&gt;commuting with backward shifts. Insights and
tools developed during the&lt;br/&gt;course of the project will be applied to
other classes of linear operators&lt;br/&gt;on Hilbert and Banach
spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Many of the differential and integral equations
that physicists and&lt;br/&gt;engineers use to model physical processes may be
viewed as linear&lt;br/&gt;operators on spaces of functions. This viewpoint,
pioneered by David&lt;br/&gt;Hilbert, led to the development of function-
theoretic operator theory,&lt;br/&gt;which is the branch of mathematics
inspiring the problems that are the&lt;br/&gt;focus of Bourdon and Shapiro's
project. A number of these problems concern&lt;br/&gt;the notion of numerical
range of a linear operator, an object that has&lt;br/&gt;relevance to quantum
physics and that has proven useful to engineers in&lt;br/&gt;determining the
stability of certain control systems. Other problems&lt;br/&gt;relate to the
chaotic behavior of linear operators. That linear operators&lt;br/&gt;can give
rise to chaotic systems is a relatively recent discovery which &lt;br/&gt;has
led to unexpected connections between operator theory and
dynamical&lt;br/&gt;systems. The idea of decomposability--the study of how to
break a&lt;br/&gt;complicated linear system up into simpler ones--has been shown
to have&lt;br/&gt;surprising connections with such chaotic behavior. The final
group of&lt;br/&gt;problems involves norm calculations for composition
operators. The norm&lt;br/&gt;of an operator measures how much the operator can
stretch the unit ball of&lt;br/&gt;the space on which it acts. Computer
experimentation should yield&lt;br/&gt;insights and intuition concerning both
composition-operator norms and&lt;br/&gt;numerical ranges. Through such
experimentation, undergraduate students at&lt;br/&gt;Washington and Lee
University will be given an opportunity to participate&lt;br/&gt;in the project.
The training and research experience provided to these&lt;br/&gt;students by the
project contribute to its human-resources
impact.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;