* 0100196
* Application of Radiosity Methods to the Prediction of Sound Fields in Diffusive Environments
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Ralph Muehleisen, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 08/31/2005
* USD 155,013.00

Most architectural acoustic prediction programs utilize ray-tracing techniques
that work best for environments with large reflecting surfaces such as auditoria
and concert halls. This project will apply the radiosity method that has been
developed for illumination and visual computer rendering to the prediction of
sound fields in diffuse acoustic environments. The new prediction method will
allow for prediction of sound levels in small complicated environments such as
open plan offices and factories where ray tracing techniques fail. The decreased
computational requirement of the method may allow acoustics to be added to the
visual architectural "walk-through" of office and factory designs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the radiosity method a set of energy balance equations
between the bounding surfaces of the room is developed. Most of these equations
are independent of the source and receiver positions and thus acoustic
prediction on multiple source and receiver locations can be significantly faster
than with ray tracing techniques. In the first phase of this project, the
acoustic radiosity method is developed assuming perfectly diffuse surfaces and
radiators and ignoring diffraction effects. In the second phase the method is
extended to include non-diffuse surfaces. In the third phase diffraction effects
are added to the model. Students working on the project will present their
results at national conferences and through publications in peer reviewed
acoustic journals. Results of the work will be incorporated into existing
classes on building noise control and room acoustics where students will develop
their own radiosity programs for acoustic prediction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;