* 0100330
* Geometric and Analytic Problems in Several Complex Variables
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* M. Salah Baouendi, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2004
* USD 201,950.00

One of the basic geometric and analytic problems in several complex
&lt;br/&gt;variables is to determine when two real submanifolds in
&lt;br/&gt;multidimensional complex space are locally biholomorphically
&lt;br/&gt;equivalent. That is, when is it possible to find a local invertible
&lt;br/&gt;holomorphic transformation sending one submanifold onto the other?
&lt;br/&gt;This problem has attracted the attention of many mathematicians since
&lt;br/&gt;the beginning of the twentieth century, starting with the work of
&lt;br/&gt;Poincare and continuing with the major contributions of E. Cartan,
&lt;br/&gt;Tanaka, Chern, Moser and others. The principal investigators will
&lt;br/&gt;continue their research on several aspects of this problem. In
&lt;br/&gt;particular, they will focus on determining when it is possible to
&lt;br/&gt;reduce the biholomorphic equivalence problem to solving systems of
&lt;br/&gt;polynomial equations with complex coefficients. They also plan to
&lt;br/&gt;determine when a formal mapping sending a real submanifold into
&lt;br/&gt;another is necessarily convergent. In addition, they will attempt to
&lt;br/&gt;categorize those submanifolds for which such mappings are determined
&lt;br/&gt;by finitely many derivatives at a given point. They expect that this
&lt;br/&gt;study will lead to the discovery of new geometric, analytic, as well
&lt;br/&gt;as algebraic invariants of these
submanifolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigators will continue
their study of fundamental &lt;br/&gt;properties of analytic and geometric
objects, such as surfaces and &lt;br/&gt;curves, in multidimensional complex
spaces. A complete classification &lt;br/&gt;of these mathematical objects can
have important implications for a &lt;br/&gt;number of other questions in
mathematical science. In fact, this &lt;br/&gt;study is motivated by the rich
interplay between several areas of &lt;br/&gt;mathematics and physics, including
control theory, string theory, and &lt;br/&gt;other areas of mathematical
physics. Progress on the problems &lt;br/&gt;proposed by the Principal
Investigators will likely have impact on &lt;br/&gt;the above-mentioned areas as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;