* 0100820
* A Laboratory For the Study of Objective Measurement of Visual Acuity
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* Carlos Davila, Southern Methodist University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 07/31/2003
* USD 74,607.00

0100820&lt;br/&gt;Davila&lt;br/&gt;Visual acuity (VA) is a measure of how well
the visual system can resolve closely spaced objects. The Snellen eye chart is
the most common method of measuring VA in adults however it is useless when
measuring VA in infants and other non-verbal patients. Preferential looking,
optokinetic nystagmus, and photoscreening have been used to assess VA in
infants, however all of these methods have been found to have their
shortcomings. Diseases such as amblyopia, which occurs in 2-3% of the
population, if not diagnosed by age 6 can lead to permanent visual loss, and
this can lead to learning and behavioral difficulties. Standard pre-school
visual screening programs can fail to diagnose ocular disease in as any as 2% of
the population. The visual evoked potential (VEP), an electrical potential
generated in the visual cortex of the brain in response to a visual stimulus,
has been used to measure VA in infants. This is done by determining the maximum
spatial frequency in the stimulus which elicits a detectable VEP. However, this
method does not yield very repeatable measures and has a higher variability than
psychophysical measures of VA. The PI's group has developed VEP detectors which
are capable of detecting very low-level VEP's at much higher stimulus spatial
frequencies than other detectors; nevertheless, long measurement times are still
required. The goal of this proposal is to obtain the laboratory equipment
necessary to study objective measurement of visual acuity based on a new model
of the visual system. This model, if validated, will enable VA to be measured
using the VEP by simply computing its temporal frequency spectrum (which is much
faster than existing swept spatial frequency methods). The spacing of
photoreceptors in the eye is not a good predictor of limits on spatial
resolution. The average spacing of cones on the foveal of the retina would
actually predict a much higher visual resolution limit than the often quoted
value of 60 cycles/deg. The proposed model is based on the premise that the eyes
are constantly in motion and hence the luminance falling on any given
photoreceptor in the retina is constantly changing with time. The main
hypothesizes is that resolution in foveal vision is determined entirely by the
temporal dynamics of the visual system. The model for VA consists of a
photoreceptor, a ban of temporal bandpass filters, and a detector at the output
of the filter bank. The temporal bandpass filters have the same effect as the
spatial frequency filters which have been used to model the visual system. A
second hypothesis associates the temporal filter-based model for VA with the
VEP. A number of psychophysical and electrophysiologic experiments are proposed
which are designed to validate the two hypotheses. One experiment is based on
the classical psychophysical adaptation experiments of Blakemore and Campbell
but rather than adapting to a constant spatial frequency, we propose to adapt to
a constant temporal frequency. This will be done by stabilizing the drift rate
of the stimulus grating with respect to eye motion. By measuring the contrast
sensitivity function (CSF) at two different drift rates and a fixed spatial
frequency, the temporal filter model would predict a result which the spatial
frequency channel model would completely fail to explain. Experiments co paring
psychophysical and electrophysiologic spatiotemporal CSF's will also be
performed which are designed to insure that the psychophysical results carry
over to the electrophysiologic domain. The equipment needed for this research
consists of a high accuracy dual Perkinje image eye tracker, an optical image
stabilizer, a high scan rate, fast phosphor video monitor, and a psychophysical
graphics generation system. The PI's institution has agreed to cost-share 30% of
total project costs. This research will have important theoretical ramifications
in understanding the basic processes in human vision. In addition, it will also
impact the quality of health care by enabling an accurate method of
electrophysiologically measuring VA in infants and non-verbal
patients.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;