* 0100437
* Applications of Krein space operator theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2005
* James Rovnyak, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2005
* USD 40,880.00

Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is concerned with operator theory
and function theory&lt;br/&gt;involving the generalized Schur and Nevanlinna
classes and&lt;br/&gt;two-isometries on Pontryagin spaces. A generalization of
Nudelman's&lt;br/&gt;problem in interpolation theory will be studied. In the
classical&lt;br/&gt;case, existence criteria were given by M. Rosenblum and the
PI using&lt;br/&gt;the commutant lifting theorem. The criteria imply a series
of&lt;br/&gt;classical interpolation results with both interior and boundary
data.&lt;br/&gt;The Ball and Helton generalization of the commutant lifting
theorem&lt;br/&gt;yields an extension of Nudelman's problem to the generalized
Schur&lt;br/&gt;class which has similar applications. New problems for
boundary&lt;br/&gt;interpolation and Hilbert transforms arise in the indefinite
case and&lt;br/&gt;will be studied in joint work with T. Constantinescu and A.
Dijksma.&lt;br/&gt;D. Z. Arov and the PI will study Darlington synthesis
for&lt;br/&gt;J-contractive matrix-valued functions in the unit disk. State
spaces&lt;br/&gt;now are Pontryagin spaces. The approach follows previous work
by Arov&lt;br/&gt;and also uses the factorization theory for pseudo-
continuable&lt;br/&gt;functions by Rosenblum and the PI. L. A. Sakhnovich and
the PI will&lt;br/&gt;study indefinite cases of direct and inverse problems for
canonical&lt;br/&gt;differential and difference equations by the method of
operator&lt;br/&gt;identities. A recent Ph.D. dissertation by C. Hellings
obtains a&lt;br/&gt;generalization of Richter's theorem on analytic two-
isometries on&lt;br/&gt;Pontryagin spaces. This area is new and includes a
number of open&lt;br/&gt;questions and possibilities for further
developments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal is concerned with problems in
areas of mathematics which&lt;br/&gt;have traditional connections with
engineering and control theory and&lt;br/&gt;especially the design of
stabilizing feedback controllers and passive&lt;br/&gt;networks. The main
problem of interpolation theory is to reconstruct&lt;br/&gt;a function from
partial information such as given values of the&lt;br/&gt;function at specified
points. Usually the data of a problem satisfy a&lt;br/&gt;positivity condition
depending on the class of functions under&lt;br/&gt;consideration. The proposal
will study a unified method to deal with&lt;br/&gt;one class of such problems in
which the positivity conditions are&lt;br/&gt;replaced by weaker assumptions.
The inverse problem of spectral&lt;br/&gt;theory, which asks to reconstruct an
operator from observed spectral&lt;br/&gt;properties, is related to
interpolation theory, and the effect of&lt;br/&gt;weakening positivity will
again be considered. Other problems are&lt;br/&gt;related to the embedding of a
passive system into a conservative&lt;br/&gt;system: extensions will be
considered in which systems contain active&lt;br/&gt;as well as passive
elements. Conservative systems correspond in some&lt;br/&gt;sense to isometric
operators, and another group of problems explores&lt;br/&gt;generalizations of
isometric operators in the absence of positivity.&lt;br/&gt;The projects are in
collaboration with colleagues in the U.S. and&lt;br/&gt;Europe. Funding of the
project will also provide support for an&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate research
program in the Mathematics Department of the&lt;br/&gt;University of Virginia
that matches students one-on-one with&lt;br/&gt;mathematics professors for
projects of approximately eight weeks in&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;