* 0100512
* Geometric Theory of Meromorphic Functions
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2006
* Alexandre Eremenko, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2006
* USD 254,147.00

The proposer intends to continue his study of geometric questions &lt;br/&gt;in
the theory of meromorphic functions, using the new techniques
&lt;br/&gt;developed in his previous work. The main directions of the
&lt;br/&gt;proposed research are the following.&lt;br/&gt;a) Questions related
to Bloch's theorem and the Type Problem of&lt;br/&gt;a simply connected Riemann
surface, especially the relations&lt;br/&gt;between the conformal type of a
surface and its integral curvature.&lt;br/&gt;b) Problems of geometric function
theory arising in real algebraic&lt;br/&gt;geometry. More specifically, it
includes counting real solutions&lt;br/&gt;of certain systems of algebraic
equations of geometric origin, which&lt;br/&gt;have important applications in
linear control theory. &lt;br/&gt;c) Generalization of results of geometric
function theory to&lt;br/&gt;quasiregular maps in spaces of arbitrary
dimension.&lt;br/&gt;d) Normality criteria for families of holomorphic curves in
projective&lt;br/&gt;spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the basic questions in
mathematics and its applications is&lt;br/&gt;whether a given equation or a
system of equations has solutions,&lt;br/&gt;how many, and where are they
located. In the theory of meromorphic functions&lt;br/&gt;one studies these
questions for equations of the type&lt;br/&gt;f(z)=a, where a is a given complex
number and f a given meromorphic function.&lt;br/&gt;The class of meromorphic
functions includes elementary functions,&lt;br/&gt;such as rational, exponential
and trigonometric ones, as well as the special&lt;br/&gt;functions, a. k. a.
higher transcendental functions, such as the&lt;br/&gt;Gamma function, Airy
functions, elliptic functions and so on.&lt;br/&gt;Most functions arising in
applications of mathematics belong to&lt;br/&gt;this class. In modern
mathematics, questions about solvability&lt;br/&gt;of equations are usually
formulated in geometric language, which makes&lt;br/&gt;the results appealing to
our geometric intuition. &lt;br/&gt;The logic of development of mathematics and
its applications&lt;br/&gt;require an extension of results to vector-valued
functions known&lt;br/&gt;as ``holomorphic curves''. The proposer plans to
continue his study&lt;br/&gt;of geometric theory of meromorphic functions and
holomorphic curves.&lt;br/&gt;A part of the proposal is related to existence of
real solutions, which is&lt;br/&gt;by far more subtle than the existence of
complex solutions, which are usually&lt;br/&gt;studied. This part is inspired by
the so-called "pole placement problem", which is a major unsolved
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;problem in control theory of linear systems. The results
in this area&lt;br/&gt;will have implications for the design of complicated
automatic control systems. &lt;br/&gt;These results would establish limitations
on the possibility to&lt;br/&gt;control a system of given size by a control
device of certain class. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;