* 0100073
* Electrokinetic Remediation of Heterogeneous and Low Permeability Soils Contaminated by Hydrophobic Organic Compounds
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Krishna Reddy, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 08/31/2005
* USD 233,800.00

Throughout the United States, hydrophobic organic compound (HOC) contamination
has become a widespread and pervasive problem. HOCs, which include tars,
creosotes, petroleum residues, and chlorinated solvents, are commonly used in a
myriad of different industries. They are generally classified as irritants
and/or toxins, and many have been identified as lethal carcinogens. Therefore,
in order to protect public health and the environment, sites with existing
contamination urgently need remediation. Unfortunately, removing HOC
contamination has proved to be very difficult. These compounds are extremely
persistent due to their low aqueous solubilities, and their distribution within
the subsurface is highly dependent on particle and macro-scale heterogeneities.
In spite of attempts to develop efficient HOC remediation technologies, very few
have been successful. In-situ flushing with surfactants/cosolvents, though, has
been shown to be promising. Surfactants/cosolvents are pumped into the
subsurface to increase HOC desorption/solubilization by lowering interfacial
tension. Once in solution, the contaminants are mobilized towards wells where
the solution is commonly pumped out and treated. The effectiveness of the
flushing process, however, depends largely on the extent of contaminant
desorption and solubilization, and the degree of interaction between the
solution, contaminant, and soil.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
research is therefore to characterize the distribution of HOCs in heterogeneous
soil environments and develop and evaluate the electrokinetic enhancement
technique for the remediation of HOCs under difficult heterogeneous subsurface
conditions. Though electrokinetically enhanced flushing has great potential, the
physicochemical reactions and transport mechanisms are complex. A complete
fundamental and conceptual understanding of the various components of the
process is essential. To achieve this goal, the following tasks will be
performed: (1) characterization of the HOCs in heterogeneous soils, (2)
evaluation of surfactants/cosolvents for enhanced HOC desorption and
solubilization, (3) assessment of HOC removal from particle-scale heterogeneous
soils, (4) assessment of HOC removal from macro-scale heterogeneous soils, and
(5) development of design guidelines for remediating HOC-contaminated
soils.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In conjunction with the research objectives, the
project will offer educational opportunities and infrastructure improvements for
geotechnical and geoenvironmental education at both the graduate and
undergraduate student levels. Equipment for the research, especially the
physical two-dimensional simulation models, will serve as important
demonstration tools for classroom instruction.&lt;br/&gt;