* 0100348
* Studies in Experimental Nuclear Physics at Indiana University
* MPS,PHY
* 12/01/2001,11/30/2005
* William Snow, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 11/30/2005
* USD 9,355,574.00

The Indiana nuclear physics group plans to assume a leading role in
the&lt;br/&gt;investigation of the following critical questions in nuclear
physics.&lt;br/&gt;The spin of the proton is an essential property that
determines the&lt;br/&gt;structure of matter, yet we know that only a small part
of the spin&lt;br/&gt;comes from the three quarks that form the proton. The
STAR-SPIN group&lt;br/&gt;would definitively measure the contribution from the
gluons, the&lt;br/&gt;short-lived particles that hold the quarks together and
which account&lt;br/&gt;for much of its mass to see if that is where the missing
spin&lt;br/&gt;resides.The measurement of the gluon contribution to the proton
spin&lt;br/&gt;will be carried out by adding a special detector for high energy
gamma&lt;br/&gt;rays to the STAR detector located at the Relativistic Heavy
Ion&lt;br/&gt;Collider. The detector is now being built using separate
NSF&lt;br/&gt;construction funds.&lt;br/&gt; The force between pairs of neutrons
and protons cannot, by itself,&lt;br/&gt;account for the strength that binds the
nucleus together. New,&lt;br/&gt;three-body forces are needed, but their form is
almost unknown. By&lt;br/&gt;manipulating the neutron and proton spins when
three of them come&lt;br/&gt;together, the PINTEX collaboration would produce a
map to guide a theory&lt;br/&gt;of such three-body force. . FY2002 will be the
last year of data taking&lt;br/&gt;using the intense beams and unique
capabilities of the Indiana&lt;br/&gt;University Cooler Facility to study these
three-body forces.&lt;br/&gt; The weak force between nucleons, which can change
the form of matter, is still poorly understood. By making a measurement accurate
to one part in a billion on the formation of a deuteron from a neutron and a
proton, the IU neutron group would measure the longest-range part of the weak
force . The Indiana group would support studies of the weak force and other
effects accessible using cold neutrons at NIST and LANSCE and
by&lt;br/&gt;providing crucial parts of the experimental apparatus. &lt;br/&gt;
There is mounting evidence that neutrinos, one of the most
ubiquitous&lt;br/&gt;particles in the universe, may have mass, thus changing our
most elegant&lt;br/&gt;theories of matter and how it controls the expansion of
the universe. &lt;br/&gt;The neutrino group would check a recent observation
from LANL of a few&lt;br/&gt;cases where neutrinos, because they have mass,
spontaneously change from&lt;br/&gt;one neutrino type into another by collecting
a large enough data sample&lt;br/&gt;to settle this issue.&lt;br/&gt; A key
component of the Indiana program will be the training of students&lt;br/&gt;to
become the next generation of researchers. This effort includes
the&lt;br/&gt;involvement of post-doctoral associates in critical experimental
roles,&lt;br/&gt;guiding the research of graduate students, involving
undergraduates&lt;br/&gt;through the NSF-funded REU summer program and part-time
employment, and&lt;br/&gt;reaching out to make the community aware of our
scientific mission.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;