* 0100273
* NSF-EC Activity:  Experimental and Theoretical Studies of Intercalated and Intracalated Carbon Nanotubes
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,02/28/2005
* Louis Girifalco, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing grant
* David Nelson
* 02/28/2005
* USD 480,000.00

The intrinsic structure and chemistry of nanotubes provide a framework upon
which important functional nanoscale systems can be built. At the University of
Pennsylvania, we are discovered and produced hybrid materials in which molecules
are introduced into the lumen of nanotubes to impart new and improved
functionality. The first of these was one-dimensional chains of C(60) molecules
encapsulated in single-wall carbon nanotubes. The molecules were shown to be
highly mobile within the tubes and therefore provide an ideal basis for the
experimental and theoretical study of one-dimensional systems. We have recently
shown that our synthesis methods are general and we have incorporated the alkali
metals K and CS, and the endohedral molecule La(2)@C(60), inside of nanotubes.
This can lead to important results. For example, calculations predict that the
tensile modulus of nanotubes is greatly increased when they contain chains of
C(60). Also, there are possible applications of these systems to hydrogen
storage and Li-based batteries. An exciting prospect is the use of nanotubes as
nanoscale reaction chambers to produce metastable molecules. %%% Our theory
program first developed the intermolecular potentials among graphitic and
fullerene structures and then applied one-dimensional statistical mechanics to
analyze the clustering and one-dimensional equation of state of fullerene chains
within nanotubes.