* 0100012
* Urban Containment Programs and the Vulnerability of Infrastructure to Hazards: Are Cities Being Engineered to be Safe as Well as Smart?
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2005
* Raymond Burby, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2005
* USD 149,995.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal: CMS-0100012&lt;br/&gt;PI: Raymond
Burby&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of North Carolina at Chapel
Hill&lt;br/&gt;Date: July 10, 2001&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT: Urban
Containment Programs and the Vulnerability of Infrastructure to Hazards: Are
Cities Being Engineered to Be Safe as Well as "Smart"&lt;br/&gt; "Smart Growth"
is now being advocated in the United States by federal agencies, industry, and
professional associations in order to bring about more efficient,
environmentally sensitive, and livable urban communities. One key tenet of smart
growth is containment of urban sprawl through the use of regulatory growth
boundaries, greenbelts, and curtailment of water and sewer extensions. Smart
growth and urban containment, however, may have a serious unintended
consequence: increased vulnerability of urban development and related civil
infrastructure systems to natural hazards due to increased development pressure.
In this interdisciplinary project (civil engineering and urban planning) we will
document the dimensions of this threat and identify engineering and other
measures that can be used to counter it. The study will focus on a paired sample
of four metropolitan areas. Two metropolitan areas have had urban containment
programs in place for twenty or more years: Portland, Oregon and San Diego,
California. They will be paired with neighboring Vancouver/Clark County,
Washington and Orange County, California, respectively, which do not have
containment policies. Several hundred parcels within each metropolitan area will
be randomly sampled to determine the change in the value of parcels and
intensity of development before and after containment began. Data will also be
collected on a range of other factors that can affect development (e.g., hazard
mitigation and other infrastructure standards and development regulations,
parcel size, soils and slopes, accessibility, public services, and nearby
development trends). Regression models will be used to isolate the effects of
containment while controlling statistically for other factors that can affect
development and value. Then, using ratios of infrastructure (roads, bridges,
water, sewerage, and electricity) to housing units of various types, the degree
to which containment programs increase the potential for losses to civil
infrastructure systems will be estimated. The development of engineering
standards for the built environment and planning standards for contained urban
growth will be explored through discussions with representatives of federal
agencies, industry trade associations, and engineering and planning professional
associations. The implications of the study findings for engineering urban
growth will help to ensure that "smart growth" now being advocated widely is
also "safe growth." &lt;br/&gt;