* 0100532
* Symposium: Stress - Is it More Than a Disease? A Comparative Look at Stress and Adaptation, to be held January 3-7, 2001, Chicago, IL
* BIO,IOS
* 01/15/2001,12/31/2001
* Cliff Summers, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Platt
* 12/31/2001
* USD 7,000.00

The nervous and endocrine systems play a critical role in allowing organisms to
cope with environmental stressors. Recent studies on non-mammalian species have
identified responses to stress that have adaptive features that do not fit
readily into current views, largely based on laboratory animals, that stress is
a disorder. This symposium brings together for the first time scientists
specifically working on chemical signaling during stress in mammalian and non-
mammalian animals. The symposium will cover the phylogenetic diversity of the
stress response in invertebrates and vertebrates, the comparative aspects of how
mechanisms for responses show specific adaptations, and the integration of how
stress responses function in development, reproduction, immune function, and
behavior. The symposium itself takes an integrative approach from molecules to
behavior, over a wide range of organisms, and is a satellite meeting to the
similarly broad Society for Integrative &amp; Comparative Biology. Papers will
be presented by graduate students and postdoctoral researchers, as well as
senior researchers, and the proceedings will be published an international
journal.&lt;br/&gt; This symposium will have an impact by giving a unique
perspective on a topic of broad interest to animal physiology as well as to
neuroscience and behavior, and the exposure of young scientists to these ideas
and to interactions with leaders in the field will have an impact on their
careers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;