* 0100650
* Symposium: Minisymposium on Amphibian Metamorphosis, to be held Chicago, IL,  January 3-7, 2001
* BIO,IOS
* 12/15/2000,11/30/2001
* Robert Denver, William Paterson University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 11/30/2001
* USD 2,000.00

During the annual meeting of the Society for Integrative and Comparative Biology
(SICB) to be held January 3-7 in Chicago, Illinois, the Division of Comparative
Endocrinology will sponsor a mini-symposium on amphibian metamorphosis. This
mini-symposium will concentrate on molecular mechanisms and hormonal control of
metamorphosis. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Metamorphosis consists of a series of
postembryonic developmental steps that leads to the transformation of an aquatic
tadpole into an often land-dwelling frog. This sequence of events is triggered
and controlled by hormones. Although humans are direct developers, and thus do
not undergo a metamorphosis, many of the same basic developmental processes
occur in frogs and man. Amphibian metamorphosis provides an ideal animal model
system to analyze, at the cellular and molecular level, how hormones orchestrate
development. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Concern over the status of amphibian
populations has been mounting due to widespread reports of population declines
and deformities in adult frogs. Recent reports of malformed frogs throughout the
Great Lakes Region have focused concern on the effects of pollution on amphibian
development. Both wildlife and human populations in the Great Lakes region and
beyond are potentially at risk from the teratogenic effects of such pollutants.
Because many of these pollutants can mimic or alter hormonal signaling there is
a strong potential for disruption of basic developmental processes. Amphibians
can serve both as indicator species of environmental contamination and powerful
model systems for assessing potential deleterious effects of pollutants on
wildlife and humans.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this symposium, experts in various
scientific disciplines and whose central theme of investigation is amphibian
metamorphosis will take a multidisciplinary approach to analyzing this complex
process. Speakers will address the molecular, evolutionary and hormonal aspects
of amphibian metamorphosis. This synthesis of scientific expertise from
different disciplines will advance understanding of this fundamental
developmental process and may advance our understanding of the physiological
problems underlying declines of some amphibian populations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;