* 0100611
* The Characterization of Organic Bistable Device and the Formation of High Performance Organic Memory Cells
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2003
* Yang Yang, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Venkata Mulpuri
* 06/30/2003
* USD 77,759.00

&lt;br/&gt;Recently, we observed that organic semiconductor device shows strong
bistable states with remarkably differing electrical conductivities when it is
structure right. The transition from an electrically insulating state to a
conducting state in the device is accompanied by a drastic increase in injection
current by as much as six orders of magnitude. The retention of the high
conductivity state was observed even after switching off the power. Furthermore,
the low conductive states can be re-established by applying a negative voltage
pulse. These discoveries pave the way for potential applications such as low-
cost, large-area, electrically addressable high-density data storage devices,
organic switches, and sensors. This newly invented organic device is significant
for two reasons. First, this device uses organic insulators as the active
material, thereby providing new options for organic electronic devices, which
have been traditionally associated with organic semiconductors. Second,
electronic memory is a very important component in all electronic devices such
as computers, cell phones, PDAs etc. It is anticipated that the successful
development of this device as memory cells will have a tremendous impact in the
electronic industry. Unfortunately, the mechanism of this device, for example
the sudden change in electrical conductivity at ~3V; and the reason behind the
retention of the high conductivity state even after switching off the power, is
not yet clearly understood. Our goal of this project is to gain the
understanding of the organic bistable device, from both experimental and
theoretical modeling approaches. Based on the obtained results, we will try to
further improve device performance and to realize other applications.&lt;br/&gt;