* 0100366
* Microplasma for Dry Etching: New Approaches for Micro and Nano Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2001,02/28/2002
* Yogesh Gianchandani, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 02/28/2002
* USD 266,567.00

0100366 Gianchandani

Plasma processing is routinely used in semiconductor processing applications,
and is the dominant technique for silicon etching. Conventional etchers aim to
create a uniform plasma across the process chamber in which the silicon wafers
are located. However, there are applications in micromachining and
nanotechnology in which alternative paradigms may prove useful. For example,
present fabrication techniques are not practical for manufacturing an array of
trenches with 100 different depths, which would require 100 lithography steps.
Such a array could be useful for applications like biological cell sorting.

This proposal addresses questions pertaining to the science and technology of
spatially confined reactive plasmas (microplasmas) and their application to the
etching of silicon and other materials. In particular, it focuses on in-situ
microplasmas, which are generated by electrodes patterned on the silicon wafer
itself. The viability of this concept, which differs radically from other recent
work in microplasmas, has been demonstrated by preliminary experiments in which
in-situ DC microplasmas were used to etch completely through a silicon wafer in
less than one hour. The proposed effort will explore the physics, technology,
and diagnostics for reactive microplasmas for etching silicon and other
materials.

A number of etching configurations will be examined for their impact on plasma
confinement, etch rates, anisotropy, mask selectivities, and electrode wear.
Promising electrode structures will be explored, including options in which the
ion flux is electrostatically controlled to locally adjust the etch rate and
sidewall profile. Various electrode materials, powering schemes, and gas
chemistries will be evaluated. Both in-situ and ex-situ diagnostic tools
(including thin-film Langmuir probes) will be developed and used. Spectroscopic
analysis will be performed. The dependencies of the Paschen breakdown curve, the
molecular behavior of the ambient gas, the ionization rates and the electron
energies, as well as the relationship of these parameters to the etch rates and
profiles will be explored.

Theoretical models will be developed for the reactive microplasmas by refining
global plasma analysis. This includes the incorporation of realistic basic data
and consideration of discharge geometry and electrode material. The theoretical
models will be used for scaling studies to determine if the plasmas can be
reduced to nanometer dimensions. Supporting experiments will be carried out to
explore the scaling limits and validate the theory.

The proposed reactive microplasmas have the potential not only for making a
contribution to traditional etching applications, but also facilitating the
fabrication of microstructures that were previously infeasible. Using
microplasmas, an array of 100 trenches with different depths could be built with
just two masking steps. In addition, if the proposed research is successful, not
only will it be possible to individually specify the profile of every trench in
the array, but also to skew the direction of the etch with the help of local
electric fields controlled by secondary electrodes. In the longer term, the
proposed research could lead to other avenues of research, including localized
deposition by sputtering or plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD).