* 0100141
* Combinatorial Commutative Algebra and Integer Programming
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2001,09/30/2004
* Rekha Thomas, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Pollington
* 09/30/2004
* USD 94,000.00

This research program concerns questions at the intersection
of&lt;br/&gt;commutative algebra, integer programming, and discrete geometry.
The&lt;br/&gt;link between these fields is made via toric ideals and their
Groebner&lt;br/&gt;bases. The first set of questions concern the
characterization and&lt;br/&gt;construction of toric initial ideals without
embedded primes. Answers&lt;br/&gt;to these questions will provide new
structural results in the theory&lt;br/&gt;of integer programming via the
classical technique of group&lt;br/&gt;relaxations due to Gomory and will extend
recent work in this area by&lt;br/&gt;Serkan Hosten and the proposer. The second
set of questions concern &lt;br/&gt;the toric Hilbert scheme, a parameter space
for all polynomial ideals&lt;br/&gt;with the same multi-graded Hilbert function
as a given toric ideal. A&lt;br/&gt;central open question about these schemes is
whether they are&lt;br/&gt;connected. The proposer will work with Diane Maclagan
on this &lt;br/&gt;connectivity question, building on their recent construction
of a&lt;br/&gt;graph on the monomial ideals of the scheme which is connected if
and&lt;br/&gt;only if the scheme is connected. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Over the
past decade, the proposer has contributed to the development&lt;br/&gt;of
several new theories in discrete optimization using
algebraic&lt;br/&gt;techniques and has worked on the application of the
resulting,&lt;br/&gt;non-traditional algorithms to practical problems. The
research that&lt;br/&gt;has contributed to these theories brings tools from
algebra,&lt;br/&gt;combinatorics, optimization and discrete geometry to bear on
problems&lt;br/&gt;from all of these fields. The application of algebraic
techniques has&lt;br/&gt;led to new understanding in the field of integer
programming, a branch&lt;br/&gt;of discrete optimization, but tools and ideas
from optimization have&lt;br/&gt;also led to new results in algebra. This
interplay of ideas and&lt;br/&gt;techniques has shed light on questions from
each of these areas and&lt;br/&gt;promises to lead to greater insight and
advancement. The proposer&lt;br/&gt;works with students on some of the
computational aspects of the&lt;br/&gt;research and plans to involve students in
the development of software&lt;br/&gt;that implements these algorithms. The
proposer is also interested in&lt;br/&gt;curriculum development in subject areas
related to this research at&lt;br/&gt;the University of Washington.