* 0100770
* Adaptive Synchronization Framework Supporting Device-independent Mobile Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2004
* Abdelsalam Helal, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Brett D. Fleisch
* 06/30/2004
* USD 150,000.00

Recent technological advances in wireless networks and portable information
appliances have engendered the new paradigm of mobile computing, enabling users
carrying portable devices to access and update data regardless of their physical
location or movement behavior. However, the use of this technology will remain
limited unless we develop the necessary concepts, theory and infrastructure that
can seamlessly integrate mobility and disconnection into everyday networked
computing. Extensive research is needed in order for mobile computing to become
pervasive. Current research efforts do not support sufficient automation and
management of mobile data access and update. Assumptions are usually made
regarding the application, the source of mobile data, or the particularities of
the mobile device. Ubiquitous data access is lacking due to the tight coupling
between the mobile device and the mobile data. Users are therefore not allowed
to switch mobile devices without spending a lot of effort on copying and re-
hoarding. Additionally, current solutions do not support mobile access and
hoarding from heterogeneous sources of data such as file systems, database
servers, web servers, etc. Current research is also limited to basic
synchronization schemes that do not take into consideration the variable and
individual needs of consistency and up-to-dateness of mobile data. Finally,
current mobile transaction models are not efficient in terms of successful
commit rate, especially under prolonged periods of disconnection. This proposal
is based on ongoing research on mobile computing, operating systems and data
warehousing. The overall goal is to make mobile computing available to a broader
range of users and applications by automating the hoarding of a wide variety of
data from multiple heterogeneous sources into mobile devices, and to facilitate
sophisticated synchronization between the mobile devices and the fixed networks
where the sources reside. The specific goals are: Develop and evaluate a three-
tiered architecture based on the Coda file system that provides independence
between the mobile data and the mobile devices via a data warehouse for storing
the user's working set. Develop algorithms for automatically and incrementally
hoarding data on mobile devices and for synchronizing the contents of the mobile
device with the working set in the warehouse and the original sources. Develop
new synchronization techniques for maintaining the user's working set, based on
programmable and conditional consistency specifications of mobile data items.
Different data items may have different consistency requirements, and must
therefore be synchronized differently. Develop a new model of mobile
transactions that can guarantee that transactional updates performed during
disconnection are highly likely to be committed upon reconnection. Our goal is
to build upon existing results to develop the architecture and algorithms to
make smart hoarding and synchronization in mobile environments a reality. We see
the realization of such a framework as an important and necessary step towards
making mobile computing a viable practice for a broad audience; a step that some
day may lead us to the realization of ubiquitous computing. In our vision, users
should be allowed to switch to any mobile device to connect to the fixed network
and carry the necessary data with them, without having to worry about hoarding,
synchronization, and other low-level burdens. Given our prior experience and
research results in the areas of mobile computing, distributed systems, and data
warehousing, we believe that we can successfully apply data warehousing
technology to manage important user data as well as support the incremental
maintenance of this data in light of frequent updates.