* 0100149
* Lattices, Trees and Group Actions
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,03/31/2002
* Lisa Carbone, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynne Walling
* 03/31/2002
* USD 35,100.00

The investigator has determined the necessary and sufficient conditions that
ensure the existence of tree lattices, that is discrete subgroup of finite
covolume in the automorphism group of a locally finite tree, giving a complete
answer to the Bass-Lubotzky conjectures for the existence of tree lattices. The
intention is to explore the connections between tree lattices and lattices in
rank 1 Lie groups over non-archimedean fields. The investigator is interested in
making explicit constructions of non-uniform lattices contained within rank 1
Lie groups, comparing them with general tree lattices, covolumes, questions of
arithmeticity and commensurability, and Hausdorff dimension. Concerning lattices
in Lie groups, A. Lubotzky showed that rank 1 Lie groups over non-archimedean
local fields contain uncountably many conjugacy classes of lattices. The
investigator has obtainted a topological description of Lubotzky's deformation
spaces of lattices. The aim now is to investigate the analytic and algebro-
geometric structure of these deformation spaces, and to construct infinite
dimensional deformation spaces for non-uniform lattices. The investigator and H.
Garland have established that Kac-Moody groups over finite fields contain
lattices. The aim is now to show that in rank 2 there are deformation spaces of
lattices and to investigate the structure of the deformation spaces, of
fundamental domains for non-uniform lattices, and of commensurability groups of
uniform lattices in rank 2. Under consideration also is the existence of uniform
lattices and spherical buildings in higher rank, congruence subgroups, and
lattices in non-split and generalized Kac-Moody groups. The investigator and her
colleagues aim, following the work of E. Rips, to give classification theorems
for groups with free or stable actions on R-trees by isometries, and by
isometries and homothety. The strategy is to give a classification of the
pseudogroups of isometries of R, and then to combine this with a structure
theory for reconstructing group actions which has recently been
developed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We are studying infinite 'trees', which are
connected graphs with no closed circuits, and the algebraic structure of their
symmetries. The algebraic structures that are 'discrete' and have 'finite
volume' are of particular importance. We have established the existence of such
symmetries, and we are investigating their properties. This allows us to study
the interactions of mathematics with physics. Our techniques also have
applications in algebra, geometry and topology.&lt;br/&gt;