* 0100903
* Lamellae Formation and Reorientation in Diblock Copolymers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2004
* Jorge Vinals, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 06/30/2004
* USD 222,000.00

0100903&lt;br/&gt;Vinals&lt;br/&gt;This research project will use analytical and
computational techniques to study the formation, stability and coarsening of
lamellar phases in diblock copolymers. Although block copolymers are already
widely used in industry, newer technologies that rely on high performance
polymeric materials often require precise control of the polymer microstructure
and its self-assembly. Processing by temperature quench or solvent casting from
a high temperature isotropic phase always leads to the formation of a
polycrystalline structure comprised of domains or grains of differently oriented
lamellae. The focus of this research is on mechanisms controlling long-ranged
orientational order, including the reorientation of lamellar phases by
reciprocating shears, and the motion of topological defects and its effect on
coarsening of the lamellar structure. A theoretical analysis is carried out at a
mesoscopic level to find nonlinear solutions under imposed, reciprocating
shears, as well as to elucidate their stability. Viscoelastic contrast between
the microphases is explicitly taken into consideration. In addition, the longest
relaxation times in the lamellar phase are likely to be determined by the
spatial distribution and motion of topological defects. The motion of grain
boundaries, disclinations (in two-dimensional samples), and dislocations is
considered, as well as their effect on the coarsening times of the
microstructure, and on the possible existence of asymptotic self-
similarity.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This research project will use analytical
and computational techniques to study the formation, stability and coarsening of
lamellar phases in diblock copolymers. Although block copolymers are already
widely used in industry, newer technologies that rely on high performance
polymeric materials often require precise control of the polymer microstructure
and its self-assembly. Processing by temperature quench or solvent casting from
a high temperature isotropic phase always leads to the formation of a
polycrystalline structure comprised of domains or grains of differently oriented
lamellae.&lt;br/&gt;The focus of this research is on mechanisms controlling
long-ranged orientational order and the motion of topological defects and its
effect on coarsening of the lamellar structure.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;