* 0100799
* SGER:  New Magnetic Tunnel Junctions Using Semiconductor Sandwich Layers with Controllable Band Gaps
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/01/2001,08/31/2002
* John Snyder, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 08/31/2002
* USD 54,802.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;D.C.Jiles and
J.E.Snyder&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Progress beyond data storage
densities of 100 Gbits/in2 requires a revolution in materials. Magnetic tunnel
junctions provide a possible solution and are expected to form an essential
component of future magnetic disk drive read heads, part of the $50 billion/year
hard disk drive industry. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Tunnel junctions with a R/R of
30% have been announced in the last year. However there are serious problems
with the current generation of tunnel junctions, which are based exclusively on
an alumina barrier layer. These layers are now down to 0.7 nm in thickness and
still the resistances of the tunnel junctions are too high for the intended
applications. Essentially the alumina tunnel junction has reached its ultimate
performance limits and there is a concern if alumina tunnel junctions will ever
be able to be used in read heads and MRAM because of the high resistance.
Therefore it is time for new tunnel junction materials to be brought forward
based on alternative barrier layers. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently studies of
alternative insulator materials by Fert et. al. showed that the barrier layer
strongly affects the spin polarization in the magnetic layers. Freitas et al.
have studied the effect of nitrogen additions to the alumina which changed the
barrier height and resulted in an increase in tunnel magnetoresistance from 22%
to 25% as the composition changed from Al2O3 to AlN.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;However none of this has addressed the central problem of
the overall resistance of the devices. In our proposed SGER we intend to make
the radical change of completely replacing the alumina with other
semiconductors. Of course this is a high risk endeavor, but the enormous
benefits to the magnetic data storage industry that will accrue if the project
is success make this a worthwhile exploratory
investigation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;