* 0100899
* Travel Grant: AIChE Inaugural Woman's Initiative Committee Session for "Turn of the Century Engineers"
* ENG,CBET
* 11/01/2000,01/31/2002
* Karen High, Oklahoma State University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 01/31/2002
* USD 6,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Karen A. High&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Oklahoma
State University&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0100899&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
Inaugural Woman's Initiative Committee Session entitled "turn of the Century
Chemical Engineers: Successes and Challenges" will be held at the annual
American Institute of Chemical Engineers (AIChE) meeting in Los Angeles. It will
be a full morning session from 8:30 to 11:30 am with seven speakers including
women from industry, academia government. Some of the presentations
include:&lt;br/&gt;- A discussion of the work of the Congressional Commission on
the Advancement of Women and Minorities in Science, Engineering and Technology
Development by Dr. Kathryn Johnson, Vice President of Matrix Consulting
Group&lt;br/&gt;- A discussion of the progress made by women chemical engineers
and opportunities for partnership between AIChE and the Women in Engineering
Programs Advocacy Network (WEPAN) by Dr. Suzanne Brainard, Director of the
Center for Women in Science and Engineering at the University of
Washington.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The session is a part of a more comprehensive
program to help women at all stages of their careers - from graduate student to
tenured faculty as well as women in various industrial positions in the chemical
process industries - to advance in their careers. Other activities will continue
during the day including the inauguration of a joint venture with the Girl
Scouts to develop science kits which will hopefully help encourage young girls
to study engineering.&lt;br/&gt;