* 0100737
* Discrete and Continuous Extremal Problems in Approximation Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2001,11/30/2001
* Edward Saff, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Juan J. Manfredi
* 11/30/2001
* USD 96,310.00

Technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research will primarily focus on
three areas: (i) the&lt;br/&gt;existence and determination of asymptotic
interpolation &lt;br/&gt;measures for multivariate polynomial interpolation;
(ii) inverse&lt;br/&gt;problems for the 2D Laplacian; (iii) asymptotics for
minimal&lt;br/&gt;energy points on the sphere in n-dimensional Euclidean
space.&lt;br/&gt;Regarding (i), the research is expected to result in
algorithms&lt;br/&gt;for discretization of certain algebraic curves. Concerning
(ii)&lt;br/&gt;we will explore a new method based on best meromorphic
approximation&lt;br/&gt;for the nondestructive testing of homogeneous bodies for
&lt;br/&gt;faults (cracks). Regarding (iii), we shall investigate the
&lt;br/&gt;limiting behavior of point sets on the sphere generated by
&lt;br/&gt;certain minimum energy criteria and also devise fast
algorithms&lt;br/&gt;for "near-optimal" point sets. In all phases of the
research,&lt;br/&gt;potential theory is expected to be a useful
tool.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Non-technical Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will primarily focus on three problem areas:&lt;br/&gt;(i) the
noninvasive detection of faults (cracks) in homogeneous&lt;br/&gt;media, (ii)
near-optimal configurations of large numbers&lt;br/&gt;of sampling points on a
sphere, and (iii) the determination &lt;br/&gt;of near-optimal sampling points
on certain curves. Regarding&lt;br/&gt;(i), the goal is to develop an efficient
algorithm (program)&lt;br/&gt;that utilizes only boundary data to determine the
existence&lt;br/&gt;and location of cracks inside a conducting material.
Concerning&lt;br/&gt;(ii), we shall investigate point sets on the sphere
that&lt;br/&gt;arise in the structural analysis of large molecules, and
also&lt;br/&gt;serve as well distributed locations (eg. on Earth) for
sampling&lt;br/&gt;climate data for global weather models. Regarding (iii), we
shall&lt;br/&gt;explore point sets on certain curves that can be used
for&lt;br/&gt;geometric design and data sampling purposes.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;