* 0100780
* A Fundamental Investigation of Threshold Stress in Dispersion-Strengthened Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/15/2001,06/30/2005
* Rajiv Mishra, Missouri University of Science and Technology
* Continuing grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 06/30/2005
* USD 168,003.00

The project is aimed at developing a quantitative model for high temperature
creep of dispersion strengthened aluminum alloys (Al-Sc-Mg-Zr-SiC) by
integrating the dislocation dissociation and positive climb concepts. An
innovative creep specimen geometry will elucidate the threshold stress
mechanisms and the microstructural evolution during creep deformation. An
understanding of the influence of particle size and distribution on threshold
stress and creep kinetics can lead to development of high temperature aluminum
alloys by microstructural design. The development of quantitative model based on
fundamental dislocation parameters is in dire need. Major goals of the study
are: (1) to investigate the deformation characteristics in simpler alloy systems
(Al-Sc, Al-Zr, etc) for a systematic understanding of their mechanical behavior;
(2) to perform in-situ transmission electron microscope (TEM) straining
experiments for determining dislocation velocities during their glide and climb
movements; and (3) to develop quantitative model using the experimentally
determined parameters. The work involves a combination of university-industry-
government laboratory-national user facility. %%% This research develops new
understanding of the fundamental mechanisms of dispersion strengthening beyond
the current state of the art. The results are aimed at the development of creep-
resistant materials for high-temperature applications in various technologies.
***