* 0100872
* Mesoscopic Theories in Materials Science
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2004
* Markos Katsoulakis, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2004
* USD 83,994.00

In the proposed research we address the modeling and analysis of mesoscopic
equations describing pattern formation in materials and complex fluids. We focus
mainly on two paradigms, surface processes and field-responsive fluids.
Mesoscopic models are coarse grained PDE or Stochastic PDE, derived directly and
exactly from microscopic interacting particle systems and include detailed
atomistic/molecular information. The principal question we attempt to answer is
how microscopic intermolecular forces affect pattern formation and evolution at
much larger length scales. The analysis proposed here draws techniques from
nonlinear PDE, calculus of variations and stochastic processes. In the first
project we study pattern formation and evolution in surface processes under the
influence of multiple and possibly competing mechanisms such as surface
diffusion, reaction and adsorption/desorption. Here we employ Gamma-convergence
techniques in order to understand patterning at equilibrium, and viscosity
solutions and varifolds for their dynamic counterparts. In a second project we
focus on molecular dynamics and related mesoscopic models describing particle
suspensions in fluids and in particular on the derivation and analysis of
mesoscopic PDE for field-responsive fluids. Here we employ mass transport and
relative entropy methods combined with Riesz Transform estimates to show
existence of solutions as well as relaxation to equilibrium.

Ample experimental evidence indicates that interatomic and intermolecular
forces dictate macroscopic properties of matter and determine formation and
selection of patterns and textures. Notable examples arise in polymer blends,
alloys, catalysis, epitaxial growth of advanced materials and biological media.
Molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo algorithms, developed in a
Quantum/Statistical Mechanics framework, provide detailed, quantitative dynamic
and equilibrium descriptions of these phenomena; however they are limited to
short space/time length scales, while experimentally observed morphologies
involve much larger scales. This disparity between computations and experiments
underscores the need to develop models (PDE, Stochastic PDE) for larger scales,
which take in consideration microscopic details. The "mesoscopic" models we
develop and study numerically and analytically are geared towards this
direction, incorporating systematically, (a) microscopic interactions, and (b)
underresolved microscopic scales fluctuations. The developed models and analysis
methods can allow for a more direct comprehension of macroscopic dynamic and
equilibrium morphological behaviors and also provide comparisons to experiments
which typically involve larger length scales than the ones arising in
microscopic modeling and simulation.

