* 0100932
* The Math Works
* EHR,DUE
* 05/15/2001,12/31/2003
* John Pazdar, Capital Community College
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 12/31/2003
* USD 231,203.00

This project is addressing the need to improve the mathematics learning
environment in two-year colleges by generating increased student enthusiasm in
the exploration and applications of mathematics and by attracting more students
to science, mathematics, engineering, and technology (SMET) fields of study. The
overall project goal is to provide faculty with a complete package of
information and materials for establishing and conducting an interdisciplinary
course for the study of mathematics. The package includes (a) ten laboratory
exercises, each having a technology problem, a bibliotechnology research
exercise, a method to develop the mathematics tools required to solve the
problem, a model portfolio, and a thesis defense; (b) initiation of a marketing
plan; and (c) initiation of a management plan. Means to accomplish the project
objectives involve in-kind support from the American Mathematical Association of
Two-Year Colleges (AMATYC), Texas Instruments, and Capital Community College.
Twenty AMATYC faculty members have been selected to produce the ten
laboratories.

Project outcomes include a laboratory, marketing, and management plan, all of
which are being compiled into The Math Works Resource Book, to be published in
hard copy and via the Internet. This project is offering a multitude of
professional enhancement opportunities to those who develop or use the products
developed through this project.