* 0100633
* Stochastic and Reliable Matching and Scheduling Algorithms for a Heterogeneous Computing Environment
* CSE,CNS
* 07/01/2001,12/31/2003
* Fusun Ozguner, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Brett D. Fleisch
* 12/31/2003
* USD 97,503.00

In heterogeneous distributed computing, a network of dissimilar machines is used
to execute a given application in parallel. With the advent of advanced network
technologies, the scale at which heterogeneous computing can be practicaly
applied is growing to a global scale, thus making it possible to collect high
performance computers across the globe into a single computational resource.
Multiple users will be able to simulataneously use this computational resource
to execute a variety of large, parallel applications. However, there are a
number of problems to solve before this type of computing becomes a reality.
Therefore this project proposes to develop effective matching and scheduling
methods to allow multiple users to execute applications in a large,
decentralized, failure-prone, heterogeneous computing environment. Due to the
dynamic and uncertain nature of this environment, the algorithms that will be
developed will use statistical techniques to allocate resources fairly in a
highly dynamic system. The algorithms will be evaluated by simulations and also
on a small testbed. There are three different aspects of this proposed work: 1.
Methods will be developed to statistically obtain an estimate of the response
time of a task on an arbitrary target machine. This will be accomplished by
developing separate techniques to estimate the execution time, machine loads,
and network loads. A method for estimating the execution time using data
gathered from past executions of the task has already been developed. This
method will be refined and similar stochastic methods will be developed for
machine and network load estimation. 2. A dynamic matching and scheduling method
for heterogeneous machines will be developed. This method will allow each
application to make scheduling decisions without direct knowledge of the other
applications executing in the environment. Each application will have to compete
for the computational resources of the network. The scheduling heuristics will
take into account the uncertainty in the stochastic estimates of the execution
time and machine and network loads. 3. Finally, reliable scheduling algorithms
based on either heuristic cost functions or evaluation of the reliability of
applications will be developed. The heuristic cost functions developed will
define the impact of a scheduling decision on the reliability of an application
in time units. These algorithms will consider both the execution time and
failure probability of applications while making scheduling decisions, and thus,
will be capable of producing task assignments that improve both the performance
and reliability of applications. In addition, algorithms which can trade
performance for reliability of applications will be designed.