* 0100851
* VIDI: Visual Information Dissemination for Visually Impaired Individuals
* CSE,IIS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2007
* Allen Hanson, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Ephraim Glinert
* 07/31/2007
* USD 516,921.00

This is the first year funding of a three year continuing award. The PI's
contention is that the field of computer vision has matured to the point where a
completely portable system capable of finding signs and other textual events in
the environment in close to real time, and then reading their contents aloud, is
feasible. His goal in this project is to provide the visually impaired with a
way to obtain crucial information from the environment that is now totally
inaccessible (except through intervention of a sighted person). Running on a
wearable computer connected to a gyroscopically referenced head mounted camera,
the envisaged system will detect text and signs within a compact representation
of continuous video of the user's surroundings in the form of a mosaic. The sign
detection and recognition system will use a set of multi-scale features that
have been shown to be invariant to changes in viewing angle and illumination.
Recognition will be accomplished by building multi-resolution spatial networks
of distributions of these features and matching them against a database of known
(customized to locale) signs (e.g. international highway signs) using a coarse
to fine matching technique that is both robust and efficient. Text will be
detected using the same techniques, with the aid of a commercial OCR system. The
PI will also examine the OCR's intermediate representations, and a word
dictionary for tolerance to character recognition errors. He will leverage
existing work on image retrieval from large databases using image content, face
recognition, image indexing using color properties, and text detection and
recognition in complex images. The work will be performed in three phases
roughly corresponding to a year each. System design and evaluation will both be
conducted in conjunction with Lighthouse International, which specializes in
rehabilitation training for the visually impaired. In the first phase of the
work, individual components, which include camera stabilization, mosaics, text
and sign recognition, will be developed. In the second phase, a head mounted
unit, attitude inference, a wearable computer, a camera, speech synthesizer and
user interface model will be developed. Additionally, the use of log-polar
cameras will be examined for fast computation of multi-scale features and for
its effectiveness in simultaneously addressing the field of view and resolution
issues. The third and last phase will consist of a series of user and system
evaluations and refinements. There is no doubt that, if successful, this
research will have a tremendous impact on and dramatically improve the lives of
visually impaired individuals.