* 0100354
* GOALI:  Fundamentals of Fabrication of Nanofiber Assemblies by Electrospinning
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/01/2001,04/30/2007
* Darrell Reneker, University of Nebraska-Lincoln
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 04/30/2007
* USD 372,000.00

The objective of this Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry
(GOALI) research project is to continue the comprehensive experimental and
theoretical study of electrospinning of polymer nanofibers with the emphasis now
on the fabrication of nanofiber assemblies and the evaluation of their
microstructure and properties. Electrospinning is an emerging technology
producing polymer fibers in the diameter range from a few microns down to three
nanometers. Previous collaborative research by the principal investigators has
advanced the understanding of the process in a single jet regime, including a
recent discovery and analysis of a hierarchical bending instability as a major
mechanism of production of small diameter fibers. Potential industrial
applications of the process require further development of methods of nanofiber
placement and fabrication of nanofiber assemblies with controlled geometry,
orientation, and properties. This research will provide a body of knowledge
necessary for the development of robust, industrially relevant methods and
devices for flexible and reproducible fabrication of large nanofiber assemblies
with controlled geometry and microstructure. Development of better methods of
fabrication of nanofibers and their useful assemblies will produce a
considerable impact in the general area of nanostructured
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to establish new technologies for the
control of nanofiber placement, the research tasks will include experimental and
theoretical analysis of the density distribution of jets in the cloud region of
the process envelope. Under normal conditions, non-woven sheets with random
fiber orientation are being produced. By taking into account the interactions of
the segments of the jet with themselves and with the external field,
electromechanical methods of placement of the nanofibers into controlled
oriented and gradient assemblies will be explored. Microstructure and properties
of these assemblies will be characterized and correlated with the process
parameters. The research will be performed in close collaboration with the
Donaldson Company, Lucent Technologies Bell Laboratories, NIST, and SUNY Stony
Brook/Brookhaven National Laboratory.