* 0100410
* Stability and Finiteness Problems in Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,02/28/2006
* Jacob Sturm, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 02/28/2006
* USD 83,970.00

The first question motivating the subject of our project is
the&lt;br/&gt;following: Let f be a holomorphic function in a neighborhood of
the&lt;br/&gt;origin of affine n-space. Can the singularities of f(z)=0 get
"worse"&lt;br/&gt;under small perturbations of the function f? By "get worse" we
mean:&lt;br/&gt;Can the critical exponent of f get smaller, where the
critical&lt;br/&gt;exponent is the supremum of all exponents d for which the
absolute&lt;br/&gt;value of f raised to the power -d is locally integrable.
This&lt;br/&gt;question, and its effective counterpart, play an important role
in&lt;br/&gt;proving the existence of Kahler-Einstein metrics on certain
Fano&lt;br/&gt;manifolds (as has been recently demonstrated by Demailly and
Kollar).&lt;br/&gt;We plan to apply our method of "algebraic estimates" to
this&lt;br/&gt;problem. A related question which we will pursue is the
following: Let&lt;br/&gt;R be a rational function with complex coefficients. How
do we decide&lt;br/&gt;if R is in L^p? To what extent is the L^p norm of R a
continuous&lt;br/&gt;function of its coefficients? The third motivating question
concerns&lt;br/&gt;decay rates of oscillatory integral operators is one which
has&lt;br/&gt;attracted much aattention is recent years: What is the best decay
rate&lt;br/&gt;of such operators? We have been able to attack this problem in
the&lt;br/&gt;multilinear one-dimensional case when the phase function is
a&lt;br/&gt;polynomial, and have succeeded in finding the best decay rate
(modulo&lt;br/&gt;logarithimic terms). Our method employs in an improved version
of the&lt;br/&gt;curved trapezoid technique developed by Phong-Stein. We plan to
apply&lt;br/&gt;this method to the higher dimensional case and in the case of
damped&lt;br/&gt;operators.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The main themes of this
proposal - oscillatory and singular integrals&lt;br/&gt;and the method of
stationary phase - are central to the field of&lt;br/&gt;classical analysis,
with foundational results dating back to the&lt;br/&gt;nineteenth century:
Harmonic Analysis plays a critical role in the&lt;br/&gt;solution of wide
spectrum of problems in physics and applied&lt;br/&gt;mathematics - solving the
heat equation, wave equation, Laplace&lt;br/&gt;equation, Schrodinger equation
all make use of the Fourier analysis&lt;br/&gt;technique. The use of harmonic
analysis in X-ray diffraction is&lt;br/&gt;indispensible to determining the
structure of large molecules (such as&lt;br/&gt;DNA), and the Fourier transform
method in signal processing is at the&lt;br/&gt;core of much of the modern
technology involving the transfer of&lt;br/&gt;information by electronic means.
In modern applications to a variety&lt;br/&gt;of questions, traditional
techniques do not suffice and the need for a&lt;br/&gt;more general theory has
arisen. In particular, the issues of bounds&lt;br/&gt;and stability for
oscillatory integrals and operators, and the related&lt;br/&gt;problem of
regularity of Radon transforms have been the focus of much&lt;br/&gt;recent
work. The principal investigator, working with D.H. Phong&lt;br/&gt;(Columbia
University) and Elias M. Stein (Princeton University), plans&lt;br/&gt;to
continue investigating this circle of problems using the tools
from&lt;br/&gt;geometry and analysis which were recently developed in our joint 
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&g
t;