* 0100426
* Problems in Complex Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2005
* John Fornaess, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2005
* USD 243,078.00

The principal investigator plans to work on various problems in&lt;br/&gt; the
theory of several complex variables and complex dynamics. With &lt;br/&gt;
Professor Sibony, the principal investigator will work on a systematic
&lt;br/&gt; development of the theory of iterations of holomorphic maps. This
&lt;br/&gt; depends on the use of pluripotential theory to construct invariant
&lt;br/&gt; measures as well as a broad range of function theoretic tools from
the &lt;br/&gt; theory of several complex variables. One of the main problems in
the &lt;br/&gt; theory of dynamical systems is that the equations are too
difficult &lt;br/&gt; for rigorous study. Holomorphic maps have enough structure
so that &lt;br/&gt; many results can be proved rigorously thereby giving an idea
of phenomena &lt;br/&gt; that can occur also in more complicated systems. The
principal&lt;br/&gt; investigator also plans to work on several problems in the
theory of &lt;br/&gt; several complex variables. This includes generalizations
of the &lt;br/&gt; Bochner-Hartogs extension Theorem to more general manifolds
and to &lt;br/&gt; solutions of the Cauchy-Riemann equations in singular
spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The goals of this proposal are to study
problems in complex analysis&lt;br/&gt; and in dynamical systems using
techniques of complex analysis. Complex&lt;br/&gt; numbers were introduced to
solve algebraic expressions that could not &lt;br/&gt; be solved with real
numbers. With time, complex numbers have proved to &lt;br/&gt; be necessary to
explain fundamental physical phenomena like electromagnetisms, vibrations in
mechanical systems, etc. Complex analysis studies the changes of quantities that
depend on complex numbers. Dynamical systems is the study of systems that change
over time. Examples of dynamical&lt;br/&gt; systems range from the weather to
the study of populations. Dynamical&lt;br/&gt; systems are in general very hard
to model and to understand. The simplest&lt;br/&gt; models involve using real
algebraic expressions to represent the system.&lt;br/&gt; Considering the
algebraic expressions over the complex numbers allows&lt;br/&gt; one to see and
study the problems in a higher dimensional setting and&lt;br/&gt; using more
powerful tools. In this setting, a very intricate and&lt;br/&gt; fascinating
scenario appears. Computer generated pictures show the&lt;br/&gt; geometry of
this phenomenon: a very complicated fractal structure.&lt;br/&gt; Proper
understanding of this geometry will lead to a better understanding&lt;br/&gt; of
real dynamical systems.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;