* 0100829
* Spectral Geometry of Non-Compact Domains and Riemannian Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Peter Perry, University of Kentucky
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2005
* USD 113,355.00

Abstract for DMS - 0100829&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator will
study the spectral geometry of non-compact&lt;br/&gt;domains and Riemannian
manifolds in order to elucidate the geometric&lt;br/&gt;content of scattering
poles. First, the PI will continue his study of the&lt;br/&gt;spectral geometry
of hyperbolic manifolds and their perturbations. He will&lt;br/&gt;study
resonances as functions on the deformation space of the
underlying&lt;br/&gt;discrete group, and define and analyze a determinant of the
Laplacian.&lt;br/&gt;Secondly, the PI will study scattering theory for the wave
equation on&lt;br/&gt;two-step nilpotent Lie groups and their quotients by
discrete subgroups.&lt;br/&gt;New parametrices or the wave equation on the
Heisenberg and Heisenberg-type&lt;br/&gt;groups will be derived, and trace
formula for certain quotients obtained.&lt;br/&gt;Riemannian submersion
techniques of Gordon, Wilson, and others will be used&lt;br/&gt;to obtain pairs
and families of `isoscattering' manifolds which will help&lt;br/&gt;determine
the limits of geometric information which may be deduced from
a&lt;br/&gt;knowledge of the scattering poles. Thirdly, the PI will study
the&lt;br/&gt;isoscattering problem for exterior domains in Euclidean
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental problem of spectral
geometry is to elucidate the&lt;br/&gt;geometric content of the Laplace spectrum
on a Riemannian manifold.&lt;br/&gt;For so-called scattering manifolds, the
eigenvalues of the Laplacian&lt;br/&gt;together with scattering resonances
constitute the spectral data for the&lt;br/&gt;manifold. Elucidating the
geometric content of such spectral data&lt;br/&gt;advances our understanding of
quantization, produces new analytic tools&lt;br/&gt;for the study of geometric
objects, and provides insight into inverse&lt;br/&gt;problems of a more
`applied' nature where the eigenvalues and scattering&lt;br/&gt;poles are
measurable quantities. The present work aims to begin
with&lt;br/&gt;geometrically natural examples where techniques of Lie theory,
automorphic&lt;br/&gt;functions, and harmonic analysis may be used, and progress
to harder&lt;br/&gt;problems such as target identification by radar where such
techniques &lt;br/&gt;are not available but the underlying mathematical problems
are very similar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;