* 0100074
* Automatic Data Segmentation and Geometric Reasoning of Unorganized Point Cloud for Reverse Engineering of Precision Mechanical Objects
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2006
* Chia-Hsiang Menq, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Judy M. Vance
* 06/30/2006
* USD 289,279.00

This grant provides funding for the development of the necessary technologies
that support automatic geometric model reconstruction of existing objects having
arbitrary topology when the prototype is created or modified on the shop floor
and when a computer-aided design model does not exist. Particularly, the focus
is to automate the data segmentation process on the reconstructed manifold
surface and to facilitate optimal geometric model reconstruction for precision
mechanical parts by geometric computation and reasoning. An algorithm will be
developed to efficiently reconstruct a triangle mesh from 3-dimensional
unorganized coordinate points to optimally recover the object shape. The
reconstructed triangle mesh captures object topology with the associated
2-manifold represented as a combinatorial structure, which establishes explicit
relations among the data points, and provides a topological domain with
necessary differential geometric characteristics for the subsequent data
segmentation process. By extending segmentation concepts from the regular image
domain to the irregular mesh domain, a robust two-step automatic data
segmentation approach will be developed, combining the border-based approach and
the region growing approach. Finally, algorithms for geometric computation and
reasoning will be developed to automatically classify the segmented patches into
surface elements and to infer possible topological relations and geometric
constraints among them. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of
this research will lead to significant improvements in automatic geometric model
reconstruction and reverse engineering. With automatic data segmentation and
intelligent geometric reasoning, user intervention can be eliminated and the
entire model reconstruction process can be shortened from days to minutes. When
integrated with state of the art scanning devices, the developed technologies
could lead to a seamless reverse engineering process and support rapid design
and prototyping of high-precision mechanical components. The results will have
potential application in a whole spectrum of engineering problems with a major
impact on rapid design and prototyping, shape analysis, and virtual
reality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;