* 0100416
* Dynamics of Partially Hyperbolic Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Keith Burns, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2005
* USD 85,500.00

&lt;br/&gt;This project will investigate the dynamics of partially hyperbolic
systems.&lt;br/&gt;It is hoped to improve the recent theorem of Pugh and Shub by
weakening the&lt;br/&gt;center bunching hypothesis and adapting the proof so
that it applies to the&lt;br/&gt;pointwise (or Brazilian) version of partial
hyperbolicity rather than more&lt;br/&gt;stringent uniform assumptions made by
Pugh and Shub. I also hope to extend&lt;br/&gt;the classes of partially
hyperbolic maps within which the hypotheses of the&lt;br/&gt;Pugh-Shub theorem
are known to hold generically by studying compact group&lt;br/&gt;extensions of
the compact group extensions already studied by myself and&lt;br/&gt;Wilkinson.
In addition I plan to continue my work with Paternain on&lt;br/&gt;magnetic
flows and to collaborate with Hasselblatt and Wilkinson on a&lt;br/&gt;study of
Lyapunov exponents for geodesic flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
study the dynamics of partially hyperbolic systems.&lt;br/&gt;A differentiable
dynamical system consists of a differentiable manifold
which&lt;br/&gt;represents the possible states of the system and a
differentiable map of the&lt;br/&gt;manifold to itself which represents the
evolution of the system from its&lt;br/&gt;current state to its next state. A
basic mechanism which tends to produce&lt;br/&gt;chaotic behavior is for the
derivative of the map to stretch vectors in&lt;br/&gt;some directions and to
shrink vectors in the complementary directions.&lt;br/&gt;Such behavior is
called hyperbolicity. The system is called partially&lt;br/&gt;hyperbolic if in
addition to the expanding and contracting directions&lt;br/&gt;that are
stretched and shrunk there is a third direction which is
stretched&lt;br/&gt;less than the expanding direction and shrunk less than the
contracting.&lt;br/&gt;It has long been suspected that most partially hyperbolic
systems should&lt;br/&gt;have the same chaotic behavior as fully hyperbolic
systems.&lt;br/&gt;In the 1990's the work of Pugh and Shub (in collaboration
with Grayson&lt;br/&gt;and Wilkinson) has made it possible to prove this in
considerable generality.&lt;br/&gt;I aim to extend their work, by weakening the
hypotheses in their main theorem&lt;br/&gt;and studying a number of particular
examples of partially hyperbolic systems.&lt;br/&gt;