* 0100735
* Design and Oligomerization of Uniquely Folded Supersecondary Structural Motifs
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Barbara Imperiali, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 08/31/2004
* USD 444,000.00

With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor
Barbara Imperiali, of the Department of Chemistry at the Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, is studying the structure, association properties, and function
of "mini-protein" motifs. A 29-residue mini-motif containing a disulfide link
will be rationally designed to a disulfide-free motif, and a biological strategy
for "evolving" 23- and 29-residue motifs will be used to develop mini-motifs
including only the 20 encoded amino acids, rather than relying on one or two
D-amino acids currently used as turn stabilizing agents. New methods, including
the use of fluorescent reporter groups and amino acids with solvatochromic
properties, will be implemented to permit the discovery of peptide oligomers
with discrete quaternary structure. Finally, Professor Imperiali will explore
the possible function of these mini-motifs in the molecular recognition and
sensing of small molecules such as fluorescent organic species and fluorescently
labeled mono- and disaccharides.

Proteins (polypeptides), comprised of long chains of interconnected amino acids,
play myriad biochemical roles. Their specific function is critically dependent
on the three dimensional structure adopted by the polypeptide chain, yet the
factors responsible for protein folding are still at best incompletely
understood. Through the design, synthesis, and study of small polypeptides,
Professor Barbara Imperiali, of the Department of Chemistry at the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology, with the support of the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program, is shedding light on the factors responsible for the
formation of particular protein folding motifs. Her studies also explore the
possibility that these "mini-motifs" could serve as scaffolds to permit the
recognition and sensing of small organic molecules, including sugars, leading in
the longer term to the design of peptide-based chemosensing agents.