* 0100445
* Ergodic Theory of d-adic Endomorphisms
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Christopher Hoffman, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Dmitry Khavinson
* 06/30/2005
* USD 91,441.00

Hoffman will investigate the properties of endomorphisms which
are&lt;br/&gt;isomorphic to one sided Bernoulli shifts. One direction this
work&lt;br/&gt;will take is to show that particular dynamical systems are
isomorphic&lt;br/&gt;to one sided Bernoulli shifts. In particular Hoffman will
attempt to&lt;br/&gt;classify which toral endomorphisms are isomorphic to a one
sided&lt;br/&gt;Bernoulli shift. He will also attempt to classify all
toral&lt;br/&gt;endomorphisms up to isomorphism. Hoffman will try to show
the&lt;br/&gt;differences between Ornstein's theory of Bernoulli automorphisms
and&lt;br/&gt;the emerging theory of Bernoulli endomorphisms. A particular
example&lt;br/&gt;of this relates to compact extensions of Bernoulli
endomorphisms.&lt;br/&gt;Rudolph proved that any compact extension of a
Bernoulli shift that is&lt;br/&gt;weak mixing is isomorphic to a Bernoulli
shift. Hoffman will try to&lt;br/&gt;show that Bernoulli endomorphisms do not
share this property. Hoffman&lt;br/&gt;will also continue his work in
probability theory. He will continue&lt;br/&gt;to study infinite percolation
cluster on the square lattice. In&lt;br/&gt;particular he will compare the
properties of simple random walk on the&lt;br/&gt;square lattice with the
properties of simple random walk on infinite&lt;br/&gt;percolation clusters. The
overall goal of this portion of the&lt;br/&gt;research is to determine if the
distribution of paths for simple&lt;br/&gt;random walk on the infinite
percolation cluster can be rescaled in&lt;br/&gt;such a way as to generate the
distribution of Brownian paths in the&lt;br/&gt;plane.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
study of randomness is a major part of the application of&lt;br/&gt;mathematics
to many interesting systems. For example, in statistics&lt;br/&gt;knowledge of
randomness is used to make sense of data and in applied&lt;br/&gt;math random
processes are used to model financial markets dynamical&lt;br/&gt;systems. This
proposal deals with randomness in the context of&lt;br/&gt;dynamical systems and
probability theory. This proposal will attempt&lt;br/&gt;to classify various
types of mathematical systems according to the&lt;br/&gt;type and amount of
randomness that they exhibit.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;