* 0100782
* Matrix Integrals,Combinatorics and Integral Lattices
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,05/31/2006
* Mark Adler, Brandeis University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2006
* USD 228,432.00

Abstract for DMS - 0100782&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) What is the distribution of
the eigenvalues of a&lt;br/&gt;random matrix, with certain symmetry conditions
to&lt;br/&gt;guarantee the reality of the spectrum? What happens
to&lt;br/&gt;the distribution, when the size of the matrix gets&lt;br/&gt;large?
What about universality in the limit?&lt;br/&gt;(2) What is the statistics of
the length of the&lt;br/&gt;longest increasing sequence in random permutation
or&lt;br/&gt;random words (Ulam's problem). This question applies&lt;br/&gt;to
models of interface growth, polymers in random&lt;br/&gt;environments, first
passage percolation problem, and&lt;br/&gt; "dimer"
configurations.&lt;br/&gt;(3) Integrals over groups and symmetric spaces,
(or&lt;br/&gt;over their tangent spaces) lead to a variety
of&lt;br/&gt;interesting matrix models. The coefficients of
the&lt;br/&gt;(perturbative) expansions have striking combinatorial&lt;br/&gt;or
topological significance and can be computed in a&lt;br/&gt;recursive way. This
work originates in the works of&lt;br/&gt;Feynman, 't Hooft, Bessis-Itzykson-
Zuber and Witten,&lt;br/&gt;in the context of string theory.&lt;br/&gt;(4) The
sample canonical correlation coefficients&lt;br/&gt;(maximum likelihood
estimates) for the canonical&lt;br/&gt;correlation coefficients of two Gaussian
populations&lt;br/&gt;are the test statistic for the
statistical&lt;br/&gt;independence of the two populations, as studied
by&lt;br/&gt;Hotelling, James and Constantine.&lt;br/&gt;(5) The four problems
above and their&lt;br/&gt;"time"-perturbations are all solutions to
integrable&lt;br/&gt;equations or lattices. For large random matrices
or&lt;br/&gt;permutations, they are solutions to the Korteweg-de&lt;br/&gt;Vries
equation. In the finite case, they are solutions&lt;br/&gt;to the Toda lattice,
and to two new integrable&lt;br/&gt;lattices, the Pfaff and Toeplitz
lattices.&lt;br/&gt;%Besides matrix integrals solutions, these
lattices&lt;br/&gt;%have interesting rational
solutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is fair to say that
matrix integrals point the way&lt;br/&gt;to new integrable systems, but also to
new&lt;br/&gt;combinatorial and probabilistic questions !&lt;br/&gt;General
description: The problems above&lt;br/&gt;relate to a number of important
questions in physics,&lt;br/&gt;engineering and statistics:&lt;br/&gt;Problem
(1) has its origin in the study of energy&lt;br/&gt;levels (excitation spectra)
of heavy nuclei in nuclear&lt;br/&gt;physics (Wigner, Dyson). These levels are
so intricate&lt;br/&gt;that any explicit description would be
intractable.&lt;br/&gt;For that reason, Wigner proposed a statistical
model&lt;br/&gt;for these energy levels. Concerning problem (2), &lt;br/&gt;it
is well known that a large percentage of computer &lt;br/&gt;time is devoted to
the rearrangement of the data used &lt;br/&gt;in the course of computations. How
many data, after a &lt;br/&gt;complete reshuffling, are statistically still in
order? &lt;br/&gt;This question of random permutations also applies
to&lt;br/&gt;statistical mechanics, the basis of thermodynamics,&lt;br/&gt;and
to questions of polymers. Some of the matrix &lt;br/&gt;models (3) provide toy
models for string theory, &lt;br/&gt;an important set of ideas at the basis of
the &lt;br/&gt;fundamental interactions in the physical world.&lt;br/&gt;It
turns out that certain matrix models, mentioned&lt;br/&gt;above, are used in
testing whether two sets of&lt;br/&gt;statistical data are correlated, as
sketched in (4).&lt;br/&gt;The Korteweg-de Vries equation, the arch-
type&lt;br/&gt;``soliton equation", describes the propagation of&lt;br/&gt;waves
in shallow water; a similar non-linear partial&lt;br/&gt;differential equation
governs the propagation of&lt;br/&gt;ultra-short pulses in optical fibers, when
the wave&lt;br/&gt;length is long compared to the diameter of the
fiber.&lt;br/&gt;