* 0100194
* Local Composition Control in Solid Freeform Fabrication
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2001,03/31/2005
* Emanuel Sachs, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 03/31/2005
* USD 400,000.00

This research project addresses the central impediment to the wide-spread
exploration of the potential of Local Composition Control (LCC) - the
information pathway required for the representation and design of composition
within a component and its realization by Solid Freeform Fabrication (SFF). It
is hoped that the development of an information pathway to support Local
Composition Control will provide designers with the access they need to fully
explore this intriguing capability. One of the great potential benefits of SFF
technology is the ability to control the internal composition of components, a
capability not shared by conventional mechanical manufacturing processes. While
several compelling applications such as Drug Delivery Devices and Lenses which
function by local control of the index of refraction, are under development, it
is likely that the potential is largely untapped.

The proposed work envisions a suite of Composition Design Features which the
designer can use singly or in combination, to specify the composition of complex
components. Each composition design feature will relate directly to the geometry
of the design, often relying on user interaction to specify critical aspects of
the geometry. For example, features can specify the composition of sub-volumes
or the transition of composition between sub-volumes. The representations
underlying the composition design features will be analytic and therefore
concise. Wherever possible, the work on this project will be kept generically
applicable to SFF technologies. Where a specific process must be chosen to focus
the work, Three Dimensional Printing will be used as the prototypical SFF
technology. 3D Printing is well suited to local composition control as multiple
materials may be printed through multiple inkjet nozzles, thereby achieving true
3-D composition control.

