* 0100202
* Noise Spectroscopy for the Investigation and Characterization of Ultra-Thin Gate Dielectrics
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2005
* Rashid Bashir, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 05/31/2005
* USD 300,000.00

The goal of our research is to develop a new and highly sensitive technique for
the characterization and investigation of stress-induced breakdown in the
advanced, ultra-thin gate dielectrics which constitute one of the key components
for next state-of-the-art and next generation VLSI technology. Our technique of
Noise Spectroscopy is based on the realization that dielectric breakdown must
involve the breakage and rearrangement of atomic bonds arising from the impact
of energetic carriers (electrons or holes) which invariably leads to the
formation of CARRIER TRAP STATES. EXCESS CURRENT NOISE in the tunneling, leakage
current through gate dielectrics represents an extremely sensitive probe of both
the presence and the nature of these TRAPS which serve as stepping stones in the
tunneling process and therefore the detailed and systematic investigation of
excess noise via Noise Spectroscopy has the potential of providing direct
information on the QUALITY OF DIELECTRIC FILMS immediately after growth as well
as the PATHWAY TO DIELECTRIC BREAKDOWN.

The potential impact of this research in the shorter term is the development of
a more sensitive and informative technique to ascertain the quality and
robustness of ultra thin gate dielectrics which will be useful to the silicon
VLSI industry complementary to conventional charge to breakdown and CV
techniques. In the longer term, when a clear understanding of the physical
mechanism of dielectric breakdown is achieved it should lead to the ability to
design and manufacture better and more robust gate dielectrics e.g. via addition
of trace impurities to pin atomic motion and reduce trap formation. In terms of
education, we intend to involve three graduate students, one for the Noise
Spectroscopy technique and the others for dielectric growth. Both aspects will
involve state-of-the-art methods in the respective areas. In addition we plan to
foster industrial ties to the fullest extent.