* 0100122
* GOALI/Collaborative Research:  Capacity and Flexibility Investment Decisions in a Make-to-Order Environment
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2001,12/31/2005
* Ana Muriel, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Stephen G. Nash
* 12/31/2005
* USD 169,000.00

This Collaborative Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI)
project will study strategic capacity planning decisions and their impact on the
supply chain in a make-to-order environment. The project will construct
analytical models and develop analytical, numerical, and simulation methods that
will be tested in General Motors' environment to guide the research direction
and ensure their practicality and ease of implementation. To provide their
customers with customized products within reasonable lead-times at competitive
prices, firms need to shift to make-to-order production where adequate capacity
decisions are even more important than in the past. For a make-to-order strategy
to be successful, supply and demand need to be reasonably balanced. This can be
achieved through: (1) manufacturing flexibility, so that capacity can be shared
among different products, (2) price flexibility, so that demand can be managed,
and (3) delivery-time flexibility, so that demand coming from time-sensitive
customers can be shifted in exchange for a price break. The project will study
the effect of each of these levers on supply chain performance and on capacity
requirements to offer guidance to companies on the design and management of
their make-to-order production systems. In addition, the plan is to integrate
the capacity investment decisions for products and additional features or
options (e.g., vehicles and leather seats). Several issues need to be considered
in the capacity analysis for these options: (1) The option and vehicle model
capacity decisions are interdependent. (2) Demand for the various options might
be correlated. (3) Customers have a different attitude towards different
options. For example, they might not buy a car without an automatic
transmission, but may accept other missing options, such as a vanity mirror.
This leads to very different risks of over- and under-capacitizing for each
particular option. Thus, the project will develop models that address capacity-
pricing decisions considering customers' preferences.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research will provide: (1) Analytical results and insights for better capacity
planning in a make-to-order environment, and (2) Tools for vehicle and option
capacity planning that consider uncertainty, demand management techniques, and
the impact on operational supply chain costs. Also, the projected outcome is to
develop general models that can be used in a wide range of industries and
demonstrate their practical impact by implementing/testing them at General
Motors.