* 0100372
* Automorphic Forms, L-functions and Galois Representations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,12/31/2004
* Dinakar Ramakrishnan, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 12/31/2004
* USD 169,742.00

AUTOMORPHIC FORMS, L-FUNCTIONS AND GALOIS REPRESENTATIONS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
The princial investigator proposes to do the following: (i)
attach&lt;br/&gt;Galois representations to cusp forms of weight k &gt; 1 over
any CM field K (with totally real subfield F) by transferring certain associated
forms on GL(4)/F to suitable unitary groups by making use of L-functions, trace
formula, congruences, restrictions of Hasse invariant forms and pseudo-
representations; (ii) construct certain special holomorphic forms on GSp(4)/Q,
study their lifting to GL(4)/Q, and derive consequences for certain Galois
representations; and (iii) to continue ongoing work with D. Prasad on a
refinement of the local Langlands correspondence for self-dual representations
of GL(n).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The field of research of the P.I. is Automorphic
Forms. The simplest, yet not so simple, instance of the basic problem of the
field is the following: Start with a sequence of numbers {a_0, a_1 , a_2, a_3,
.., a_n, ...} and consider the "generating function" f(q) = a_0 + a_1q + a_2q^2
+ ... + a_nq^n + ...., where q is a dummy variable. A fundamental question is to
know when f(q) satisfies a "hidden symmetry". To elaborate, write q = exp(2\pi
iz), with z a complex number of positive imaginary part, and set q* = exp(-2\pi
i/z). What one is often looking for, and this shows up in disparate fields like
string Physics and combinatorics, is a relationship between the pair (f(q),
f(q*)). One says that f has weight k if &lt;br/&gt;f(q*) =(-log q/2\pi i)^k
f(q). The existence of such a symmetry &lt;br/&gt;implies that the sequence
{a_n} we started with has miraculous properties. For example, when the a_n are
multiplicative, i.e., when a_{mn} = a_ma_n for m,n relatively prime, with a_0=0
and a_1=1, then there is an associated 2-dimensional Galois representation R
coming from geometry whose associated "L-function" equals 1 + a_2/2^s + a_3/3^s
+ ..., implying that for each prime p, a_p =&lt;br/&gt;u_p + 1/u_p with u_p an
algebraic integer of absolute value p^{(k-1)/2}; in particular, |a_p| is bounded
by 2p^{(k-1)/2}, which is not provable by an apriori analytic estimate. A key
example to keep in mind is the ubiquitous Delta function
q{(1-q)(1-q^2)(1-q^3)...)}^{24} = q+tau_2q^2 + tau_3q^3 + ..., which has weight
12. The general "Langlands program" envisions many such occurrances, and they
involve a family of symmetries ("modularity") which are complicated to write
down explicitly, but are nevertheless very important to pursue due to their far-
reaching consequences. For example, one key ingredient of the celebrated proof
of Fermat's last theorem by Wiles makes use of a result obtained in this
program. In his work related to his&lt;br/&gt;current (about to become preious)
NSF proposal, the P.I. proved that given two functions f(q), g(q) as above
attached to {a_n}, {b_n} respectively, admitting hidden symmetries of some
weights, the product sequence {a_nb_n} is associated to a modular object of
degree 4. This has the following consequence. Suppose f, g have the same
weights, and suppose further that a_p^2 equals b_p^2 for almost all primes p.
Then f equals g.