* 0100243
* GOALI:  High Efficiency, Large Area Solar Cell Devices Based on Crystalline Si Thin Films by Low Temperture Growth and Solid State Laser Crystallization
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2001,02/28/2006
* Mool Gupta, Old Dominion University Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 02/28/2006
* USD 295,124.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thin film solar cells, active matrix displays and
displays with driver electronics require crystalline silicon thin films on
inexpensive, large area and/or transparent substrates such as glass for improved
performance and low manufacturing costs. To achieve this goal the difficulties
are: (1) amorphous nature of glass makes it impossible to employ current growth
techniques that take advantage of crystalline character of the substrate. (2)
the inability of relatively inexpensive glass to withstand high processing
temperatures required for growth of crystalline silicon films. To overcome these
problems we propose a solid state laser crystallization technique where laser
pulse causes melting and re-solidification of the near surface region however
short duration of laser pulse prevents sustained heating of the underlying
substrate and makes the process compatible with glass substrates. The goal of
the proposed program is to understand the basic science of laser crystallization
using solid state lasers with near infrared wavelengths and grow amorphous
silicon films by a low temperature process on glass substrates and then
crystallize them by semiconductor diode lasers for seed layer followed by
thicker films by plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition to demonstrate high
efficiency solar cell devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research effort is
Academy-Industry collaboration under the National Science Foundation GOALI
program. The university faculty and graduate students will work in close
collaboration with the team of scientists and engineers at the BP Solar
Corporation. The university industry collaboration will provide additional
opportunity for students to work with industrial scientists and use of their
additional state of the art equipment facilities. Besides improvements in solar
cell technology, this project will provide education to students in thin film
growth, laser processing and electronic device fabrication, which are highly
desired skills and important areas of current interest. The proposed program
will have a strong outreach activity such as summer experience for high school
teachers to work in solar energy and laser applications area, visit to industry
and a display in a local museum of improved device for public knowledge and
generate interest in science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;