* 0100016
* The Formation and Climatological Distribution of Tornadoes within Quasi-Linear Convective Systems
* GEO,AGS
* 07/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Robert Trapp, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 08/31/2003
* USD 175,204.00

Approximately 1000 tornadoes are observed within the U.S. annually. These
tornadoes are spawned from a variety of parent storm types, including supercell
thunderstorms and quasi-linear convective systems (QLCSs) such as squall lines
and bow echoes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The horizontal extent of viable tornado-
breeding sites is an order of magnitude larger in QLCSs than in individual
supercells. QLCS tornadoes can be strong and produce extensive damage. Also,
QLCS tornadogenesis appears to occur, on average, more rapidly than does
supercell tornadogenesis from the perspective of Doppler radar. The
geographical, seasonal, and diurnal distributions of QLCS tornadoes are
unknown.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A significant amount of research effort has been
devoted to the study of supercell tornadogenesis, but no published research
addresses specifically QLCS tornadogenesis. Owing to the related lack of
fundamental knowledge of QLCS tornadogenesis/tornado climatology, it may be
argued that operational meteorologists are generally unable to assess the
potential risk of tornadic winds in QLCSs and, hence, properly alert the public
to this danger. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigator will undertake
a complementary two-part study. The objectives are to: &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1.
Estimate the climatological distributions of QLCS-spawned tornadoes;
characterize the environmental conditions under which they occur; determine
radar-based attributes of tornadic versus non-tornadic QLCS.&lt;br/&gt;2. Gain
an understanding of tornadic versus non-tornadic QLCS morphology and
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Successful completion of this research will
increase fundamental knowledge of QLCS tornadoes and will have applications in
severe weather forecasting and warning operations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;