* 0100107
* Subelliptic Jets and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2004
* Thomas Metzger, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2004
* USD 118,117.00

A major part of the success in the linear and quasilinear theory of&lt;br/&gt;
partial differential equations is based upon interpreting&lt;br/&gt; derivatives
in the generalized sense of distributions, allowing&lt;br/&gt; for a more
powerful calculus. However, Distributions do not seem, &lt;br/&gt; in general,
well suited to non-linear problems because they cannot be&lt;br/&gt; multiplied.
"Jets" are generalized (local) pointwise derivatives that&lt;br/&gt; allow for
the interpretation and calculation of non-linear functions&lt;br/&gt; of
derivatives. In this proposal, the PI presents a project to extend the notion of
jets from the Euclidean or Riemannian case to more general state spaces.
Typically, in these spaces higher derivatives with respect different parameters
do not commute, as in the Euclidean&lt;br/&gt;case, but rather satisfy more
complicated algebraic relations. Jets adapted to the geometry of a state space
endowed with a family of vector fields satisfying a &lt;br/&gt; non-degeneracy
condition are called "subelliptic jets". Basic analysis topics like Taylor
developments and maximum principles have to be adapted to conform to the
new&lt;br/&gt; subelliptic geometry. The PI proposes to study Hamilton-
Jacobi&lt;br/&gt; equations, to provide with a natural approximation
procedure&lt;br/&gt; for semi-continuous functions, and to explore notions of
"subelliptic&lt;br/&gt; convexity" to help formulate appropriate second
derivative&lt;br/&gt; subelliptic estimates.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The
derivative is a basic tool in mathematical analysis, used to&lt;br/&gt; measure
the growth and decay of functions. Knowledge of the&lt;br/&gt; derivative of a
function allows for its recovery by means&lt;br/&gt; of integration. When trying
to model complex scientific&lt;br/&gt; phenomena it is often necessary to write
down equations&lt;br/&gt; satisfied by derivatives, and derivatives of
derivatives, &lt;br/&gt; of functions with respect to several parameters. These
equations are called&lt;br/&gt; partial differential equations. If these
equations are linear,&lt;br/&gt; a well developed theory exists to study their
solutions. &lt;br/&gt; Much less in known in the more interesting case of
nonlinear&lt;br/&gt; equations, although when the state space is Euclidean,
there&lt;br/&gt; is vast fully-nonlinear theory developed in the last twenty
years.&lt;br/&gt; However, in applications coming from Control Theory, Robotics
and&lt;br/&gt; Finance, very often we find derivatives which do not commute. The
analysis of nonlinear&lt;br/&gt; operator of these derivatives is the main
object of this project. The significance of this proposal relies in the
interconnection between areas of classical mathematical analysis and applied
mathematics as well as the use of computational tools not available until now in
mathematical analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;