* 0100629
* The Development of Nanoelectromechanical Structures for GHz Oscillators and Other High Frequency Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Sean Washburn, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 08/31/2005
* USD 274,800.00

The increasing miniaturization of electronic devices has been the foundation of
the electronics revolution. Similar trends ate being seen in the field of
actuating devices. where the acronym MicroElectroMechanical Systems is quickly'
being replaced at its leading edge by NanoElectroMechanical Systems (NEMS). The
ultimate scate for such devices will be the atomic scale. Nanoscale engineered
materials will the building blocks of such devices [I]. Among these materials.
nanotubes (NTs) provide many of the necessary properties required for NFMS:
their geometry, extraordinary mechanical properties [2-6] ( which will allow GI-
Iz mechanical resonance), novel electronic properties (metallic, semiconducting)
[7-9]. and novel interfacial properties (atomically smooth, low friction)110,
llj. We have recently discovered the atomic scale features in both the motion
(friction)[1 I] and electrical properties of nanotube contacts [12]. These
measured changes in response at the atomic scale in the dynamic electrical
contact between NTs allow for a host of novel devices. These include high
frequency devices, where the modulated signal depends on the relative velocity
of the sliding contact, to atomic scale linear encoders in which the relative
movement of a system can be measured to within a unit cell spacing. A necessary
technology in the deployment of NT based NEMS will be a batch-fabrication
process which includes NT integration. One solution to this problem is through
NT growth processes. in which catalyst material is patterned on a substrate to
produce desired integrated NI' NEMS. Specifically, growth processes will have to
be understood such that NTs of specific crystalline orientation, radius, and
length can be grown in-plane within an integrated silicon based device
structure. We propose a plan of research that combines both investigations into
the basic mechanisms of novel NEMS devices, and growth techniques that make
strides toward batch-fabrication of NT NEMS. The specific NEMS devices we have
in mind exploit the atomic scale features of the dynamic contact between NT
electrical leads, and the mechanical resonance properties of NTs. Ln our view,
the idea of position and orientation dependence of electrical contacts is an
aspect of NEMS devices that deserves attention. It is a unique property of the
nanometer scale and should open up device applications that are unique to NEMS.
In a micron scale contact, the transport properties are an average over many
relative crystalline orientations of the contacting surfaces as well as defects
etc. hi a nanometer scale contact. ncw behavior will be observed due to relative
perfection and smoothness of the contacting surfaces [13] and thc ability to
tune precisely the relative orientation of contacting atomic lattices. hi this
case the atomic structure matters. We propose to create:&lt;br/&gt;1. Voltage to
frequency converter. The (M1-lz-GI-Iz) driving signal will be convened to a
signal with 1- 1000 times the input frequency depending on the input
amplitude&lt;br/&gt;2. Gigahertz frequency mixer: Sum and difference frequencies
will be generated from input M1-Iz signals&lt;br/&gt;3. Atomic resolution linear
encoder in an integrated. submicron device.&lt;br/&gt;