* 0100594
* Investigations in Model Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* John Baldwin, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2004
* USD 90,004.00

Baldwin proposes investigations in stability theory, the model theory of algebra
and finite model theory. Baldwin will continue to investigate the the
construction of homogeneous universal models with respect to a notion of strong
submodel. One application of this method links stability theory with probability
on finite models by providing a technique for not only proving 0-1 laws but
obtaining model theoretic properties of the almost sure theory. These model
theoretic properties of the almost sure theory can be applied to problems in
finite model theory. Baldwin has been a leader in the application of stability
theory to the development of logic with finitely many variables. This work has,
for the first time, provided serious links between the deep work of Cherlin,
Harrington, Lachlan, and Zilber on homogeneous structures and the mainstream of
finite model theory. Baldwin and Baizhanov are studying expansions of stable
structures by arbitrary predicates; this is motivated by the earlier work with
Benedikt on embedded finite model theory. Baldwin's earlier work with Holland
has included applications in the area of algebra, specifically group theory, and
in expansions of the complex numbers by an arbitrary subset. The present project
will try to find some specific new structures which expand the complex numbers
by subgroups of the multiplicative group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most of Baldwin's
work has been in model theory, a branch of mathematical logic. The general aim
of this work is to understand `ordinary mathematics' at a higher level of
abstraction. This abstraction allows the discovery of common features in widely
different areas of mathematics, ranging from probability theory to combinatorics
to algebraic geometry. This kind of work has been fruitful both in a better
understanding of algebraic structures and in providing a background for
investigations in database theory. In particular, Baldwin's work with his co-
author Michael Benedikt of Lucent Technologies on `embedded finite model theory'
has found limits on the expressibility of database queries. Baldwin will
continue his educational work - primarily focusing on developing innovative and
effective ways to prepare mathematics teachers. The educational work is
connected with two other NSF sponsored programs.&lt;br/&gt;