* 0100832
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Inequalities and Skills of Immigrants in the U.S., Canada, and Australia
* SBE,SES
* 04/15/2001,03/31/2002
* Lingxin Hao, Johns Hopkins University
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 03/31/2002
* USD 7,500.00

For countries with large immigrant populations such as the United States,
Canada, and Australia, the skills of immigrants constitute an important part of
national human resources. However, little is known about what determines 1) the
skills immigrants bring to their host country, and 2) how well immigrants
perform in the new labor markets they enter. Existing immigration studies have
demonstrated that the level of development and inequality in the country-of-
origin influences immigrants' skills and socioeconomic outcomes, but have given
little attention to local social environments and the nature of immigrant
networks between the source and host countries. This project examines how these
local characteristics and immigrant networks affect the labor market skills and
economic success of immigrants. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project uses decennial
census data collected by government agencies of three destination countries -
the United States, Canada, and Australia. It then links these data to various
national level indicators gathered from publications of the United Nations and
other international organizations. The new and more comprehensive data combine
country-of-origin attributes with characteristics of the immigrants' settlement
areas. The analyses then estimate the effects of human capital, social capital,
and macro social factors on immigrant outcomes for groups that differ by
national origin and destination.&lt;br/&gt;