* 0100347
* GOALI:  Sequencing the Assembly Line and Analyzing Manufacturing Complexity to Enhance Supply Chain Management
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2001,04/30/2003
* Fong-Yuen Ding, North Dakota State University Fargo
* Standard Grant
* Janet M. Twomey
* 04/30/2003
* USD 41,918.00

This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project's
first major research objective is to effectively sequence mixed models under
dynamic conditions in an assembly plant so that the sequence at the downstream
assembly sections can be known in advance to the plant and suppliers. The second
major objective is to develop a model and method in evaluating the manufacturing
costs for having many choices in product options. This research effort can
result in significant opportunities to enhance production control and supply
chain management at the plant and potentially for similar production
environments. Mixed-model assembly can provide a production environment with
more even output of finished products, more even part usage rates on the
assembly line, and potentially more even workloads among assembly stations. At
the assembly plant, mixed models of pickup trucks are produced on a seven-mile
long assembly line. Due to a block-painting practice and unexpected production
problems in the upstream assembly sections, the intended mixed-model sequence is
significantly revised prior to reaching the downstream assembly line sections.
At the downstream sections, however, many suppliers need to know the model
sequence in advance in order to achieve sequenced part delivery. This research
will attempt to develop mixed-model sequencing under these dynamic conditions in
order to achieve advance knowledge of the sequence. Development from this
research is expected to be useful for similar industrial
environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Currently, customers are offered a vast
number of choices in features such as cabs, box styles, engines, drives, tires,
axles, doors, and colors. The vast number of option combinations has a
significant impact on production, material, and inventory costs. This research
attempts to develop a model for evaluating the impact of having various choices
and options on manufacturing and material management. Also, this research
attempts to more closely link production costs and product complexity in order
to assist in sound decision making in this regard.&lt;br/&gt;