* 0100676
* Electronic Devices on Plastic Substrates
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/15/2001,11/30/2004
* Vikram Dalal, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 11/30/2004
* USD 217,966.00

In recent years. new applications such as large area conformal displays, multi-
color organic displays. fault-tolerant terra-byte memories, large area solar
cells, conformal electronic sensors for biological applications etc. have
demanded that active electronic devices be grown on plastic films. With the
exception of organic LED's, almost all such devices use amorphous Si as the
active materiaL However, a-Si material suffers from low carricr mobilities, and
poor stability. Therefore, the ability to grow thin film electronic devices in
cri stalline Si-based materials on plastic substrates may provide both better
performance and greater stability in these applications. Such a development
would also allow one to grow c-Si devices on polyimide layers, which are widely
used as planarizing insulators in standard c-Si wafer-based device technology,
and thereby allow three dimensional device architecture. The development of thin
film crystalline devices would be very useful for efficient integration of
organic LED's with driver circuits on a polymer substrate. It is the objective
of this proposal to develop hi2h performance crystalline Si- based electronic
devices on plastic substrates.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work is based on our
recent success, under a NSF SGER grant, in being able to deposit high quality
c-Si films on polyimide. and making proof-of-concept c-Si solar cells in them.
We plan a comprehensive research project to improve the electronic properties of
the film and to make novel TFT devices in thcse films. The project embraces the
following tasks:&lt;br/&gt;o Control of crystallinity of the films by using
reactive ion beams of H, Cl and F during growth in a novel, well-controlled ECR
reactor.&lt;br/&gt;o Systematic investigation of structural properties by using
Raman, TEM. SEM and x-ray diffraction.&lt;br/&gt;o Systematic investigation of
electronic properties by using DLTS, Hall measurements and capacitance
spectroscopy of defect levels.&lt;br/&gt;o Study of growth of stable field-
oxides (gate insulators in MOS devices) by controlled plasma-oxidation with F
and 0 and study of oxide/semiconductor interfaces, using capacitance and
conductance techniques.&lt;br/&gt;o Fabrication of horizontal TFT
devices.&lt;br/&gt;o Measurement of properties of these devices, including
channel mobility and stability after charge pumping and charge
injection.&lt;br/&gt;o Fabrication of novel proottof. concept vertical TFT which
may not be affected by grain boundaries.&lt;br/&gt;The effort relies on using
our past experience in material growth, material analysis, device fabrication
and device design and analysis. The facilities exist to carry out this
work.&lt;br/&gt; A significant educational component is planned, including
graduate student and undergraduate student involvement. The undergraduate
students will be drawn from our on-going NSF-REU site program. A significant
minority student research experience is also planned. Women students,
particularly at the high school level, will also participate in the program. The
program will lead to development of new courses in this area, thereby
integrating research and education.&lt;br/&gt; The project has a potentially
significant impact on industry. We have planned a strong collaboration with a
company, Micron technologies, which is expected to provide a cash grant for
supporting additional graduate students in this research
area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;