* 0100621
* SGER: Development of a Soft Magnetic Material with Enhanced High Temperature Strength
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2001,03/31/2004
* Susil Putatunda, Wayne State University
* Standard Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 03/31/2004
* USD 99,999.00

0100621&lt;br/&gt;Putatunda&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the SGER grant is
on a new, super-soft magnetic material with high creep strength at elevated
temperatures. The alloy, iron with 10-20% aluminum, will use an innovative
powder metallurgy processing route by simultaneous hot pressing and sintering.
The iron-aluminum phase diagram indicates that iron with more than ten percent
Al will not undergo the austenite to ferrite phase transformation. Furthermore,
the addition of aluminum to iron allows for significant grain growth during
sintering. Thus, it should be possible to produce a large grain size (grain
diameters in excess of 1500 mm) in a super-soft magnetic material with extremely
low coercivity, very high saturated magnetic induction, and very high
permeability. Furthermore, the phase diagram indicates that in iron-aluminum
alloys with 10-20% aluminum there is a likelihood of Fe3Al-type precipitates.
These precipitates should provide barriers to magnetic domain wall movement, as
well as obstacles to dislocation movement, resulting in a material with high
creep strength at elevated temperatures. Iron and aluminum powders will be mixed
in the requisite proportion and compacted. After compaction, the green product
will be sintered at different temperatures and time periods to determine optimum
processing conditions for a fully dense product. The magnetic and mechanical
properties of the alloy will be characterized and compared with commercially
available iron-silicon alloys and iron-phosphorus alloys. The influence of
aluminum on grain growth and magnetic properties will be considered. Fine scale
precipitates of Fe3Al will be produced in the matrix by a judicious mixture of
cold working and annealing and subsequent quenching and aging processes.
Successful processing will generate a new super soft magnetic material with
excellent high temperature mechanical properties at low cost with very efficient
magnetic performance and energy savings. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Soft magnetic
materials are important engineering materials needed in power generation
devices. These materials must have high magnetic permeability, low coercivity
and high saturated magnetic induction. Moreover, they must have a narrow
hysteresis loop. The soft magnetic materials generally have poor mechanical
properties at elevated temperatures. Many industrial applications (e.g., rotors
in high-speed generators, magnetic bearings in engines, auxiliary power units,
etc.) require soft magnetic materials, which not only can retain their soft
magnetism at high temperature but also can withstand high stress at elevated
temperatures. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;