* 0100363
* Full-Scale Static and Dynamic Lateral Pile Group Testing
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* Kyle Rollins, Brigham Young University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2004
* USD 272,159.00

Many important buildings and bridges are supported by foundations consisting of
groups of steel pipes or piles driven into the ground. The horizontal resistance
provided by these groups of piles is critical in determining whether or not the
structures will survive an earthquake without significant damage. Although
fairly reliable methods have been developed for predicting the horizontal
resistance of single piles under slowly applied loads, there is very little
information to guide engineers in the design of closely spaced pile groups,
particularly under rapidly applied loads. Nevertheless, the data from these
limited field tests indicate that piles in groups will undergo much more
movement and higher stresses for a given load per pile than will a single
isolated pile. These pile group effects are commonly accounted for in design by
using reduction factors to reduce the resistance provided by the soil on the
piles in the group, but there is considerable uncertainty regarding appropriate
reduction factors. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research study has the following
objectives: (1) Evaluate the effect of pile spacing on measured group reduction
factors and develop a design curve for these factors as a function of pile
spacing, (2) Determine the validity of the reduction factor concept for a large
(5-row) pile group and determine if the reduction factors remain constant beyond
the third row, (3) Determine the effect of repeated loading and gap formation
around the piles on the measured group reduction factors, (4) Examine the effect
of loading rate on the resistance provide by the soil around the pile, and (5)
Provide a well-documented case history for use in evaluating and calibrating
computer and physical models.&lt;br/&gt; These objectives will be accomplished
by conducting a series of horizontal load tests on a full-scale pile and pile
groups. These tests will supplement pile group testing already conducted at the
site with pile spacing of three feet on centers. First, horizontal load testing
will be performed on a single 12-inch diameter steel pipe pile for comparison
purposes. Load will be applied in 10 increments with 15 cycles per increment to
simulate the repeated loading from a large earthquake. Next, horizontal load
tests will be conducted on a five-row pile group spaced at four feet on centers.
The same cyclic loading procedure will be applied and the load carried by each
pile will be measured. The load frame will then be moved to an adjacent pile
group for testing at six feet spacing. In addition to the slowly applied loads,
load will be applied rapidly using a rocket sled (Statnamic device) which will
simulate the speed at which earthquake loads are applied. Following data
reduction, the test results will be analyzed using available computer models and
appropriate pile group reduction factors will be determined as a function of
pile spacing. The results of the load tests from this and previous work at the
site will also be provided to several researchers in Japan for detailed analysis
using sophisticated 2-D and 3-D computer models. These analyses should help
quantify the increased resistance seen during rapidly applied loads relative to
slowly applied loads. Potential Japanese researchers will include Prof.
Matsumoto of Kanazawa University, Dr. Susumu Iai of the Japanese Port and Harbor
Research Institute, and other researchers expressing interest in analyzing the
results.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;