* 0100783
* Physics-Based Finite-Dimensional Modeling and Adaptive Control of Underwater Vehicles
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Louis Whitcomb, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing Grant
* mario rotea
* 08/31/2005
* USD 179,544.00

This research program will develop finite-dimensional nonlinear dynamical models
for underwater robot vehicles, and incorporate these models in the development
of provably stable nonlinear controllers for dynamic maneuvering of underwater
vehicles. This research will directly address the following two problems:

1. Nonlinear Finite Dimensional Dynamical Modeling: We are developing unsteady
dissipative hydrodynamical models and numerical simulations for marine vehicles,
and experimentally verifying these analytical models under the low-speed
operating conditions typical for dynamically positioned vehicles engaged in
survey, sampling, docking, and maneuvering operations.

2. Stable Model-Based Nonlinear Adaptive Control: We are developing 6-DOF model-
based adaptive tracking controllers, and experimentally evaluating both the new
and previously reported techniques in full-scale experimental trials.

The goal is to enable marine vehicles to perform missions presently considered
either infeasible or impractical with existing manned and unmanned systems. The
intellectual merit of the activity is the analytical development and
experimental validation of finite-dimensional plant models with explicit
dissipative structure, and the development and experimental validation of a new
class of model-based adaptive identifiers and tracking controllers for
underwater vehicles. The broader impacts of the activity include: Development
and web-based dissemination of "Dynamics and Control of Marine Vehicles," a new
course at JHU. Advances developed under the proposed research will be
transitioned to the vehicles of the NSF supported National Deep Submergence
Facility to improve their operational capabilities for U.S. oceanographic
science.



