* 0100186
* A Real Options Approach to Forecast Generation Adequacy in Competitive Electric Power Industry
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Chung-Li Tseng, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Kevin Tomsovic
* 08/31/2004
* USD 179,993.00

This grant provides funding for developing a methodology to study long-term
capacity investment in a competitive electric market. The objective is to study
generation adequacy in relationship to the many complex factors in markets, such
as load growth, market mechanisms, cost characteristics and physical limits of
generating units, environmental policies, and competition. Specifically, three
main goals will be targeted: (1) Develop a real-options based, long-term
generation asset valuation tool, and use it to evaluate capacity investment
decisions. (2) Develop theoretic results to define the "optimal capacity
expansion," including the investment timing and the generator's type and size in
a well-defined, deregulated environment. (3) Develop a model that simulates
generation capacity expansion process in the competitive electric power a model
that simulates generation capacity expansion process in the competitive electric
power &lt;br/&gt;industry, and use the model to study capacity expansion related
problems, and forecast generation adequacy and electricity price trend. If
successful, given a well-defined market environment, the model will be used to
forecast the probability distributions for electricity price and system capacity
at each future time period and the probability of blackouts as well. This
forecasting model will help to detect unforeseeable problems related to
generation adequacy, and to serve as an early warning system.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;