* 0100511
* Collaborative Research: Managing Material Flow and Cash Flow in the Supply Chain
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Rachel Zhang, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 08/31/2004
* USD 87,967.00

The purpose of this collaborative research project is to develop new models that
can help firms make their production and financial decisions simultaneously.
Production decisions (e.g., when to produce and how much to produce, when to
order and how much to order) and financial decisions (e.g., short term
borrowing, issuing of dividends) are interrelated in a firm. This project will
integrate recent results in production and inventory control with those in
finance, as well as new methodologies in stochastic programming, to develop
models that can help firms make their production and financial decisions
simultaneously in the presence of demand uncertainty and financial
constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this research, models will be developed for
making production and financial decisions simultaneously and study the effect of
financial constraints on production decisions. This is motivated by experience
working with industry. The research tasks offer the potential to integrate the
state of the art in traditional production and inventory control modeling with
finance. If successful, the research will provide structural results for the
problems and meaningful insights for managers; and, useful tools for improvement
in production and inventory planning. The decision tools will integrate material
flows and financial flows and help firms make production and financial decisions
simultaneously in the presence of uncertainty. The models will be demonstrated
through actual use by industrial partners.&lt;br/&gt;