* 0100176
* Prediction of Microstructural Changes and Residual Stresses in Hard Machining
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2001,03/31/2004
* Shreyes Melkote, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 03/31/2004
* USD 167,654.00

This grant provides funding for the development of a computational tool for
analysis and prediction of microstructure changes and residual stresses
generated in cutting of hardened steels using single-point tools. The
computational tool will be used to establish the optimal parameter values for
cutting speed, feed, depth of cut and tool geometry that yield favorable
residual stresses and a workpiece surface free of undesirable microstructure
changes (e.g., white layer formation) in two-dimensional cutting of a hardened
steel material. To achieve this goal, analytical models of the metallurgical
phase transformation occurring in quenching of steels will be developed and
combined with a coupled thermo-mechanical updated Lagrangian finite element
model of the two-dimensional cutting process developed using the ABAQUS Standard
finite element code. In order to validate the complete model, orthogonal cutting
experiments will be performed with bearing steel (e.g., AISI 52100) as the
workpiece material and PCBN tool material using cutting parameters determined
from the model. Existing material property data and/or elevated temperature high
strain-rate tests will be used to establish the material flow-stress models to
be used in the simulations. The microstructure of the machined workpiece samples
will be characterized using optical and scanning electron microscopy while
residual stresses will be measured using X-ray diffraction.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the results of this research will provide
the capability of accurately simulating surface generation in machining of
hardened steels and determining an optimal window of cutting conditions to
produce surface characteristics that enhance the service-life of hardened steel
components. This will in turn help to reduce cost, improve part quality, and
promote the industrial use of hard machining technology. On a fundamental level,
the proposed research will advance current physical understanding of material
and cutting process interactions in hard machining, particularly from a
standpoint of workpiece microstructure changes (e.g., white layer formation) and
residual stresses. The proposed research will also provide a solid framework for
future development of a three-dimensional model for simulating hard machining
processes such as turning and milling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;