* 0100404
* Restricted Versions of the Hilbert 16th Problem and Related Topics in the Theory of Analytic Foliations
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2004
* Yulij Ilyashenko, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2004
* USD 111,390.00

The Hilbert 16th problem, part 2, is: "What may be said about the number and
location of limit cycles of a planar polynomial vector field?" Traditionally
this question is interpreted as a problem of finding an upper bound of the
number of limit cycles of a polynomial vector field as a function of the degree
of the polynomials. Even for the degree two, the upper bound is not yet found,
and its existence is not yet proved. It makes sense to consider "restricted
versions" of the Hilbert 16th problem. Namely, the set or all polynomial vector
fields is replaced by a particular subset of by a similar class. The examples
are Lienard and Abel equations (the latter ones are polynomial in the phase
variable with coefficients 1-periodic in time). Even for these equations the
problem of the number of limit cycles stays open. It is solved by the PI with an
extra restriction: Abel equations, and Lienard ones with the polynomial of odd
degree, are considered together with an upper bound for the magnitudes of the
coefficients; the upper estimate on the number of limit cycles depends on this
upper bound of the magnitudes. This is the result from the prior NSF support. In
the current project we try to get rid of this latter restriction, and to give an
estimate of the number of limit cycles that depends on the degrees of the
polynomials in the right hand side only; for Abel equations the coefficients
should be trigonometric polynomials of given degree. We hope to use mighty tools
of the theory of complex analytic foliations, growth and zeros theorems for
holomorphic functions and methods developed under the prior NSF support. Another
important problem to be studied is the infinitesimal Hilbert 16th problem. It
requires to estimate the number of limit cycles generated by a small
perturbation from the ovals of the Hamiltonian polynomial vector field; closed
orbits of the latter field form continuous families. This problem is reduced to
the estimate of the number of zeros of an Abelian integral, that is, an integral
of a polynomial 1-form over the ovals of a real polynomial in the plane; the
estimate should be given in terms of the degrees of the polynomial Hamiltonian
function and of the integrand. This problem was investigated by the author since
69; later on by Yakovenko, D.Novikov, Horosov, Gavrilov, Petrov, Khovanski,
Varchenko and others. Some progress was obtained by Glutsuk and the author for
the restricted version of the problem when the Hamiltonian polynomial is taken
of a special type and of arbitrary degree. One of the goals of this project is
to get an explicit upper estimate that is expected to be an exponential of a
polynomial of the degree of the Hamiltonian function, provided that the
integrand has a smaller degree.

The theory of dynamical systems is the realm of determinism, on one hand, and of
chaos, on the other hand. Vector fields in the phase space of dimension higher
than two form the realm of chaos. This was understood in 1960's, and henceforth,
this realm is the subject of the top interest for mathematicians, computer
scientists and physicists. On the other hand, the classical subject of planar
differential equations which may be called "realm of order" attracted the
interest of researchers during more that one hundred years, beginning with
Poincare and Hilbert. Hilbert's 16th problem is the main one in this domain. It
persists the efforts of mathematicians during 100 years, and it is clear now
that simplified "restricted" versions of the problem should be attacked first.
The project suggests some concrete ways of this attack based on new ideas and
the progress from the prior NSF support.