* 0100828
* SGER - Atomic Force Microscopy System with  Single Molecule Fluorescence Capabilites
* BIO,DBI
* 12/15/2000,05/31/2003
* Yuri Lyubchenko, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 05/31/2003
* USD 99,756.00

&lt;br/&gt;Single molecule studies can provide unique information on the
structure and dynamics of&lt;br/&gt;biological molecules and cellular complexes
that is impossible to obtain using traditional&lt;br/&gt;structural techniques.
These studies, to be performed at conditions close to
physiological&lt;br/&gt;environments, open the way for looking directly at the
function of individual biological&lt;br/&gt;molecules and their complexes.
Scanning probe microscopy and atomic force microscope&lt;br/&gt;(AFM) in
particular has proven to be a very useful technique permitting static and
dynamic&lt;br/&gt;studies of molecules at nanometer range resolution. However,
the requirement for the sample to&lt;br/&gt;be bound to the surface restricts
considerably the dynamical studies. A breakthrough has&lt;br/&gt;recently been
made in the real-time observation of dynamics of molecular complexes at
the&lt;br/&gt;single-molecule level using single-photon sensitive fluorescence
microscopes. However, the&lt;br/&gt;resolution of this technique is limited by
the wavelength of the light and does not reveal&lt;br/&gt;structural details of
molecules. The combination of AFM and a single molecule
fluorescence&lt;br/&gt;(SMF) microscope into one instrument would enable us to
identify structural details of&lt;br/&gt;biological systems at the molecular
level by AFM and to use the SMF microscope to observe&lt;br/&gt;directly the
dynamics of an experimental system at a the single molecule level. Importantly,
the&lt;br/&gt;dynamics can be performed on molecular systems structurally
characterized by AFM and&lt;br/&gt;localized on a comparatively large surface
area. Therefore, the major objective of this proposal&lt;br/&gt;is to build
AFM/SMF system based on the currently available Bioscope
AFM/fluorescence&lt;br/&gt;microscope instrument. The sensitivity of the
fluorescent system will be tested using specially&lt;br/&gt;designed samples. In
addition, potential pitfalls of integrated AFM will be identified
and&lt;br/&gt;analyzed for solutions.