* 0100075
* A Novel High-Speed Electrometer for Nanoscale Electronic Device Research
* ENG,ECCS
* 06/01/2001,11/30/2005
* Alexei Orlov, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 11/30/2005
* USD 294,000.00

The development of a high-speed,high sensitivity single-electron detector for
research in the area of quantum-effect electronics and computing is proposed.
The electrometer will be applied directly to the study of quantum cellular
automata (QCA)for the implementation of logic circuits using
anostructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work will result significant
progress in both the understanding of single-electron transistor (SET)and QCA
switching dynamics as well as the performance of high-speed QCA circuits.
Previous work has shown the feasibility of QCA-based digital logic;logic gates
and latches have already been demonstrated experimentally.What is still needed
is experimental verification of the high speed capabilities of these devices.
Once this has been achieved, real applications can be contemplated which employ
nanostructure-based logic.The proposed research will make this
possible.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed detector is based on a sub-
nanosecond temporal resolution continuous-wave micro-wave-frequency
reflectometer. In contrast to conventional approaches, this technique uses
changes in the reflection coefficient of a resonant single electron transistor
(SET)sensor rather than attempting to directly sense the voltage or current in
the SET.The capacitively-coupled external charge changes the conductance (via
the Coulomb blockade)in the SET 's tunnel junctions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
proposed work will provide both undergraduate and graduate students with
excellent opportunities for research in nanostructure-based devices and
circuits,as well as serve as a vehicle for demonstrating, in Prof.Fay 's
Microwave Circuit Design course (EE 458), the use of microwave-frequency
engineering concepts in a novel and unconventional context. The proposed work
will also enhance research infrastructure for applications other than QCA-based
circuits, since the high-speed electrometer will enable numerous experiments in
a variety of fields in science and engineering that are not yet
possible.&lt;br/&gt;