* 0100370
* Reduction of Labor Turnover Impact through Dynamic Work Allocation and Active Operator Replacement Policies
* ENG,CMMI
* 05/15/2001,04/30/2005
* Jesus Villalobos, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Abhijit Deshmukh
* 04/30/2005
* USD 267,243.00

This project will investigate different work allocation strategies in
conjunction with operator replacement policies that appear to be more suitable
for high labor turnover environments. The idea is to find work allocation
methods that give less workload to new operators and automatically increase this
load as they gain experience. In particular, the reduction of the effects of
labor turnover on productivity when hybrid assembly methods based on bucket
brigade and work sharing are used will be will be researched. This investigation
will be performed by constructing the appropriate analytical and simulation
models of different production lines and work allocation and operator
replacement strategies. An important characteristic of the research is the close
collaboration that will be maintained with industry. In order to develop and
test the models, the investigators will gather information and validate the
research results in the facilities of the industrial
partner.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;High labor turnover, frequently cited as a major
contributor to lagging productivity and competitiveness of the U.S. industry,
represents enormous costs that impact the competitiveness of a manufacturing
firm. The costs more frequently associated with labor turnover include those
associated with recruiting and training the new employees. However, there are
other costs, such as production losses caused by the variability introduced by
the new operators into the assembly line, that are frequently ignored. These
production losses are the result of the learning process that the new employees
go through and that the current assembly lines are not designed to accommodate.
While the usual approach to deal with high labor turnover focus on reducing it
by using long-term strategies such as better recruiting and giving incentives to
employees to stay with the company, this research project seeks engineering
solutions to mitigate its negative effects. This is particularly important for
the period in which the benefits of the implementation of long-term policies are
not felt yet.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;