* 0100771
* Gauge Theory and Geometry in Dimensions Three and Four
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2004
* Peter Kronheimer, Harvard University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2004
* USD 257,703.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0100771.&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Peter B. Kronheimer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim of this project
is to apply gauge-theory techniques to&lt;br/&gt;the study of three-dimensional
manifolds. The principal&lt;br/&gt;investigator proposes to investigate Floer
homology and closely&lt;br/&gt;related areas of geometry, and hopes to shed
light on the&lt;br/&gt;applicability of gauge theory to problems in three-
dimensional&lt;br/&gt;topology. In particular, it is hoped that a relation can
be&lt;br/&gt;established between the Floer homologies of three-
manifolds&lt;br/&gt;defined on the one hand by the monopole equations on the
other&lt;br/&gt;hand by the instanton equations. (These are the equations
which,&lt;br/&gt;in four-dimensions, lead respectively to the Seiberg-
Witten&lt;br/&gt;invariants and Donaldson invariants of four-manifolds, and
which&lt;br/&gt;have led to an flood of results in four-dimensional
differential&lt;br/&gt;topology in the past twenty years.) A first goal is to
prove&lt;br/&gt;that if the instanton Floer homology of manifold with first
betti&lt;br/&gt;number one is trivial in the strong sense that all
the&lt;br/&gt;representations of the fundamental group can be made to
disappear&lt;br/&gt;by a holonomy perturbation, then the monopole Floer
homology&lt;br/&gt;groups are trivial also. (For the instanton groups, the
relevant&lt;br/&gt;representations are the representations in SO(3) with non-
trivial&lt;br/&gt;Stiefel-Whitney class.) By an application of a non-
vanishing&lt;br/&gt;theorem for the monopole Floer homology and use of Floer's
exact&lt;br/&gt;triangle, this would lead to a proof of the "Property
P&lt;br/&gt;conjecture". A related goal in this project is the
development&lt;br/&gt;of new constructions for Floer homology, based on the
technique&lt;br/&gt;of finite-dimensional approximation (which has already
seen&lt;br/&gt;convincing application in the study of the four-
dimensional&lt;br/&gt;invariants).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Topology is the
qualitative study of space and its connectedness.&lt;br/&gt;Its importance was
recognized at the turn of the last century by&lt;br/&gt;the French mathematician
Poincaro, during his investigation of&lt;br/&gt;the laws of motion that govern
the movement of a three-body&lt;br/&gt;system such as the Earth, Moon and Sun
moving according to&lt;br/&gt;Newton's laws. In the past twenty years, topology
has seen&lt;br/&gt;applications in questions such as the knotting of proteins
and&lt;br/&gt;DNA, and in modern theories of high-energy physics. The
topology&lt;br/&gt;of three-dimensional spaces, as opposed to those of
higher&lt;br/&gt;dimension, is of particular subtlety. Through this project,
it&lt;br/&gt;is hoped to bring new techniques to bear on outstanding
questions&lt;br/&gt;in three-dimensional topology. These techniques -- gauge
theory&lt;br/&gt;and the Seiberg-Witten equations -- originated in physics,
where&lt;br/&gt;they had potential application to fundamental questions such
as&lt;br/&gt;quark confinement. They have been an effective tool in the
study&lt;br/&gt;of four-dimensional spaces (such as our space-time). The aim
now&lt;br/&gt;is to apply the same techniques to questions in dimension
three.&lt;br/&gt;