* 0100072
* Studying Cognition via Information Search in Game Experiments
* SBE,SES
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Vincent Crawford, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Kaye Husbands Fealing
* 07/31/2005
* USD 245,622.00

Many unresolved questions about strategic behavior concern strategic
sophistication, the extent to which players analyze their environment as a game,
taking its structure and others' incentives into account. Sophistication is the
main difference between the behavioral assumptions of traditional game theory,
which take it to be unlimited, and adaptive learning models, which take it to be
nonexistent or severely limited. It is also the main difference between the
leading kinds of learning models, beliefs-based and reinforcement. Even when
convergence to equilibrium is assured, sophistication can affect limiting
outcomes through players' initial beliefs and the structure of their learning
rules. The influence of sophistication on convergence, equilibrium selection,
and the nature and timing of responses to changes in the environment give it a
leading role in applications of game theory to economic, political, and social
interactions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project concerns experiments designed
and conducted with Faculty Associate Miguel Costa-Gomes of the University of
York, UK. Experiments allow the control needed to test theories of behavior in
games, which are sensitive to environmental details. Experiments also allow us
to study sophistication and other aspects of cognition more directly, by
monitoring subjects' searches for hidden information. Under plausible
assumptions about cognition and information search, leading theories of initial
decisions and of learning both have sharply separated implications for search.
Interpreting subjects' searches in the light of the cognitive implications of
alternative theories of behavior help to understand their strategic thinking and
predict their behavior.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Some experiments adapt the MouseLab
design used to study subjects' initial responses to two-person matrix games to
two-person guessing games in which subjects have hidden, independently variable
payoff parameters, monitoring their searches for their own and their partners'
parameters. This new design better separates decision rules; and searching for
payoff parameters within a known structure is a very different cognitive task
than searching directly for payoffs in matrix games, which expands our view of
subjects' strategic thinking. Another set of MouseLab experiments adapts our
previous design to study initial responses to two-person matrix games with
multiple equilibria mixed with other games designed to separate boundedly
rational decision rules. The main goal is to separate traditional theories of
equilibrium selection that apply notions like risk- or payoff-dominance to the
set of equilibria from the view that responses to games with multiple equilibria
are a by-product of the same kinds of boundedly rational rules that appear to
predominate in other games. A third set of experiments monitor subjects'
searches for hidden payoff parameters and the history of decisions and realized
payoffs in repeated play of normal-form games with a variety of structures. The
goal is to exploit sharp separation of information requirements to distinguish
reinforcement and beliefs-based learning and hybrids such as experience-weighted
attraction learning. These experiments require the development of a new
interface with expanded search capabilities. &lt;br/&gt;