* 0100428
* Diffusion Studies of Multicomponent Penetrants in Polymers using Fast FTIR Imaging
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2001,04/30/2005
* Jack Koenig, Case Western Reserve University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 04/30/2005
* USD 330,000.00

Fast FTIR imaging using newly available Focal Plane Array detectors and step-
scan interferometers allows the acquisition of multicomponent images of the
diffusion process from which the nature of the diffusion process and the
magnitude of the diffusion constants can be measured. The images allow the
detection of anomalous diffusion in the polymer samples arising from voids or
cracks. These studies will be initially directed at characterization of the role
of residual and diffusing water in poly(methylmethacrylate) (PMMA). The initial
studies will be made on diffusion of water into ultrapure and ultradry PMMA
samples of varying molecular weights and at different temperatures above and
below the glass transition. The PI will study the plasticizing effect of
residual water in PMMA on the diffusion behavior of other substances. Solid
state NMR will be used to measure the changes in the polymer dynamics due to the
presence of water in the PMMA in order to determine the impact of polymer chain
mobility. The PI will study the role of physical aging of the PMMA and establish
the correlations of multicomponent diffusion with the changes in the average
size of microcavities or voids in the glassy polymer (measured by Positron
Annihilation Lifetimes). Subsequently, multicomponent diffusion studies will be
made with water and environmental agents to determine the role of substance
molecular size, shape and chemical interactions on the multicomponent diffusion
process. Additionally, the PMMA will be systematically oxidized and the role of
gradient in polymer degradation from the surface to the bulk evaluated. The
experimental results will be compared with current theories of molecular
diffusion. The experimental images will be utilized as visualization aids in an
educational module (PCL.cwru.edu) which will be used to interactively teach
students the mechanisms and parameters of the diffusion process in polymers. %%%
This award, co-funded by the Division of Materials Research and Chemical and
Transport Systems, is directed toward the utilization of a powerful analytical
tool-Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) Imaging for the study of diffusion of
multicomponent penetrants into polymers. Diffusion of small molecules such as
monomers, catalysts, diluents, and solvents in materials is of vital importance
in many applications. Information concerning diffusion coefficients is necessary
in many industrial processes such as devolatization, polymerization, membrane
separation, crying, coating, and painting. The plasticization, coloration,
curing and drying of coatings are all influenced by the mobility of solvents,
dyes, and low molecular weight additives.