* 0100598
* Birational Geometry and Hodge Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2001,12/31/2005
* Donu Arapura, Purdue University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 12/31/2005
* USD 372,300.00

This project, which is divided into several parts,&lt;br/&gt;is concerned with
several interrelated areas of&lt;br/&gt;algebraic geometry centered around the
birational geometry &lt;br/&gt;and the Hodge theory of algebraic varieties. In
the first part,&lt;br/&gt;the investigators intend to construct differentials on
certain &lt;br/&gt;universal spaces arising in algebraic geometry, and apply
these to&lt;br/&gt;the study of algebraic cycles. In the second
part&lt;br/&gt;the investigators, in collaboration with D.
Abramovich&lt;br/&gt;and K. Karu, intend to extend their previous work to
the&lt;br/&gt;prove the strong factorization conjecture for birational
maps.&lt;br/&gt;This conjecture says that any birational map between
smooth&lt;br/&gt;complete varieties has a particularly simple structure:
it&lt;br/&gt;is a sequence blow ups followed by a sequence of blow
downs&lt;br/&gt;with smooth centers. In the third part, the
investigators&lt;br/&gt;will apply the previously established weak factorization
&lt;br/&gt;conjecture to compare the Hodge structure of two birationally
&lt;br/&gt;equivalent minimal models. In the fourth part, one of the
&lt;br/&gt;investigators intends to extend their previous
vanishing&lt;br/&gt;theorems and apply them to the study of
birational&lt;br/&gt;invariants. In the fifth part, one of the investigators
will &lt;br/&gt;attempt to relate the Hodge theory of higher homotopy groups to
&lt;br/&gt;the intersection theory of algebraic cycles. In the&lt;br/&gt;sixth
part, one of the investigators intends to study a class &lt;br/&gt;of surface
singularities, which are important for birational&lt;br/&gt;geometry, over
fields of positive characteristic. In the&lt;br/&gt;sixth and final part, one of
the investigators intends to &lt;br/&gt;extend the theory of toroidal embeddings
by taking into account&lt;br/&gt;certain stratifications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Algebraic varieties are geometric objects which provide a&lt;br/&gt;rich set of
models for a number of phenomena within mathematics&lt;br/&gt;as well as in
neighboring fields of science such as physics and&lt;br/&gt;computer science.
They have the advantage of being describable &lt;br/&gt;in finite terms, as
solutions to a finite system of algebraic&lt;br/&gt;equations. However, these
descriptions are often complicated and &lt;br/&gt;not unique; deciding when two
such descriptions lead to equivalent,&lt;br/&gt;or even approximately
equivalent, varieties is very difficult.&lt;br/&gt;Approximate equivalence is
made precise by the notion of&lt;br/&gt;birational equivalence. One of the goals
of this project is to &lt;br/&gt;study the finer structure of the birational
equivalence relation.&lt;br/&gt;Another goal of this project is to introduce and
study certain&lt;br/&gt;natural birational invariants, that is,
measures&lt;br/&gt;of the geometric complexity of algebraic varieties. Some
of&lt;br/&gt;these invariants count the number of harmonic
(energy&lt;br/&gt;minimizing) objects associated to the algebraic
variety.&lt;br/&gt;These two goals are related since the investigators expect
that the&lt;br/&gt;fine structure of the birational maps will yield insights
into&lt;br/&gt;the properties of these invariants.