* 0100279
* GOALI:  Analysis, Design, and Testing of Profiled Hydrostatic Thrust Bearings
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2001,03/31/2005
* John Litherland, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 03/31/2005
* USD 310,000.00

This Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award
provides funding for improving the performance of a hydrostatic thrust bearing.
It is well known that these bearings undergo both small and large scale
deformations and that these deformations can significantly reduce the load-
carrying capacity of the bearing. What has been less well known is that certain
types of bearing deformation can actually increase the load-carrying capacity!
In this research, these advantageous deformations will be investigated using
analytical, numerical, and experimental techniques. The objectives of this work
will be to develop design guidelines that may be used to ensure beneficial
deformations while also guaranteeing that harmful deformations do not occur. The
fluid-film thickness between the bearing and the thrust surface will be
optimized based upon sliding speed, structural properties of the bearing, fluid
conditions, and power source limitations. A method for conducting these
investigations will be to study the impact of intentionally profiling the
bearing surface to achieve optimal bearing performance. The optimized profile
geometry, coupled with the expected passive deformation of the bearing, will be
used to specify the design requirements for the advanced bearing
design.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the work of this research will be
used to significantly enhance the performance of hydrostatic thrust bearings
that are widely used in mechanical design applications. The improved performance
will be demonstrated in higher load-carrying capacities and lower power
requirements. A secondary impact will be to reduce wear and increase life
expectancies by eliminating the potential for metal-to-metal contact between the
bearing and the thrust surface. The design guidelines that are generated from
this work may be used to update the classical textbook theory that exists for
these widely used machine elements. By doing this, improved machine design
practices will be disseminated among the engineering community and a significant
reduction in waste and an increase in productivity will be
realized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;