* 0100252
* Symbolic Dynamics, Smooth Dynamics, and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Howard Weiss, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 08/31/2004
* USD 106,312.00

The proposed project has several related components: 1) We&lt;br/&gt;plan to
continue our study of the Schelling segregation&lt;br/&gt;model as a dynamical
system. This model, which first arose&lt;br/&gt;in economics, is related to a
number of lattice models in&lt;br/&gt;statistical physics like the lattice gas,
but more difficult&lt;br/&gt;due to the inherent non-local nature of site
coupling; 2) We&lt;br/&gt;plan to study the "rigidity" of periodic point
invariants&lt;br/&gt;for symbolic and hyperbolic dynamical systems.
These&lt;br/&gt;topological invariants include, for a Holder
continuous&lt;br/&gt;function f, the unmarked periodic orbit spectrum, the
beta&lt;br/&gt;function P(-s f), and the zeta function. These
invariants&lt;br/&gt;are fundamental objects of study in dynamics and
statistical&lt;br/&gt;physics, but the information about the function f
they&lt;br/&gt;capture is subtle and poorly understood; 3) We plan
to&lt;br/&gt;continue our investigation into the distribution of
values&lt;br/&gt;of fundamental quantities in ergodic theory (e.g.
Lyapunov&lt;br/&gt;exponents, local entropy, and Birkhoff averages) and
the&lt;br/&gt;fine structure of the corresponding phase
space&lt;br/&gt;decomposition.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed project has
several related components: 1) We&lt;br/&gt;plan to continue our study of the
Schelling segregation&lt;br/&gt;model as a dynamical system. This model, which
was first&lt;br/&gt;proposed by the eminent economist Thomas Schelling,
is&lt;br/&gt;related to a number of lattice models in statistical
physics&lt;br/&gt;like the lattice gas, but more difficult due to the
inherent&lt;br/&gt;non-local nature of site coupling; 2) Pressure is
a&lt;br/&gt;fundamental object of study in statistical physics, but
even&lt;br/&gt;in highly idealized systems, the information about
the&lt;br/&gt;system it captures is subtle and poorly understood. We
plan&lt;br/&gt;to study whether certain systems are completely
identified&lt;br/&gt;by their pressure. These problems have striking
similarities&lt;br/&gt;to fascinating questions which Kac adroitly summarized
with&lt;br/&gt;the question "Can you hear the shape of a drum?"; (3)
For&lt;br/&gt;ergodic systems, the time average of a function along
almost&lt;br/&gt;every orbit equals the spatial average. Only very rarely
can&lt;br/&gt;almost every orbit be replaced by every orbit. We plan
to&lt;br/&gt;study the fine structure and dimension of the
exceptional&lt;br/&gt;set whose time average does not coincide with the
spatial&lt;br/&gt;average&lt;br/&gt;