* 0100825
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Ontogeny of Paranasal Sinuses in the Platyrrhini (Haplorhini, Primates)
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2001,11/30/2002
* Andrew Hill, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 11/30/2002
* USD 11,268.00

The New World monkeys (platyrrhines) are a diverse group of primates whose
evolutionary history in South and Central America dates back to at least the
late Oligocene. Despite a great deal of study in recent decades the evolutionary
relationships between species of this group have been difficult to resolve.
Studies of craniodental and postcranial anatomy, as well as molecular data, have
produced conflicting results, especially with regard to marmosets and tamarins.
In addition, the relationships of Saimiri (the squirrel monkeys), Cebus
(capuchins), Aotus (owl monkeys), and Callicebus (titi monkeys) to the rest of
the New World monkeys are equivocal in most analyses. &lt;br/&gt;The present
study seeks to contribute to the resolution of these uncertainties by providing
information from a hitherto poorly known region of anatomy, the paranasal
sinuses. The paranasal sinuses are hollow mucous-lined outpocketings of the
nasal cavity that occupy various portions of the facial skeleton in mammals.
Sinus anatomy is well documented in Old World monkeys and apes, in which it
provides diagnostic features of several genera and groups of genera. It has yet
to play a role in studies of NWM relationships because our knowledge of which
sinuses are present in different species is very incomplete. What little
information we have indicates that these monkeys may exhibit a greater diversity
of sinus patterns than any other group of primates. &lt;br/&gt;This project will
used computed tomography scanning of dry crania as a non-invasive means of
imaging the internal anatomy of the sinuses in forty-seven specimens of
platyrrhines representing ten genera. Each genus is represented by an age-graded
series of specimens from juvenile to adult, allowing the development of their
sinuses to be documented for the first time. &lt;br/&gt;The taxonomic
distribution of sinus anatomy documented by this analysis will be compared to
several competing phylogenetic hypotheses in order to reveal which relationships
it supports. By completing our knowledge of sinus patterns in higher primates,
these data will also facilitate interpretation of sinus anatomy in fossil
representatives of Old World monkeys and apes. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;