* 0100818
* Specific Interactions in Polymer Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2001,09/30/2004
* Michael Coleman, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 09/30/2004
* USD 390,000.00

The two co-PI's will continue research on the effect of specify interactions on
the phase behavior of polymer blends. One part of the proposed work concerns the
completion of work initiated a few years ago on the effect of chain architecture
on the number of like and un-like contacts in solutions and blends where the
components contain functional groups that hydrogen bond to one another. These
systems are particularly amenable to study because infrared spectroscopy can be
used to count the number of contacts in well-chosen systems. Work in progress
involves the effect of branching in hyperbranched and dendrimer-like polymers,
mesh size in cross-linked networks and microphase separation in blends involving
block copolymers. The second part of the proposed research involves the
application of a new technique, a two-dimensional Fourier transform
infrared/dielectric spectrometer. Dielectric relaxation measurements have been
used for many years as a probe of the dynamics of polymer chains, through the
detection of the transitions and relaxations that are a result of various types
of coupled or local motions. Infrared spectroscopy provides a probe of molecular
level structure and, in certain systems, intermolecular interactions. Clearly, a
technique (or, more accurately, a hybrid-technique) that can measure the
temperature and frequency range of various transitions and relaxation's, while
simultaneously probing the functional groups involved and the degree to which
their motions are coupled, would be an extremely powerful analytical tool. It is
expected that this instrument will open up various new areas of research and
undergraduate students will be involved in "scouting" experiments as part of
their senior projects to help explore and establish these. At the same time,
this hybrid spectrometer will be used to explore problems associated with the
major thrust of our research that could not be tackled previously, particularly
the dynamics of functional groups and polymer chains in associating
systems.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This new area of research has considerable
potential for enhancing both research activities and education. In terms of the
former, the development of the technique should allow the functional groups
involved in relaxations and transitions in various materials, not just polymers,
to be explored. In terms of education, through the mechanisms of involving
undergraduates in the research, seminars on technique development and
incorporating this instrument into our undergraduate laboratories, the
importance of combining methods of investigation and techniques in order to
tackle complex problems will be taught and emphasized.&lt;br/&gt;