* 0100246
* Modeling and Design of Reconfigurable Point Actuated Aperture Antennas
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2001,12/31/2005
* Gregory Washington, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Lawrence S. Goldberg
* 12/31/2005
* USD 225,000.00

0100246 Washington

In order to meet the communication and broadcasting needs of the 21st century,
aperture antennas are generally required to have shaped surfaces so that their
radiation patterns efficiently match the geographical regions where the signals
are to be transmitted and received. These antennas are, in general, rigid and
consist of parabolic, paraboloidal, cylindrical, spherical, or hyperboloidal
shapes. In terms of the current state of the art, beam shaping with these rigid
structures is possible with multiple off-center feed arrays or asymmetric
shaping of the reflector surface (contour beam reflector antennas). Beam
steering can be accomplished electrically by utilizing the feed array or
mechanically by using specially designed gimbals that tilt the whole reflector.
In the case of spaceborne contoured beam reflector antennas, a major limitation
is the fact that a rigid shaped reflector is optimized for coverage of a
specific geographical area. Once the antenna is deployed on orbit, radiation
pattern modification cannot be accomplished. As satellites become more reliable
and their expected service life increase, the probability that the satellite
service area and/or operator will change also increases. Mechanically active
antennas have been proposed as a solution to this problem, but at time there are
no commercially viable units. The main rationale of this stems from the
following issues:

1. We have algorithms that can accurately predict reflector shapes based on user
defined radiation patterns, but we have very few mechanisms that deal with real
structures and even fewer for how to achieve these deflections for reflectors
that will change their shape dynamically.

2. There is very little fundamental research on how many actuators to use,
actuator placement, and optimal actuator deflections for active aperture
antennas.

3. There is no fundamental mechanism for coupling the electromagnetics to the
mechanics in a seamless fashion.

The research proposed in this study seeks to effectively design, model and
construct a mechanically reconfigurable antenna that addresses these issues.
Since this type of antenna can be built at a fraction of the total cost of a
traditional phased array antenna there is commercial significance as well. For
example, a commercial manufacturer of phased array antennas claims that they can
build phased array antennas at a cost of about $100.00 per element. The
resolution needed for space based communications ranges from about 10,000 to
1,000,000 elements. This puts the total cost anywhere between ($1.0M-$100M). The
system weight and complexity can also elevate this cost. A mechanically
reconfigurable system can be built with off the shelf components today for less
than $25,000. Presently there are roughly 600 satellites in commission
throughout the world. By the year 2010, it is expected that up to 1000 new
satellites will be launched, many with multiple antenna systems. Based on this
fact it is easy to see the potential payoff. A fundamental approach to design
and construction of these antennas will revolutionize the way these aperture
antennas are built today!