* 0100210
* GOALI:  Process Modeling and Analysis for "Smart Tool" Redevelopment in Flexible Line Boring
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/15/2001,09/30/2003
* William Endres, Michigan Technological University
* Standard Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 09/30/2003
* USD 50,000.00

This Grant Opportunity for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) project aims
to extend the results of basic research in an industrial setting to assist in
the development of a more reconfigurable line boring process. Line boring is
widely used to machine a concentric line of bores, such as those for an engine
camshaft or crankshaft. The industrial partner, Lamb Technicon Machining
Systems, recently completed a prototype flexible line-boring machine, but
further development is needed for its "smart tool", which is to provide
compensation for tool vibration through internal laser feedback and
piezoelectric actuation. A new process stability solution that addresses the
real, corner-radiused tooth geometry seen in boring operations will be extended
to account for the dynamic effects of the tool's guide-pads, the actuator and
the controller. A new cutting tooth concept will then be modeled and analyzed
toward reducing the radial machining force by 50%. Model-based tooth designs
will be tested to compare forces, cutting power and tool wear to those measured
using conventional corner-radiused tools.

If successful, the extended stability solution will help avoid instability that
can damage the expensive smart tool. Having a science-based tool like this is
particularly important here due to the added complexity of the system. If the
radial force can then be reduced through the new cutting tooth concept, either
the requirements on actuator size and power will be reduced or increased
actuator motion will be achieved. This will facilitate smaller boring bars and
less demand on the actuator power-induction system that must operate across a
rotating interface. Perhaps the most important outcome of this collaboration
will be the bilateral impact on the research programs of both Lamb Technicon and
the investigator. The investigator will bring specific expertise to the smart
tool problem while learning more about the industry's true needs and their day-
to-day challenges

