* 0100538
* Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2007
* Lai-Sang Young, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2007
* USD 500,000.00

Four projects on the mathematical theory of dynamical systems
are&lt;br/&gt;proposed. Each project contains a cluster of problems with a
common &lt;br/&gt;theme. The first pertains to strange attractors with strong
dissipation &lt;br/&gt;and a single direction of instability. Extensions of a
general theory &lt;br/&gt;developed under a previous grant to arbitrary phase-
dimensions are &lt;br/&gt;proposed, as are applications to concrete problems
such as nonlinear &lt;br/&gt;oscillators. The second project concerns the
statistical behavior of &lt;br/&gt;dynamical systems with predominantly
hyperbolic behavior. The focus of&lt;br/&gt;the proposed research is on
mechanisms leading to various rates of &lt;br/&gt;correlation decay in both
discrete and continuous times. The topic of &lt;br/&gt;the third project is
lattice dynamical systems. A systematic analysis &lt;br/&gt;of the aggregate
behavior of large numbers of dynamical systems coupled &lt;br/&gt;together is
proposed. The final project proposes dynamical systems &lt;br/&gt;methods of
solution for three unrelated problems on the Schrodinger &lt;br/&gt;operator,
kinematic fast dynamo and Navier-Stokes equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a
branch of mathematics, dynamical systems is concerned with &lt;br/&gt;the time
evolutions of processes governed by certain underlying laws.&lt;br/&gt;A primary
goal of the subject is to develop unifying mathematical&lt;br/&gt;theories to
explain observed phenomena and predict future occurrences. &lt;br/&gt;In this
proposal, the investigation of a number of models amenable to
&lt;br/&gt;mathematical analysis and with potential applications to the physical
&lt;br/&gt;and biological sciences is proposed. It has been known for some time
&lt;br/&gt;that relatively simple laws can lead to complicated dynamics. The
&lt;br/&gt;first part of this proposal focuses on systems with chaotic behavior.
&lt;br/&gt;Two topics are proposed: an analysis of strange attractors and a
&lt;br/&gt;statistical theory of mixing. (Strange attractors are highly complex
&lt;br/&gt;objects which capture the long term behaviors of dissipative
dynamical &lt;br/&gt;systems; they have been observed frequently in nature and
in simulations &lt;br/&gt;but have thus far resisted rigorous analysis.) Other
projects proposed &lt;br/&gt;include the relations between aggregate properties
of large dynamical &lt;br/&gt;systems and those of their individual components,
and a few problems &lt;br/&gt;from physics and hydrodynamics which the principal
investigator &lt;br/&gt;believes can be solved by the methods of dynamical
systems.&lt;br/&gt;Four projects on the mathematical theory of dynamical systems
are&lt;br/&gt;proposed. Each project contains a cluster of problems with a
common &lt;br/&gt;theme. The first pertains to strange attractors with strong
dissipation &lt;br/&gt;and a single direction of instability. Extensions of a
general theory &lt;br/&gt;developed under a previous grant to arbitrary phase-
dimensions are &lt;br/&gt;proposed, as are applications to concrete problems
such as nonlinear &lt;br/&gt;oscillators. The second project concerns the
statistical behavior of &lt;br/&gt;dynamical systems with predominantly
hyperbolic behavior. The focus of&lt;br/&gt;the proposed research is on
mechanisms leading to various rates of &lt;br/&gt;correlation decay in both
discrete and continuous times. The topic of &lt;br/&gt;the third project is
lattice dynamical systems. A systematic analysis &lt;br/&gt;of the aggregate
behavior of large numbers of dynamical systems coupled &lt;br/&gt;together is
proposed. The final project proposes dynamical systems &lt;br/&gt;methods of
solution for three unrelated problems on the Schrodinger &lt;br/&gt;operator,
kinematic fast dynamo and Navier-Stokes equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a
branch of mathematics, dynamical systems is concerned with &lt;br/&gt;the time
evolutions of processes governed by certain underlying laws.&lt;br/&gt;A primary
goal of the subject is to develop unifying mathematical&lt;br/&gt;theories to
explain observed phenomena and predict future occurrences. &lt;br/&gt;In this
proposal, the investigation of a number of models amenable to
&lt;br/&gt;mathematical analysis and with potential applications to the physical
&lt;br/&gt;and biological sciences is proposed. It has been known for some time
&lt;br/&gt;that relatively simple laws can lead to complicated dynamics. The
&lt;br/&gt;first part of this proposal focuses on systems with chaotic behavior.
&lt;br/&gt;Two topics are proposed: an analysis of strange attractors and a
&lt;br/&gt;statistical theory of mixing. (Strange attractors are highly complex
&lt;br/&gt;objects which capture the long term behaviors of dissipative
dynamical &lt;br/&gt;systems; they have been observed frequently in nature and
in simulations &lt;br/&gt;but have thus far resisted rigorous analysis.) Other
projects proposed &lt;br/&gt;include the relations between aggregate properties
of large dynamical &lt;br/&gt;systems and those of their individual components,
and a few problems &lt;br/&gt;from physics and hydrodynamics which the principal
investigator &lt;br/&gt;believes can be solved by the methods of dynamical
systems.&lt;br/&gt;