* 0100024
* Collaborative Research: Exploitation of Finite Element Method in Robustness and Reliability Assessments for Micro-Electro-Mechanical Systems
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Hae Chang Gea, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Delcie R. Durham
* 06/30/2005
* USD 176,468.00

This collaborative research deals with the development of a rigorous finite
element method-based approach to studying robustness and reliability of Micro-
Electro-Mechanical Systems (MEMS). Exploitation of the finite element
formulation is proposed to incorporate higher order moments into the probability
analysis without incurring excessive cost. The computational burden from
introducing higher order moments will be eliminated by taking advantage of the
finite element formulation of selective functionals. New modeling methods for
MEMS will be explored and a variety of MEMS devices will be studied. To overcome
the limitations of existing methods for propagating the effect of uncertainty, a
reliability analysis-based procedure for probability analysis is proposed, which
will achieve a good balance between accuracy and
efficiency.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If successful, the research will benefit the
MEMS community with improved quality assessment and a better understanding of
the intrinsic relationship between robustness and reliability. The ability to
efficiently evaluate higher order derivatives in the finite element method is
also beneficial to other applications where this derivative information is
needed. Comparative study on various methods for probability analysis can
provide better guidelines for choosing the most appropriate technique. The
reliability analysis-based procedure for probability analysis is expected to be
applicable to design problems with nonlinear behavior and large uncertainty
variations