* 0100464
* Geometry of Groups &amp; Functional Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2001,11/30/2006
* John Roe, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 11/30/2006
* USD 654,167.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Nigel/Roe&lt;br/&gt;A deepening understanding of the role
played by large-scale geometry in topology has made it clear that large-scale
geometric features of groups determine small-scale features of their unitary
duals. The effect is easily observed in abelian groups, thanks to Fourier theory
and Pontrjagin duality, but the situation is more involved for nonabelian
groups, whose unitary representation theory is too complicated to admit a direct
descriptive account. However the perspective on dual spaces provided by Alain
Connes' noncommutative geometry makes it possible to formulate instances of this
large-scale to small-scale phenomenon for nonabelian groups. Moreover the tools
of algebraic topology, carried over to the noncommutative realm, make it
possible to elevate the phenomenon to a conjectural reciprocity (formulated by
Baum and Connes) between the global, homotopy theoretic structures of groups and
their reduced duals. The purpose of the research outlined in this proposal is to
obtain a more accurate and deeper understanding of the Baum-Connes conjecture in
operator K-theory and of the large-to-small scale phenomenon which underlies it.
The proposers will investigate issues related to group boundaries, Sobolev
theory on the reduced dual of a group, and Hilbert space embeddings of groups.
The recent discovery of counterexamples to variants of the Baum-Connes
conjecture will be analyzed in depth.&lt;br/&gt;Although the tools used to
investigate it are rather elaborate, the idea behind large scale-geometry is
very simple: ignore the local, small-scale features of a geometric space and
concentrate on its large-scale, or long term, structure. By doing so, trends or
qualities may become apparent which are obscured by small-scale irregularities.
The investigators and others have developed tools to distinguish between
different sorts of multi-dimensional, large scale behavior in geometry. Somewhat
surprisingly, aside from their intrinsic interest, these tools have found
application in ordinary, small-scale geometry and elsewhere. The present
proposal focuses on geometric aspects of group theory which are illuminated by
large-scale geometry.&lt;br/&gt;The proposers are actively involved in training
the next generation of mathematical scientists. They lead Penn State's Geometric
Functional Analysis group. They run an active, twice-weekly research seminar and
between them they have eight doctoral students under their direct supervision (a
number of other students attend the seminar regularly). They currently serve as
mentors to one VIGRE supported postdoctoral fellow, and will be recruiting a
second fellow to be supported by NSF Focussed Research Grant funds this year.
The Geometric Functional Analysis group frequently hosts sabbatical visitors as
well as visiting graduate students. Besides the seminar, the group runs a
continuing program of mini-workshops on research subjects of current interest.
The research described in this proposal will be supported by, and carried out as
part of, the activities of the Geometric Functional Analysis
group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;