* 0100311
* A Core Equipment Facility for Cellular and Molecular Neuroscience
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Charles Paden, Montana State University
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/2003
* USD 164,944.00

This award provides support for purchase of equipment to be used to establish a
multi-user, integrated core equipment facility for cellular and molecular
biological research. The equipment includes centrifuges, a microinjection
apparatus, a spectrophotomer and an inverted microscope. The facility will be
shared by faculty in two departments: a newly formed Department of Cell Biology
and Neuroscience and an existing Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry. A
shared focus of all these investigators is the elucidation of the cellular and
molecular mechanisms underlying neural development and/or nerve regeneration.
All are now physically located in adjacent labs, and given the overlap in their
research methodologies, will be able to share the equipment supported through
this award.. Some of the major equipment items requested would replace existing
items that are close to 25 years old and in serious disrepair, while others will
provide new or expanded capabilities. All major users are members of the NSF
sponsored IGERT doctoral training program at the University. This program in
Complex Biological Systems is designed to train graduate students to approach
biological problems from a multitude of levels, from the molecular to the
systems level, using a variety of approaches drawn from cellular and molecular
biology, structural biology, computational biology and systems neuroscience.
Thus the IGERT trainees will benefit considerably from access to the equipment
which will be used in both course work and in thesis research. The equipment
will also be available for use by a number of undergraduate students who
undertake independent research projects as part of their education.&lt;br/&gt;