* 0100110
* Geometry of Real Submanifolds in Complex Space and CR Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2005
* Peter Ebenfelt, University of California-San Diego
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2005
* USD 106,020.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Eberfelt&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this project, the principal
investigator (PI) studies geometric, analytic, and algebraic aspects of real
submanifolds in complex manifolds and, more generally, of manifolds with a CR
structure. More specifically, he focuses on questions that are related to the
local classification problem, which asks for a local description of the CR
structure on a manifold near a distinguished point up to equivalence. For
instance, for a real submanifold in complex space, one would like to know which
other real submanifolds are equivalent to it by a local biholomorphic
transformation. The PI studies this problem extrinsically by trying to find
normal forms in classes of real submanifolds, and intrinsically as an
equivalence problem for systems of differential equations. An important part of
the classification problem is to understand the group of transformations
preserving the structure or, more generally, the set of mappings between two
given structures. The PI of this project studies the local stability group of a
real submanifold in complex space, i.e. the group of local biholomorphisms
preserving the real submanifold and a given distinguished point on it. He
investigates under what conditions this group can be embedded as a subgroup of
the jet group of a predetermined order, and seeks to describe the subgroups that
arise in this way in more detail. He looks for conditions that imply coercivity
results such as e.g. convergence of all formal mappings between real-analytic
submanifolds, or real-analyticity of all smooth CR mappings. He also
investigates closer the prolongation of the system defining CR mappings to a
Pfaffian system, and explores its applications.&lt;br/&gt;The theory of several
complex variables is a rapidly developing subject in mathematics which has
applications in contemporary mathematical physics (e.g quantum field theory and
string theory) as well as in engineering (e.g. control theory). The study of the
geometry of real submanifolds in complex spaces, such as e.g. smooth boundaries
of domains, is central to this theory, and is also related to other areas of
mathematics such as partial differential equations and differential geometry. In
this project, we investigate questions regarding the geometry of real
submanifolds in complex space and their mappings that arise in the
classification problem of such up to equivalences that preserve the complex
structure of the ambient space. &lt;br/&gt;