* 0100539
* Orthogonal Polynomials of Several Variables
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Charles Dunkl, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Bruce P. Palka
* 06/30/2005
* USD 79,190.00

The analysis of multi-variable functions or configurations is an important
problem area with connections to topics like quantum systems of many bodies,
multi-variate statistical distributions, special functions, numerical cubature,
and algebraic combinatorics. The common thread of the problems posed in this
proposal is the existence of a symmetry group. An important class of
applications, for example, is formed by the Calogero-Sutherland-Moser (CSM)
systems; these are quantum-mechanical problems of a number of identical
particles in a one-dimensional space with certain interactions (inverse square,
for one). The symmetry group is the group of all permutations of the coordinate
functions (the type-A Weyl group) or the group of permutations and sign-changes
(the type-B Weyl group); the latter occurs in spin models. Some of the classical
orthogonal polynomials are associated to Weyl groups and compact homogeneous
spaces. Dunkl has developed a theory of differential-difference operators
(called "Dunkl operators" in both mathematics and physics literature) which are
crucial devices for this analysis. These operators are a parametrized version of
the usual derivatives. They are used to construct certain invariant differential
operators (which prove the complete integrability of several CSM models). There
is also an associated generalization of the Fourier transform. Specifically this
project concerns the construction of generating functions for polynomials with
certain desirable properties (orthogonality or eigenfunctions, for example)
associated to finite reflection groups (of types I, A, B, H); a study of the
generalized binomial coefficients defined in terms of nonsymmetric Jack
polynomials, a search for useful self-adjoint operators enabling orthogonal
decomposition of type-B harmonic polynomials (which would be used to express
wave-functions of CSM models on the line in spherical polar coordinates), a
study of special CSM models with three-body interactions. Also it is proposed to
investigate possible modifications of the original differential-difference
operators connected with bispectral problems or super-integrable
models.&lt;br/&gt; Mathematical analysis can be considered as having two
different emphases, one is to find exact formulae to describe some mathematical
system, like the motion of the planets or of a pendulum, or an electron
belonging to an atom which is part of a crystal, and the other is to find good
and useful approximations and processes which can get as close as desired to the
solution of a problem by taking an adequate number of steps. For example,
computed tomography does not give a perfect image of a cross-section of the
subject, but it does provide all the detail needed for practical purposes. This
project is in the part of analysis which aims to give exact solutions in
situations which enjoy some symmetry. This could be the quantum-mechanical
problem of indistinguishable particles, a statistical analysis which treats each
data point the same way, or the molecular structure of a crystal where each atom
has six nearest neighbors, up, down, left, right, front and back. In particular,
Dunkl has developed a calculus which takes the symmetry into account, thus
allowing precise and powerful techniques for the analysis. The problems in the
proposal can be categorized by the types of symmetry, such as those formed by
rotating a circle through multiples of sixty degrees (that is, one sixth of a
complete revolution), or those associated to permutations of identical objects,
to name just two. The goal of the project is to develop tools and discover
methods for multi-variable analysis of problems with symmetry; these will be
useful in understanding the physics of interacting particles, statistical
analysis of complicated data, and the techniques of digitizing and the
subsequent reconstruction of sounds and images.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;