* 0100163
* Norm Varieties and Cohomological Invariants
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2004
* Markus Rost, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 05/31/2004
* USD 96,138.00

The investigator continues his work on the Bloch-Kato conjecture (bijectivity of
the norm residue homomorphism) and on Galois-cohomological invariants for linear
algebraic groups. Norm varieties form the basic examples of an intimate link
between Galois cohomology and cobordism theory which lead in recent years to
considerable progress on the Bloch-Kato conjecture. The main goal of the project
is the construction of norm varieties for arbitrary weights and primes, the
computation of some of their characteristic numbers and of some of their
K-cohomology groups. Cohomological invariants are characteristic classes for
G-torsors over a field. Classical examples are the discriminant and the Hasse-
Witt invariant for quadratic forms. There is a huge variety of known
cohomological invariants for various linear algebraic groups. One objective of
this project is to get a better systematic understanding of cohomological
invariants, but also to investigate certain particular cases. Some of the
invariants (for the special linear group and for some exceptional groups) are
closely related with norm varieties.

A basic problem of algebra, number theory and algebraic geometry is to find
solutions to polynomial equations. A mathematical "law" provides a means for
solving a huge class of equations, rather than just finding a solution to a
single equation. Thus the mathematician's goal is to find and verify useful
mathematical laws. One potentially very powerful but as yet unverified law is
called the "Bloch-Kato conjecture." With the goal of demonstrating that the
Bloch-Kato conjecture is valid in general, the investigator studies in depth the
properties of certain very special systems of equations, called "norm
varieties."