* 0100975
* RUI-Combinatorial Representation Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2004
* Thomas Halverson, Macalester College
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 05/31/2004
* USD 106,326.00

The investigator will continue his collaborations with undergraduate researchers
on combinatorial aspects of the representation theory of a collection of
algebraic structures: Chevalley groups, Iwahori-Hecke algebras, affine Hecke
algebras, centralizer algebras, and quasi hereditary algebras. This research is
unified by its methodology: using discrete, combinatorial structures and
algorithms to give explicit answers to algebraic questions. Combinatorial
analyses will be performed on topics such as irreducible representations and
characters, unipotent representations of Chevalley groups, flag varieties, the
Chevalley-Hecke correspondence, Springer representations, and Langlands
parameters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to use discrete
structures to model and analyze abstract properties of algebraic systems that
are used in particle physics, data analysis, data encryption, engineering,
statistical mechanics, and geometry. These discrete structures are concrete
objects that can be enumerated and investigated on a computer. Using computer
explorations, investigators have made startling new theoretical discoveries, and
computation has become a significant method of mathematical investigation. The
work in this project furthers the understanding of these algebraic systems and
makes them more accessible to computational studies. Furthermore, these methods
allow the investigator to fully involve undergraduate students in research.
Young researchers can construct, manipulate, and analyze these objects without
needing a huge amount of advanced training. At the same time these manipulations
reveal deep truths about fundamental systems from algebra, geometry, and
topology.&lt;br/&gt;