* 0100474
* Random Holomorphic Sections and Complex Geometry
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2007
* Bernard Shiffman, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2007
* USD 349,402.00

Abstract:

Bernard Shiffman will continue his research on the statistics of random
polynomials in several complex variables and more generally of random sections
of powers of positive line bundles on compact complex manifolds and on almost
complex symplectic manifolds. He will investigate the "scaling limit" statistics
as the degree of the polynomial or the power of the line bundle goes to infinity
when distances are rescaled so that densities are normalized. He will study
spacing of zeros, hole probabilities, pair correlations for local maxima, and
other topics. He will also study correlations of critical points of spherical
harmonics. In another direction, he will study the compact singularities of
equidimensional meromorphic mappings into compact complex manifolds. He will
also look for new examples of Kobayashi hyperbolic hypersurfaces in complex
projective 3-space. Kobayashi hyperbolic spaces do not carry any entire
holomorphic curves; simple examples are the Cartesian squares of curves of genus
greater than 1 and symmetric squares of generic curves of genus greater than 2.
He will look for low-degree hyperbolic birational images of these surfaces in
complex projective 3-space.

This research project is motivated by a need to understand complex quantum
mechanical systems. Quantum mechanics is the fundamental theory that describes
the behavior of atoms and molecules and their component particles--protons,
neutrons, and electrons. These particles are described by wave functions, which
are solutions of Schrodinger's equation. The zeros and local maxima of wave
functions give important information on states of atoms and molecules; the zeros
are known in quantum chemistry and physics as nodal lines. The behavior of
random polynomials provide an elementary model similar to complex quantum
systems. Polynomials in several variables correspond to systems with several
degrees of freedom, and those polynomials of high degree correspond to wave
functions for highly excited states. The project includes statistics on
symplectic manifolds, which serve as the mathematical models for the states of
quantum systems. Another component of the research involves understanding the
geometry of complex algebraic manifolds, which play an important role in quantum
field theory and provide models for diverse physical phenomena.





