* 0100831
* Integrated LC/MS/MS System
* BIO,DBI
* 05/15/2001,04/30/2003
* David Kaback, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey-RBHS-New Jersey Med
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 04/30/2003
* USD 326,275.00

This award provides funds to support the purchase of an instrument with combined
liquid chromatography and advanced time of flight and tandem mass spectrometry
capabilities. Recent advances in mass spectrometry have provided unprecedented
opportunities for the analysis of proteins, such as internal sequencing,
identification of nature and location of post-translational modifications and
noncovalent interactions. The system to be purchased will allow the research
communities at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey and
Rutgers University - Newark to take advantage of this state-of-the-art
technology in protein research. Currently, there is no instrument available that
allows researchers at either institute to sequence and elucidate protein
structures using tandem mass spectrometry. Provision of this technology will
significantly enhance the quality and productivity of the research on both
campuses, as well as at others in the Newark area. The instrument will be placed
in a Mass Spectrometry Core Facility available to researchers at both
institutions. The projects outlined in this application by the expected major
users of the instrument entail basic research into the structure and function of
proteins from a wide-range of organisms - human, yeast, bacteria and plants. The
types of questions to be addressed will require protein identification and
sequencing, nuclear protein complex identification, localization of protein-
ligand interactions, enzyme tertiary structure determination, quality control of
designer metallo-protein synthesis, internal sequencing of N-terminally blocked
proteins, and identification of post-translational modification of proteins.
This equipment will be supervised and maintained by an experienced mass
spectrometrist who is in charge of the core facility. Three committees drawn
from both institutions oversee the fiscal and scientific management and daily
operation of this facility.