* 0100950
* Asymptotic Enumeration of Perfect Matchings of Lattice Graphs
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2004
* Mihai Ciucu, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 06/30/2004
* USD 80,685.00

This project is concerned with the asymptotic and exact enumeration of perfect
matchings of certain lattice graphs (or, in an equivalent language, enumeration
of tilings of the regions dual to these graphs) that turn out to be closely
related to several important problems in combinatorics (enumeration of spanning
trees, plane partitions, alternating sign matrices), and that appear in
statistical physics in the guise of the dimer model. Specifically, motivated by
the monomer-monomer correlation introduced by Fisher and Stephenson, and based
on the exact enumeration found by the proposer of the tilings of certain
hexagonal regions with triangular holes along their symmetry axes (which
generalizes MacMahon's theorem on counting plane partitions), the proposer
pursues extending his work on the asymptotic enumeration of tilings in the
situation when the holes are not necessarily on the symmetry axis of the region.
This should bring useful insight into an important conjecture of Fisher and
Stephenson concerning the rotational invariance of the monomer-monomer
correlation. Furthermore, the proposer studies three additional problems. First,
the proposer pursues extending the arguments that allowed him to prove directly
one identity from a set of four similar identities he found relating eight of
the ten symmetry classes of plane partitions to the remaining three identities.
This would help explaining the still mysterious fact that all ten cases are
enumerated by simple product formulas and would bring close to completion the
task of finding combinatorial proofs for all ten cases. Second, the proposer
continues his work on the three dimensional dimer problem by considering the
question of improving the lower bound, employing extensions to three dimensions
of the Gessel-Viennot and Kasteleyn theorems that yield signed enumerations. And
third, the proposer uses a generalization of his complementation theorem for
perfect matchings to classify the periodic weightings of the Aztec diamond that
lead to simple product enumeration formulas, thus giving a unified perspective
on several results of Elkies, Kuperberg, Larsen and Propp, B. Y. Yang, Stanley
and the proposer.

This research is in the general area of Combinatorics. One of the goals of
Combinatorics is to find efficient methods of studying how discrete collections
of objects can be arranged. The behavior of discrete systems is extremely
important to modern communications. For example, the design of large networks,
such as those occurring in telephone systems, and the design of algorithms in
computer science deal with discrete sets of objects, and this makes use of
combinatorial research. The specific problems in this project are instances of
the dimer model of statistical physics. A basic illustration of this is the
real-world process (relevant to the study of of lubricants) of adsorption of a
liquid, consisting of two-atom molecules --- the dimers in the model --- along
the surface of a crystal, whose fixed atoms form a lattice pattern, with any two
neighboring positions capable of holding one molecule, and any given crystal
atom being involved in the adsorption of at most one molecule. The main issue in
this setting is the asymptotic behavior of the quantities that are studied
(specifically, the number of different ways the surface of the crystal can be
covered by molecules), but it turns out in the present context that the usually
more difficult problem of determining quantities exactly allows progress in the
asymptotic study.