* 0100604
* Intersection Theory and Commutative Algebra
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2005
* Paul Roberts, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2005
* USD 113,994.00

Around forty years ago Serre proposed an algebraic definition of intersection
multiplicities which satisfied many of the properties required of such a
definition but left several unanswered questions. These problems concern, among
other things, whether the intersection multiplicities are always greater than or
equal to zero (nonnegativity) and precise conditions for them to vanish
(vanishing) or to be greater than zero (positivity). These problems have become
known as Serre's conjectures for intersection multiplicities. This proposal has
two parts. The first part is a continuation of research of the principal
investigator on the positivity conjecture that uses recent advances on the
resolution of singularities which have led to a solution of the nonnegativity
conjecture. This investigation will also study relations between these ideas and
other questions on multiplicities in commutative algebra. The second part
concerns modules of finite projective dimension over nonregular rings. It will
use a recent result of the principal investigator and V. Srinivas to study
intersection properties of modules of finite length and finite projective
dimension and extend these results to study the vanishing conjecture for two
modules of finite projective dimension.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal
the principal investigator studies some fundamental questions in the relations
between Algebra and Geometry. Geometric sets are often defined as sets of
solutions to polynomial equations. In studying the behaviour of these solutions,
one has to define multiplicities, which give the number of times a solution
should be counted. This concept generalizes the multiplicity of a root of a
polynomial, which is crucial to most applications of polynomials. The
investigation of these ideas has led to several fundamental questions in
Algebra. One of these questions is the problem of determining when these
multiplicities are positive. Another group of questions concerns modules of
finite projective dimension, which are modules which can be described by a
finite resolution; the finiteness of this description is used, for example, in
computer algebra for computing invariants. The principal investigator will study
properties of these modules and their relation to questions on multiplicities as
well as to other branches of Algebra.&lt;br/&gt;