* 0100826
* Formal Power Series and Algebraic Combinatorics: An International Combinatorics Conference
* MPS,DMS
* 04/01/2001,03/31/2002
* Helene Barcelo, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* B. Brent Gordon
* 03/31/2002
* USD 12,000.00

The investigator together with Arizona State University is hosting
the&lt;br/&gt;Thirteenth International conference titled Formal Power Series
and&lt;br/&gt;Algebraic Combinatorics (FPSAC'01). This continuing series
of&lt;br/&gt;conferences bring together researchers from various areas
of&lt;br/&gt;combinatorics and theoretical computer science and links them
with&lt;br/&gt;leading scientists from allied disciplines in pure mathematics,
applied&lt;br/&gt;mathematics and physics. The focus of the 2001 conference is
on&lt;br/&gt;algebraic and enumerative combinatorics, again with emphasis
on&lt;br/&gt;interdisciplinary links to allied
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Topics include: formal power series and enumeration
(e.g., enumerative&lt;br/&gt;problems in physics), algebra and enumeration
(e.g., combinatorial&lt;br/&gt;methods in representation theory, association
schemes), topological and&lt;br/&gt;geometric combinatorics (e.g., arrangements
of hyperplanes, Helly and&lt;br/&gt;Tverberg type theorems, oriented matroids),
probabilistic methods (e.g.,&lt;br/&gt;extensions and refinements of Rodl
method, randomized algorithms), poset&lt;br/&gt;and graph theory (e.g.,
correlation and sorting, combinatorial approaches&lt;br/&gt;to the algebraic
aspects of correlation), extremal combinatorics (e.g.,&lt;br/&gt;algebraic
methods used to determine structural properties of
extremal&lt;br/&gt;objects).&lt;br/&gt;