* 0100318
* GOALI:  Creation of Crystalline Surfaces for Short Wavelength Light Emitters
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2001,03/31/2006
* Henry Cantwell, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 03/31/2006
* USD 306,000.00

This university-industry collaborative research project seeks to advance the
capability for the manufacture of crystalline surfaces for use in short
wavelength light emitters (blue/UV LEDs and lasers) by contributing to a basic
understanding of the generation of defects resultant from the processing of ZnO
substrates, and the subsequent homoepitaxial growth of films. ZnO substrates
will be prepared by chemomechanical polishing and further pre-growth processing
techniques, after which homoepitaxial films will be grown on the substrates. The
defects generated at various stages of surface processing will be examined with
high energy backscattering spectrometry, ion channeling and scanning electrical
properties microscopy. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This understanding will aid in
identifying the processing conditions which show promise for producing ultra-
high quality epitaxial films on ZnO. Development of this understanding has the
potential to contributing to the successful demonstration of the homoepitaxial
growth of ZnO. This work will further contribute to the development of advanced
surface characterization tools which are needed for assessing near surface
damage at the nanometer scale. An extensive collaborative effort involving
Oklahoma State University, Eagle-Picher Technologies and Los Alamos National
Laboratory will be undertaken.&lt;br/&gt;