* 0100518
* Three-dimensional Study of Gravels
* ENG,CMMI
* 07/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Pedro Arduino, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 07/31/2004
* USD 105,200.00

Gravels and gravelly soils are engineering materials commonly used in many civil
engineering applications such as structural fills and pavement subgrades. The
geotechnical engineering community has long known that gravels have engineering
properties that are both similar and non-similar to sands. Sands have been
researched extensively, for both static and dynamic loading conditions, and
their behavior is comparatively well understood. In contrast, gravels have been
researched and tested to a much lesser extent due to the need for large specimen
sizes and physical difficulties of handling such specimens. Consequently, the
engineering properties of gravels have been commonly obtained by means of
correlations based on experimental tests on sands. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
addition, granular material behavior understanding is primarily based on
conventional triaxial tests where specimens are tested under axisymmetric
principal stress conditions. These particular stress conditions apply only for
special situations in engineering practice, such as soil lying directly below
and on the axis of a circular load. Often, conditions exist where none of the
principal stresses are equal. It is then necessary to take into consideration
the influence of the intermediate principal stress on the stress-strain and
strength characteristics of the material. During the last three decades, much
research has been conducted on the behavior of sands under multiaxial, or true,
states of stress. Cubical triaxial devices, that allow the intermediate
principal stress to vary from the minor to the major principal stress, have
facilitated research on the behavior of sands, clays, rock and concrete in
three-dimensional principal stress space. Missing from the literature is any
comprehensive study focusing on multiaxial testing of gravel-sized
particles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In an effort to address this gap in fundamental
understanding of gravelly soils, an extensive study of several gravels under
three-dimensional stress paths is proposed. Based on a systematic experimental
program using a flexible boundary true triaxial device, the three-dimensional
behavior of gravels will be ascertained. The effects of grain size, particle
shape, and fines content on the mechanical response of gravels will be
evaluated. The device boundary effects will be evaluated using new
instrumentation that will be developed as part of the project. A constitutive
model for gravels will be developed and calibrated from preliminary experimental
data and verified against further test results. The calibrated model may enable
successful numerical modeling and performance prediction of Civil Engineering
geotechnical structures and foundations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;