* 0101635
* ATE Regional Center for Nanofabrication Manufacturing Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/15/2001,12/31/2005
* Kathleen Harter, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 12/31/2005
* USD 2,724,449.00

An ATE Regional Center in Nanofabrication Manufacturing Education is being
established to meet the increased demand in Pennsylvania and nationally for
associate degree-level workers in the field of nanofabrication, including
semiconductor manufacturing. The ATE Regional Center is built upon a unique
educational consortium, the Pennsylvania Nanofabrication Manufacturing
Technology (NMT) Partnership, and the ATE Regional Center will capitalize on
Penn State's state-of-the-art Nanofabrication Facility.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
NMT Partnership involves Penn State, Pennsylvania industry, Pennsylvania
community colleges, and public school districts throughout the state. Key to the
NMT Partnership is the Penn State Nanofabrication Facility, a $23 million
investment in class 10 cleanrooms and equipment, and its engineering staff. This
Facility is part of NSF's National Nanofabrication Users Network (NNUN). It is
shared among Pennsylvania community colleges and secondary schools and with
Pennsylvania industry through the Partnership. Initial funding from the
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania for the Partnership has supported facility
expansion and has supported resident instruction at the Facility for a small
number of students, allowing community colleges across Pennsylvania to offer NMT
degrees and certificates. It has also supported NMT workshops for community
college and secondary school educators, "chip camps" for secondary school
students, and assistance for Pennsylvania industry in nanotechnology
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ATE Regional Center is being built on the
current NMT program in order to strengthen and institutionalize collaboration
among all 15 Pennsylvania community colleges, the 14 comprehensive universities
comprising the Pennsylvania State System of Higher Education (PSSHE), secondary
schools (including vocational-technical schools), private industry, and the Penn
State Nanofabrication Facility. New activities address &lt;br/&gt;(1) continued
improvement and expanded delivery of resident instruction in NMT at the
Facility,&lt;br/&gt;(2) creating curricula and strengthening NMT capacity at
Pennsylvania's 15 community colleges, &lt;br/&gt;(3) strengthening NMT capacity
at PSSHE institutions, &lt;br/&gt;(4) strengthening professional development of
secondary and post-secondary educators and industry personnel in
NMT,&lt;br/&gt;(5) promoting awareness among secondary and post-secondary school
students and educators of NMT career opportunities, and &lt;br/&gt;(6) promoting
increased participation in NMT educational programs by underrepresented
groups.&lt;br/&gt;