* 0101016
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Embeddedness, Relationships, and Geographies of Global Banking: Japanese City Banks in Global Syndicated Credit Markets
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2001,08/31/2002
* Eric Sheppard, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2002
* USD 6,350.00

Deregulation and globalization of financial markets and the introduction of new
information technologies in the financial industry have had profound impacts on
the banking industry. This doctoral dissertation research project will examine
the extent to which these challenges are affecting the globalization of Japanese
banks in syndicated credit markets. Specifically, the project will investigate
whether Japanese banking is becoming more similar to European and U.S. banking
in the face of similar global pressures or whether Japanese banks remain
distinctive because of the Japanese political and economic context in which they
are embedded as well as the competitive pressures from the existing banking
structure, especially networks among non-Japanese global banks. The research
will examine the globalization of Japanese banks as the outcome of changes in
the Japanese financial markets, the existing structures of the global financial
markets, and the networks strategies of Japanese banks embedded in the other two
forces. Using the DealScan database, the student will compare the behaviors of
six Japanese city banks and those of eight banks from U.S. and Europe with
respect to the overall lending practices and performance and the geography of
financial intermediation (the international networks of investors and borrowers
in which they participate). The student will examine the domestic and the global
context in which Japanese banks have evolved since the mid-1980s. Second, using
the league tables in DealScan, the student will identify the major players and
the country shares in the global syndicated credit markets. The student then
will create Arranger-Participant matrices and Arranger-Borrower matrices of
individual banks and statistically measure the extent to which the international
networking behavior of Japanese banks differs from those of non-Japanese global
banks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geographers have not explored the possibility of
quantitative and empirical research on the behavior of global financial
institutions due to lack of geo-referenced data sources. Through the use of the
DealScan database, this project will demonstrate elements of the geography of
international portfolio lending by banks of different nationalities, an aspect
of international investment that rarely is documented. The study will also
illustrate the importance of geography in understanding financial networks by
showing how the different status of financial institutions in various markets
has been considered in network creation. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
student to establish a strong independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;