* 0101543
* Problems in Equivariant Algebraic Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 10/15/2001,09/30/2004
* William Graham, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Tie Luo
* 09/30/2004
* USD 64,117.00

The purpose of this project is to use equivariant methods to
study&lt;br/&gt;problems concerning algebraic varieties with group actions.
Part&lt;br/&gt;of this project involves moment graphs of varieties with
torus&lt;br/&gt;actions. For a variety on which a torus acts with finitely
many&lt;br/&gt;fixed points and curves, one can define a combinatorial
object&lt;br/&gt;called a moment graph. There has been much recent progress
in&lt;br/&gt;computing topological invariants, such as cohomology
or&lt;br/&gt;intersection homology, in terms of the moment graph.
The&lt;br/&gt;investigator proposes to extend this to K-theory.
Schubert&lt;br/&gt;varieties are among the most important varieties with this
type of&lt;br/&gt;torus action; the investigator plans to continue work with
Brian&lt;br/&gt;Boe on a conjecture that would simplify determining if a point
in&lt;br/&gt;a Schubert variety is rationally smooth. Moreover, he plans
to&lt;br/&gt;extend some facts known only for Schubert varieties to the
more&lt;br/&gt;general setting of varieties with this type of torus action.
In&lt;br/&gt;addition, the investigator plans to use equivariant methods
to&lt;br/&gt;study certain interesting varieties: he plans to
calculate&lt;br/&gt;Chern-Schwartz-MacPherson classes of degeneracy loci, and
to&lt;br/&gt;calculate interesting invariants (degrees, push-forward
measures)&lt;br/&gt;of nilpotent adjoint orbits of reductive Lie
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is in the area of mathematics referred
to as&lt;br/&gt;"algebraic geometry." Algebraic geometry studies
geometric&lt;br/&gt;objects by describing them as solutions to polynomial
equations&lt;br/&gt;-- such objects are called "algebraic varieties."
Fortunately,&lt;br/&gt;although algebraic varieties can be very complicated,
many of&lt;br/&gt;them have a great deal of symmetry. Mathematicians have
been&lt;br/&gt;intensely investigating such varieties with extra symmetry
for&lt;br/&gt;several reasons: The presence of such extra symmetry
makes&lt;br/&gt;these varieties easier to study, so that these varieties
are&lt;br/&gt;valuable test cases in developing methods to investigate
all&lt;br/&gt;varieties. Moreover, varieties with extra symmetry are of
great&lt;br/&gt;interest in their own right: they play important roles
in&lt;br/&gt;various areas of mathematics, including number
theory,&lt;br/&gt;combinatorics, and representation theory. There has
been&lt;br/&gt;considerable recent progress in developing techniques
to&lt;br/&gt;understand these kinds of varieties; this project is
about&lt;br/&gt;extending these techniques, and using them to study
particular&lt;br/&gt;classes of varieties.