* 0101415
* Technological Education Initiative
* EDU,DUE
* 04/15/2001,09/30/2006
* Fred Emshousen, Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology Inc (ABET)
* Continuing Grant
* Virginia Carter
* 09/30/2006
* USD 856,431.00

The Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology (ABET), partnering with
several ATE Centers of Excellence, is conducting a series of hands-on regional
faculty workshops to bring together technology program faculty to enhance their
knowledge of "emerging technologies," explore ways in which these technologies
may be incorporated in programs, and provide faculty with experience in
developing effective assessment strategies that measure the impact of curricular
innovation on the performance of their graduates. These workshops are providing
tools for the development of programs that are innovative, relevant to emerging
technologies, and attractive to students; thus, preparing graduates of
technology programs to enter their careers with greater mobility and
transitional capabilities. These workshops are also enhancing the faculty's
technical professional development and providing them with a sound basis for
assessing the quality of their curricular innovations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Part
I of the workshops is an exploration of emerging technology relevant to the
future of technology graduates conducted by industry partners. Part II consists
of sessions on developing educational programs based on continuous quality
improvement methodology and outcomes based assessment. The workshops are being
facilitated by engineering professionals experienced in implementing ABET's
outcomes-based criteria -- Engineering Criteria 2000, consultants with expertise
in assisting schools with assessment planning, industry representatives current
in their company's continuous quality improvement efforts, key representatives
for the NSF Advanced Technological Education (ATE) Centers, and members of
ABET's Technology Accreditation Commission (TAC). Facilitators are motivating
faculty to analyze different university and college missions and to develop
programmatic objectives in light of those missions; determine specific outcomes
to achieve those objectives; discuss ways to achieve those outcomes (such as
curricular innovation) and decide how to measure the success of the actions
taken. The workshops are producing case studies and examples highlighting
different university and college missions and program objectives which can be
used by faculty to develop program specific assessment plans to determine
success of their curriculum reform and program innovation. Key features (and
strengths) of this initiative are the active support and participation of
industry and ATE Centers. This assures that the workshops address the most
important issues facing industry and academia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshops are being conducted over a three-year period at geographically
dispersed locations chosen to provide ease of access to the nation's technology
faculty. The workshops are open to faculty members from both non-accredited and
ABET accredited technology programs. While offering tools for program
innovation, these workshops also provide faculty the opportunity to enhance
their own technical knowledge, thereby enriching their educational programs.
Additionally, faculty benefit from networking with faculty from other
institutions and programs to share best practices in curriculum improvement and
techniques of incorporating new technologies in their programs.&lt;br/&gt;