* 0101247
* CISE Research Infrastructure:  CISE Pervasive Computing:  Applications and Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2007
* Kai Li, Princeton University
* Continuing Grant
* Joseph Urban
* 08/31/2007
* USD 1,710,288.00

EIA-0101247&lt;br/&gt;David P. Dobkin&lt;br/&gt;Princeton
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CISE Research Infrastructure: CISE Pervasive
Computing: Applications and Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We are entering a new
era in computing, the era of ubiquitous computing. In this world, our
classrooms, labs, offices, and homes will be filled with a diverse collection of
sensor, display and computing devices. Ubiquitous and pervasive displays will
revolutionize the way we use computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In such an
environment, the conventional view of the network as providing bit-pipes between
clients and servers will no longer be appropriate. Many of the devices available
in the environment will have limited computational capabilities and be connected
by limited-capacity networks. So, we need an intelligent network that will be
implemented by a collection of servers and programmable routers that overlay the
physical network substrate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The award is to build a
research infrastructure consisting of three components. At the "edge" of the
system, will be a variety of display technologies and sensors. At the "core'' of
the system, will be an intelligent network using commodity PCs and emerging
network processors. Underlying everything will be commodity wired and
wireless&lt;br/&gt;networks to provide connectivity among the edge devices and
nodes in the intelligent network. This network will augment the CS Department's
current network, which already includes both wired and wireless
components.&lt;br/&gt;