* 0101857
* The Upper Midwest LEADERS-in-Math Project Preparing Leaders for Education and Professional Development in the Effort to Renew School Mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2006
* Eric Hart, University of Iowa
* Continuing Grant
* Paola Sztajn
* 08/31/2006
* USD 1,446,951.00

Submitted under the guidelines for Teacher Retention and Renewal, this 49-month
project is "designed to develop a cadre of teachers, leaders, supervisors and
collegiate mathematics educators who will act as change agents responsible for
implementing standards-based high school mathematics reform" [project summary].
More specifically, the project provides (a) comprehensive professional
development for 256 high school teachers in Iowa, Minnesota and Wisconsin so
they can effectively implement national goals for standards-based mathematics
education through implementation of the Core-Plus instructional materials in
their classrooms; (b) leadership development for 16 master teachers who are
experienced with Core-Plus; (c) leadership development, structured workshop and
classroom observation, and preservice or inservice leadership experience for
eight college professors and eight school mathematics curriculum supervisors;
and (d) experiences for participants to work with all stakeholders, such as
parents and administrators, on behalf of standards-based renewal of school
mathematics education. The project's teacher-participants engage in professional
development in two cadres, each for two years, for at least six weeks over the
life of the project; university/college professors and school mathematics
supervisors participate for approximately four weeks.