* 0101616
* Disturbance Response of Old Growth Bryophytes: A Dual Approach
* BIO,DEB
* 12/01/2000,11/30/2001
* Robin Kimmerer, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Lyons
* 11/30/2001
* USD 60,000.00

0101616&lt;br/&gt;Kimmerer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project supports sabbatical
activities to initiate a new research direction and strengthen future research
capability for Dr. Kimmerer. This project on the bryophytes of the Pacific
Northwest complements and extends her expertise on Eastern mosses. These studies
will 1) provide information to advance understanding of the reproductive ecology
of common and rare bryophytes in coastal forests, 2) provide a framework for
further studies of the population biology of epiphytic moss communities, and 3)
have direct application to conservation in old growth
forests.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Western scientific knowledge of bryophytes in the
Pacific Northwest is largely taxonomic in nature, with little data on population
ecology or on moss response to anthropogenic disturbance. Until the harvest of
bryophytes for floriculture began 20 years ago, bryophytes were not considered
an exploitable resource and received little scientific attention. The reverse is
true among the traditional native peoples of the region, for whom bryophytes
have long been part of the indigenous subsistence economy. Both the history of
intensive indigenous use, as well as cultural traditions that encourage close
attention to biotic communities, suggest that there may be a significant body of
traditional indigenous knowledge concerning bryophytes. Therefore, in parallel
to the scientific investigations, I plan to evaluate the extent of traditional
ecological knowledge (TEK) concerning bryophyte response to a specific type of
habitat alteration/disturbance, i.e., moss harvesting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
use of dual approaches of TEK and scientific tools is largely unknown in the
academic community and support from the NSF-MCAA to explore feasibility is
critical to development of this dualistic approach. I will use a full-year
sabbatical leave to undertake field, laboratory and ethnographic research in
collabroation with Dr. Bruce McCune and colleagues in Oregon State University
(OSU)'s Department of Botany and Plant Pathology. OSU is also home to the
Northwest Traditional Ecological Knowledge Institute, directed by Dr. Judith
Vergun, who works extensively in ecological restoration with Native American
tribes in the region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research involves three
complementary scientific and TEK approaches to questions of moss conservation
biology and the potential for sustainable use:&lt;br/&gt;1) Quantitative
description of reproductive life histories of mosses designated as "survey and
manage" species, versus attributes of a control group of ubiquitous species from
similar habitats.&lt;br/&gt;2) Field and experimental assessments of dispersal
and establishment success of "survey and manage" species subject to
exploitation, versus success of the ubiquitous epiphytic species.&lt;br/&gt;3)
Exploration of TEK levels held by local indigenous people that might be specific
to the habitat requirements and post-harvest disturbance response of old-growth
forest mosses and might offer insights into species biology and
conservation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;