* 0101598
* Maryland Regional Consortium for E-Commerce Curriculum and Workforce Development
* EHR,DUE
* 05/15/2001,04/30/2005
* Anne Comins, Community College of Baltimore County, Essex
* Standard Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 04/30/2005
* USD 656,466.00

The Community College of Baltimore County (CCBC), the largest provider of IT
training in Maryland, is collaborating with other organizations to implement an
associate degree program in e-commerce and two related certificate programs for
"Building E-Commerce Solutions for Organizations" and "Managing E-Commerce
Enterprises." Partners include the Maryland State Department of Education, the
University of Baltimore's Department of Business and Economic Development, the
University of Maryland University College, the Maryland Community College
Teleconsortium, the Baltimore County Career and Technology Education Division,
the Next Generation Internet Company, Paragon Computer Services, Circadian
Management Corporation, Delata Graphics and Communications, Vansant Creations,
and the Maryland Online Network. The project builds on course work developed
under NSF Award No. 9950056, "Internet and Multimedia Technology (I/MMT):
Curriculum, Faculty, and Workforce Development," and also builds on the IT skill
standards developed by the NorthWest Center for Emerging Technologies, an ATE
Center of Excellence.

An important part of this project is the development and validation of skill
standards needed to define the specific skill sets, performance indicators,
employability skills, and technical knowledge required of technician-level
workers in e-commerce in the region. The resulting degree and certificate
programs aim to prepare students for entry-level employment, provide
opportunities for workers to upgrade and acquire technical skills, and prepare
students for further education in articulated four-year programs. Students in
the new programs have access to two delivery options for their courses: the
Internet and the classroom. Project faculty are obtaining professional
development through graduate studies and internships. Workshops are upgrading
K-12 teachers' skills. An annual professional development conference brings
together K-12 and college faculty and industry representatives to address
ongoing changes in the field. Finally, the project is employing an Internet-
supported process to survey business leaders in e-commerce, in order to access
business expertise, maintain the currency of the skill standards information,
and regularly update the curriculum. Business and educational partners are
supporting the program as advisory board members, in program development, and
for internships and cooperative education opportunities for faculty and
students.