* 0101568
* Building for Tomorrow
* EHR,DUE
* 05/01/2001,04/30/2006
* Jack Waintraub, Middlesex County College
* Continuing Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 04/30/2006
* USD 648,000.00

The Building for Tomorrow project is bringing together teachers from 35 urban
high schools for participation in structured professional development workshops
that are equipping them to attract underrepresented high school students into
science, mathematics, engineering, and technology (SMET) fields. The medium for
this is participation in the FIRST (For Inspiration and Recognition of Science
and Technology) Robotics Competition and other national SMET competitions. With
participation in these competitions, students are increasing their interest in
SMET careers, and this interest is translating into increased enrollment and
success in related high school courses and in SMET majors at postsecondary
institutions.

The collaborating institutions (Middlesex Community College, St. Louis Community
College, and San Diego City College) are conducting a series of summer
institutes to train teams of practicing high school teachers and preservice
teachers from urban districts so they may guide their students through these
tournaments. The institutes also assist the teams to establish partnerships with
corporations and academic institutions to support the participation of their
high schools in SMET competitions.

FIRST is sponsoring an annual robotics competition that partners teams of high
school students with engineers from businesses and universities and introduces
the students to the excitement of engineering. In a six-week program, each team
is brainstorming, designing, constructing, and testing a champion robot for the
tournament. Through these activities, students are discovering the connection
between classroom lessons and real world applications. Annually, teams from
about 400 schools are participating in FIRST regional and national competitions.

The strategic goals of Building for Tomorrow are to: 1. Cultivate and direct
student enthusiasm, generated by participation in national and local SMET-
related competitions, towards effective learning. 2. Capitalize on students
desire to succeed in SMET competitions to expand their knowledge of and interest
in SMET disciplines and SMET careers in industry and education through
transmission of real-time competition-related information ( e.g., how to design,
engineer, problem solve, construct, communicate ideas, and work in teams.) 3.
Increase SMET high school teacher knowledge of and ability to apply effective
team building, project management, effective communication, creative problem-
solving, time management, and conflict resolution.

