* 0101636
* Diophantine Equations and Algebraic Points on Curves
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Dino Lorenzini, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 07/31/2004
* USD 56,748.00

The investigator studies diophantine properties of points on curves and related
questions involving solutions to diophantine equations. A diophantine equation
is simply a polynomial equation with integer coefficients. One is generally
interested in solutions to these equations that are rational numbers or
integers. The investigator uses the p-adic method Chabauty-Coleman to study the
number of solutions to Thue equations, which are equations of the form F(x,y) =
m, where m is an integer and F is a homogeneous polynomial with integer
coefficients and without repeated roots. The investigator has shown that the
number of integer solutions (x,y), with x and y coprime, can be bounded in terms
of the degree of F under certain hypotheses and is now working on weakening
these hypotheses, sharpening his bounds, and extending his methods to attack
other similar problems. The investigator also looks at various questions related
to Vojta's conjecture for algebraic points on curves, which implies a variety of
important results in diophantine number theory, most notably the abc conjecture.
In addition, he uses techniques from arithmetic geometry to study class groups
of quadratic fields, consequences of the abc conjecture, and curves over finite
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator studies problems having to do with
whole number and rational solutions to polynomial equations in two or more
variables. Such problems are among the oldest in the branch of mathematics known
as number theory. Indeed, they derive their name "diophantine equations" from
Diophantus of Alexandria, a Greek mathematician who lived in the 2nd century BC.
Over the past few years, mathematicians have succeeded at completely solving
many diophantine equations that were first examined hundreds of years ago:
Andrew Wiles solved the famed Fermat equation (which has the form "x to the nth
power plus y to the nth power equals z to the nth power", where x,y, and z are
positive whole numbers and n is a whole number greater than or equal to 3) that
was initially studied by French mathematician Pierre Fermat in the 1600's, and
others have solved problems posed by Diophantus himself. Contemporary
investigations of diophantine equations have given rise to a host of new
questions and conjectures; for example, it has been conjectured that the number
of solutions in rational numbers to a polynomial equation in two variables
depends only on the degree of the equation. Number theory has proven to be of
more than historical and theoretical interest in recent years. It provided the
theoretical ideas that led to the development of error-correcting codes employed
by compact disc players and has found applications in the areas of cryptography
and data encryption, which are important both for national security and for
e-commerce.&lt;br/&gt;