* 0101802
* Simulation, Optimization, and Analysis of High Dimensional Higher Index DAEs
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2005
* Stephen Campbell, North Carolina State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2005
* USD 139,000.00

Optimization is used in everything from the control of spacecraft to optimizing
chemical processes. Optimization usually takes place in the presence of equality
and inequality constraints. Differential algebraic equations (DAEs) are implicit
systems of differential equations. Usually it is also assumed that the Jacobian
with respect to the highest derivative is singular. An integer quantity called
the index is one measure of how different a DAE is from being an explicit
ordinary differential equation. Many problems are most naturally initially
modeled as a DAE particularly those that are analyzed and simulated using
computer generated mathematical models. DAEs occur in optimization because the
original problem is a DAE, because of the activation of constraints, and when
partial differential equations are numerically solved using the method of lines.
Many problems also involve delays either because delays are inherently present
in the process or because of delays in control or feedback loops. Direct
transcription methods are a popular approach for the solution of optimal control
problems. Recently it has been shown that the usual theory of DAE integrators
needs to be substantially modified when DAEs occur during the numerical solution
by direct transcription methods of inequality constrained optimal control
problems. The primary focus of this proposal is the numerical solution of
inequality constrained optimal control problems including those with delays
using direct transcription methods. Theory will be developed, the theory will be
applied to numerical algorithms and their implementation in production codes,
and the algorithms will be applied to a number of applications. The interaction
between optimization, delays, direct transcription, numerical discretizations,
and state inequality and equality constraints is far from fully understood. This
proposal will carefully examine this interaction. In addition, more general DAE
simulation algorithms will be developed.

Designing controls and process behavior which are optimal in some sense is
fundamental to designing efficient and effective processes. The optimization can
include minimizing energy consumption, producing a part in minimum time,
maximizing part quality or maximizing product production. In general, the
availability of robust DAE simulation, analysis, and optimization software will
result in more accurate models and predictions of performance, which in turn
translates to more efficient processes and their more efficient operation
resulting in better performance. The particular theoretical and computational
questions to be examined are motivated by, and will be applied to, applications
arising at the Boeing Corporation. The specific applications each of which may
have delays, are real time control, chemical processes, and aerospace vehicles.
However, the results will be publicly distributed and will find use in a variety
of software packages and in a number of similar applications that affect a wide
range of industries. High performance and efficient use of complex processes is
a basic need in modern engineering and science. The training of young scientists
in the areas of this project and the establishment of both industrial and
international aspects to their research will be a significant contribution of
this research project for years to come.