* 0101339
* FRG: Collaborative Research-Computational Conformal Mapping and Scientific Visualization
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2004
* David Rottenberg, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 08/31/2004
* USD 170,000.00

This Focused Research Group is composed of pure&lt;br/&gt;mathematicians,
computational mathematicians, and&lt;br/&gt;neuroscientists. They develop
implementations of discrete&lt;br/&gt;conformal mapping for multidisciplinary
use, both within&lt;br/&gt;mathematics itself where complex analysis is being
reinvigorated&lt;br/&gt;by new discrete techniques, and in the larger scientific
context&lt;br/&gt;with visualization and analysis of scientific data. The
Riemann&lt;br/&gt;Mapping Theorem guarantees unique conformal maps between any
pair&lt;br/&gt;of conformal 2-discs (or conformal 2-spheres); the
conformal&lt;br/&gt;geometry preserved by such maps carries valuable
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;structure. Such surfaces arise naturally in many
scientific&lt;br/&gt;contexts as piecewise flat (from data) or smoothly embedded
(from&lt;br/&gt;theory) surfaces in 3-space. Recently the new
computational&lt;br/&gt;technique of circle packing has allowed
computational&lt;br/&gt;approximations to these conformal maps. Implementing
such&lt;br/&gt;approximations for large scientific datasets faces
both&lt;br/&gt;theoretical and computational challenges. The investigator
and&lt;br/&gt;his colleagues work on three related topics:
theoretical&lt;br/&gt;superstructure of the circle packing technique, refinement
and&lt;br/&gt;parallelization of the circle packing algorithm for use on
large&lt;br/&gt;datasets, and the application of these conformal maps
to&lt;br/&gt;visualization and analysis of scientific data. The
main&lt;br/&gt;application focuses on conformal flattening of human
brain&lt;br/&gt;cortical surfaces. The investigators use uniqueness of
conformal&lt;br/&gt;maps to install surface-based coordinate systems on
these&lt;br/&gt;surfaces; these coordinate systems allow localization
of&lt;br/&gt;activation foci in Positron Emission Tomography (PET)
and&lt;br/&gt;functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) brain
scans.&lt;br/&gt;Conformal flattening has wider applicability as a
visualization&lt;br/&gt;and graph embedding technique, and these connections
inform the&lt;br/&gt;research.&lt;br/&gt; This Focused Research Group develops
algorithms to bring a&lt;br/&gt;classical mathematics theorem (the Riemann
Mapping Theorem, 1854)&lt;br/&gt;to bear on problems of visualization of data.
The Riemann Mapping&lt;br/&gt;Theorem guarantees the existence of unique
conformal&lt;br/&gt;(angle-preserving) maps between surfaces, but does say how
to&lt;br/&gt;compute these maps. Modern computers and new algorithms
have&lt;br/&gt;changed all that, because our new computational ability
can&lt;br/&gt;breathe life into classical existence theorems of
mathematics,&lt;br/&gt;turning theory into computational tools. This project
develops&lt;br/&gt;algorithms to implement the computation of conformal maps
on&lt;br/&gt;complex spatial surfaces. The main application is the
flat&lt;br/&gt;mapping of human brain cortical surfaces. The brain surface
is&lt;br/&gt;highly convoluted and folded in space, and most of the
brain&lt;br/&gt;surface is folded up and hidden from view. If one flattens
the&lt;br/&gt;surface, one can simultaneously see down into all the folds.
The&lt;br/&gt;mathematically unique conformal maps produced by the
algorithms&lt;br/&gt;allow surface-based coordinate systems to be computed on
the&lt;br/&gt;brain surface so that surface positions can be
precisely&lt;br/&gt;determined. Moreover, if one puts foci of functional
activation&lt;br/&gt;onto the flattened surface, one can then visualize and
measure&lt;br/&gt;the relationship between brain function and brain anatomy.
These&lt;br/&gt;new surface-mapping techniques and their application to the
brain&lt;br/&gt;surface permit biomedical researchers and clinicians to
rapidly&lt;br/&gt;and accurately map and compare the locations of physiological
and&lt;br/&gt;pathological "events" in the brains of research subjects and
of&lt;br/&gt;patients with a variety of neurological and
psychiatric&lt;br/&gt;disorders. The project is supported by the
Computational&lt;br/&gt;Mathematics, Applied Mathematics, and Geometric Analysis
programs&lt;br/&gt;and the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities in MPS and by
the&lt;br/&gt;Computational Neuroscience program in BIO.&lt;br/&gt;