* 0101059
* GOALI:  Collaborative Research:  RF Technology for Magnetic Resonance Imaging
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2006
* Steven Wright, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 07/31/2006
* USD 260,175.00

0101059&lt;br/&gt;Wright&lt;br/&gt;This Industry/University Collaborative
project, a component of the Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with
Industry (GOALI) initiative, involves faculty and students at Texas A&amp;M
University (TAMU) and the University of Illinois Chicago (UIC) teamed with
practicing engineers at General Electric Medical Systems (GEMS) as participants
in a new research/educational program combining Ph.D. research in RF technology
with industrial experience in state-of-the-art Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI)
systems. The activity is to support development of innovative, collaborative
industry-university research and educational programs. Support will be provided
for eight Ph.D. students (four at TAMU [this project] and four at UIC [award
0101029]), who will be co-advised by university faculty and industrial
scientist/engineers. These students will spend one semester or summer each year
doing research at GEMS. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While in residence at GEMS in the
Applied Sciences Laboratory, the students will have access to advanced MRI
system design and testing equipment and work under the supervision of the
industrial Co-Principal investigators, who also will serve as members of the
student's Ph.D. advisory committees. Additionally, six senior GEMS
engineers/scientists will participate in this project as mentors for the
students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is expected to establish a new
model for industry/university collaborative research and education programs at
the Ph.D. level in MRI engineering. &lt;br/&gt;