* 0101738
* Theoretical Particle Physics, Astrophysics, and Cosmology
* MPS,PHY
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Glennys Farrar, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Simon P. Rosen
* 08/31/2005
* USD 702,000.00

The research supported under this proposal touches
cosmology,&lt;br/&gt;observational astronomy, aspects of particle physics,
plasma physics,&lt;br/&gt;high energy astrophysics, black holes and
computational physics.&lt;br/&gt;Techniques will be developed to best exploit
future high precision data&lt;br/&gt;on the cosmic microwave background
radiation and irregularities in the&lt;br/&gt;distribution of galaxies. The
evolution of galaxies and some aspects of&lt;br/&gt;gamma ray bursts will be
studied using the Sloan Digital Sky Survey and&lt;br/&gt;Keck telescopes.
Theoretical work will attempt to elucidate the&lt;br/&gt;properties and
distribution of dark matter, the origin of the excess of&lt;br/&gt;matter over
antimatter in the Universe, the underlying physics of&lt;br/&gt;gamma ray
bursts, the source of the highest energy cosmic rays, the&lt;br/&gt;process by
which large black holes form and accrete matter, and&lt;br/&gt;selected issues
in particle physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work will help pin down the
fundamental cosmological parameters such&lt;br/&gt;as Einstein's cosmological
constant, the curvature of the&lt;br/&gt;universe, and the matter content of the
universe. Conditions in the&lt;br/&gt;Universe in the instant after the Big Bang
will be inferred. The&lt;br/&gt;mechanism by which the Big Bang developed and
then ended will be&lt;br/&gt;elucidated and the "Inflationary Scenario" will be
tested. Novel&lt;br/&gt;properties of space-time, such as extra dimensions or
intrinsically&lt;br/&gt;quantum mechanical dimensions whose distances cannot be
described by&lt;br/&gt;ordinary numbers, are inherent in string theory; it is an
important&lt;br/&gt;challenge to find ways to discover these hidden features of
the&lt;br/&gt;Universe, if they are there. Identifying and measuring the dark
matter&lt;br/&gt;and dark energy, and answering the questions above, are
prerequisites to&lt;br/&gt;deducing the fundamental theory of nature and to
understanding why the&lt;br/&gt;Universe is hospitable to life at this or any
epoch in its history.&lt;br/&gt;