* 0101433
* Introductory College Physics/Twenty-First Century (ICP/21)
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2006
* Alexander Dickison, Seminole State College of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 07/31/2006
* USD 298,700.00

The ICP/21 project provides an innovative curriculum in introductory physics,
offering an attractive, student-centered alternative to the standard
lecture/laboratory format using conventional textbooks. For the two-semester
course, 10 content modules and a supplemental skills toolkit have been
developed. Each module consists of activities designed to encourage active
student engagement using the following models: inquiry and experimentation
activities (Explorations), reinforcement exercises (Dialogs), expanding-the-
concept activities (Extensions), assessments (Ranking Tasks), and Application (
which require groups of students to solve engineering problems involving several
physics concepts). This project is: (1) conducting a full-scale field test (2)
developing three additional modules needed to meet the needs of many technology
programs, and (3) implementing a dissemination plan with a commercial publisher.
The full scale field test of ICP/21 involves participants from the high school,
two year college and four year college teaching communities. An external
coordinator is responsible for all aspects of the field test. The results of the
field test are used to improve and strengthen the ICP/21 modules. The test also
gives data and information related to the success of module implementation in
the classroom, and the impact it has on the students in understanding the
concepts of physics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the first phase of the ICP/21
project, physics teachers have repeatedly asked for additional modules in
physics areas not covered in the original 10 modules. As a result of this input,
three new modules are being developed: electrostatics, fluids, and physical
optics. The third component of the project is to conduct a major dissemination
program for ICP/21. This is being done in conjunction with a commercial
publisher, Ztek. Ztek is a publisher that specializes in electronic media for
physics and physical science. Because of the innovative nature of the ICP/21
material, most instructors will need training or assistance in using it in the
classroom. The role of the instructor is much different when using the ICP/21
material properly than when in a traditional classroom lecture format. During
the field testing and initial implementation this will be done through
workshops. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Evaluations are being done by an independent
evaluator, who has been the evaluator during the first phase. The evaluation is
concentrating on three areas. The first is to monitor the modules and make sure
they fulfill what was promised in the first phase of the project. The second is
to evaluate the efforts of this phase, and determine its effectiveness for
student learning. The third area will be to evaluate the effect of ICP/21 on
students' attitudes and feelings about physics. This information will complement
the field test results to give a complete picture of the effect of ICP/21 on
student learning.&lt;br/&gt;