* 0101711
* Learner Connections in Biotechnology: Virtual Bioprocess
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Kenneth Bryden, Indian Hills Community College
* Standard Grant
* Daniel Udovic
* 06/30/2005
* USD 580,483.00

&lt;br/&gt;This project is developing a fully interactive three-dimensional
model of the fermentation process. The virtual reality biochemical processing
plant has three levels of immersion and is targeted to run on a standard
personal computer. This model places special emphasis on bioprocess technology
workplace preparedness. Indian Hills and its partners - Iowa State University,
Iowa BioDevelopment, Southeastern Iowa Accelerated Career Education
Biotechnology Consortium, Bio-Link, Madison Area Technical College, Pennsylvania
College of Technology, Iowa Equity Resource Center, and Iowa Department of
Education are developing and disseminating best practices in biotechnology
education and the use of virtual reality for instruction in complex technical
fields. The virtual reality bioprocessing plant provides students with an
unprecedented opportunity to "see" how a bioprocessor works from the inside out.
In addition, the virtual plant accurately models the controls and response of
the real plant so that students can explore cause and effect relationships
without costly plant shut-downs or product loss. Prior to this project, only in-
plant training was available to technicians entering this field, yet in-plant
training is expensive and the student cannot fully examine hazardous, non-
profitable or transient conditions. In contrast, 3-D modeling and synthetic
environment technology offers an inexpensive and flexible first step to training
new operators on the biochemical processing system. Students in the Indian Hills
Associate in Applied Science Degree program in Bioprocess Technology are
benefiting directly from the virtual reality bioprocessor experience which is
integrated into a number of courses. In addition, this technology is being
utilized in a variety of settings ranging from high school to university as the
technology has applications to a number of fields including biochemistry,
engineering, biophysics, microbiology, and computer science. Students utilizing
the virtual reality bioprocessor, whether in the personal computer format or in
full immersion environment with pincher gloves and goggles, are able to
visualize and test the information that is presented, internalizing the lesson.
This technology fills a major gap in the academic preparation, in-service
training, and continuing education of technicians in the biotechnology
industry.&lt;br/&gt;