* 0101268
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: High-Resolution Time Series of Eastern Sierra California Climate Over the Late Quaternary
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2001,03/31/2003
* Glen MacDonald, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Thomas J. Baerwald
* 03/31/2003
* USD 9,400.00

Understanding the severity of past drought events and assessing the linkages of
these events to conditions in the eastern Pacific is essential for long-term
water resource planning in California and adjacent portions of the southwestern
United States. This doctoral dissertation research project will use the remains
of aquatic organisms, specifically midge fly larvae, preserved within the
sediments of small, climatically sensitive Sierran lakes to reconstruct a high-
resolution record of paleotemperature and paleohydrology for California during
the late-Quaternary (past 13,000 years). This research is an expansion of an
earlier NSF-supported project that assessed how present-day differences in air
temperature and precipitation, lake water temperature, salinity, depth, and
surrounding vegetation are reflected in the modern elemental chemistry and
oxygen isotopic composition of lake waters, and the chironomids (midge flies),
cladocera (crustaceans), diatoms (unicellular algae), pollen, and stomates found
in Sierran lake sediments. Previous work had determined that the modern
distribution of midges in Sierran lakes is controlled by summer surface lake-
water temperature, lake depth, elevation, and iron. The relationship between
midge fly distributions and surface lake-water temperature also have been
characterized through the development of a transfer function (mathematical
formulae that express the value of a specific environmental variable as a
function of plant or animal species composition data). This dissertation
research project will apply the new transfer function to the fossil midge
assemblages contained within late-Quaternary lake sediment cores, thereby
enabling a high-resolution reconstruction of paleotemperature for California
during the late-Quaternary.

Earlier paleoenvironmental research in the Sierra Nevada indicates that drought
events of greater severity than those experienced during the instrumental period
(past 100 years) have occurred in eastern California during the late-Holocene
(last 3,000 years). Because of the fragmentary nature of the existing
paleoenvironmental records, however, understandings of earlier drought periods
is limited. This research project will provide a high-resolution record of the
inherent variability of eastern California climate during the past 13,000 years.
More specifically, this project will use the remains of midge fly larvae
preserved in Sierran lake sediments to provide a sensitive and detailed history
of the climatic changes that occurred in the eastern Sierra Nevada, California
over the last 13,000 years. The results of this work will assist hydrologists,
paleoclimatologists, oceanographers, and climate modelers in understanding the
timing, magnitude, and causal mechanisms associated with high frequency climate
oscillations evident in California during the late-Quaternary. The expected
results should assist water resource managers as they attempt to adequately plan
for future water resource needs. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement
award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to
establish a strong independent research career.