* 0101336
* Conference:  Travel Grant for Young Investigators to attend the IEEE Pulsed Power Plasma Science 2001 to be held in Las Vegas, NV, June 18-22, 2001
* ENG,ECCS
* 03/15/2001,02/28/2002
* Thomas Hussey, Institute of Electrical & Electronics Engineers, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 02/28/2002
* USD 6,000.00

0101336&lt;br/&gt;Hussey&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The 2001 joint meeting of the
International Conference on Plasma Science (ICOPS) and Pulsed Power Conference
(PPC), which is being called Pulsed Power Plasma Science 2001 (PPPS-2001), will
be the first of its kind. Historically, the two conferences, which have
considerable technical overlap, have both been held in June. In recent years
travel restrictions have increasingly forced individuals whose technical areas
are covered by both conferences to choose between them. PPPS-2001, therefore, is
an experiment by the IEEE Nuclear and Plasma Sciences Society, the parent
organization for both conferences, to determine the viability of holding these
conferences jointly on a regular basis. PPPS-2001 is scheduled for June 18-22,
2001 at Rio Suite Hotel in Las Vegas, NV.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
requests travel support to defray the travel expenses for young investigators
whose papers have been selected for presentation at the Conference, but who lack
funds and might not be able to attend without travel support. It is proposed
that the PPPS-2001 Student Grants Committee, in collaboration with the Technical
Program Committee, select those to receive the support. The total amount
requested is $6,000 on the basis of an average travel grant of $500 for 12
participants.&lt;br/&gt;