* 0101866
* SGER:  Exploratory Research:  Interactive Visualization and Control of Mobile Network Simulations
* CSE,CNS
* 03/15/2001,02/28/2003
* Kalpathi Subramanian, University of North Carolina at Charlotte
* Standard Grant
* Mari Maeda
* 02/28/2003
* USD 51,957.00

The objective of this research is to explore information visualization schemes
to interactively control, drive and analyze simulations of adaptive resource
management protocols in mobile networks. The considerable number of system
variables and metrics that characterize adaptive resource management protocols
and the need to monitor them in real-time results in a data explosion,
necessitating data visualization schemes for efficient analysis and
optimization. Two ideas will be explored:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Interactively
steer simulations to optimize multi-layer adaptive protocols, via visualization
interactions of appropriate simulation variables (system monitoring metrics,
metric paramaters and simulation system parameters).&lt;br/&gt;2. Characterize
and segment simulations in terms of their critical features (e.g., congestion,
failure) under a variety of dynamic network
conditions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Objective 1 is aimed at making the user central
to the simulation environment, allowing simulations to be conrolled (stopped,
backed up, variables/protocols changed) and directed towards certain predefined
objectives. Dynamic visualizations of system variables and interactions among
them are fundamental to this interactive exploration, and more important, the
user's intuition and domain expertise helps explore (reduce) a large search
space of these variables. Objective 2 is targeted at characterizing simulations
by focusing on critical features of a simulaltion, such as normal, congestion,
transient and steady state failure, and recovery conditions. A robust scheme to
detect and track these features will permit large amounts of simulation data to
be compactly represented, stored and searched. The goal is to evaluate the
application of this approach to automating adaptive protocol design and
optimization.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The two proposed ideas will be evaluated for
a specific problem instance that is being addressed by an ongoing NSF project on
survivable wireless access networks. The problem is to develop a scaleable
resource management scheme that integrates the use of adaptive admission control
and adaptive multiple access control within hierarchical cellsite architectures
of mobile networks. This multi-layer analysis and optimization problem presents
a hugh search space of simulation scenarios, posing significant challenges to
any type of comparative or systematic study. Earlier work has largely been
restricted to individual components of such problems, at best. The approach is
to cast this as a multi-variate data analysis problem, and explore several
interactive multi-variate visualization methods. This should help in
understanding the complex spatial and temporal relationships among the search
space variables. Interactive steering is an efficient means to exploring this
space and lead to desired objectives, while abstracting simulations by
extracting and parameterizing critical features serves to facilitate automated
evaluation of batch siumlation runs or network
monitoring.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Support by an SGER is being requested for two
reasons. (1) The proposed application of information visualization to the mobile
networking domain has not previously been attempted. The proposed work shows
great promise to dramatically change/improve current approaches to development
and simulation-based analysis of adaptive protocols. However, this work requires
experimentation with new ideas in emerging research areas (interactive steering
and feature characterization), and specific outcomes are not guaranteed. (2)
Immediate support is needed since the proposed work is to be conducted in
conjucntion with a newly-funded NSF project. It is expected that this will
greatly enhance the progress achieved within both projects.&lt;br/&gt;