* 0101133
* Collaborative Research:  Design and Model-based Control of Nonlinear Chemical Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 03/15/2001,02/28/2005
* Masoud Soroush, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 02/28/2005
* USD 210,520.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Masoud Soroush &lt;br/&gt;Institution: Drexel
University &lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: 0101133&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To achieve
greater profitability, process designers have been creating design in regions
involving complex nonlinearity where process controllers continue to face stiff
challenges. Steady state multiplicity, limit cycles, chaos, and parametric
sensitivity are manifestations of the nonlinearity. In addition to the
nonlinearity, there are many process designs that have unstable and/or non-
minimum-phase steady states. In many cases, operation is more profitable at an
unstable steady state, or at a stable steady state in the close proximity of an
unstable steady state, often involving non-minimum-phase behavior (inverse
response). Examples of process designs that can show such behavior are chemical
reactors, fermentation reactors, fluidized catalytic crackers, reactor-
separator-recycle plants, azeotropic distillation towers, and reboilers.
Processes with such designs are known to be more challenging to control than
processes with stable and minimum-phase steady states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
University of Pennsylvania-Drexel University joint research project is aimed at
addressing more efficient and easier operation of processes with unstable and/or
non-minimum-phase steady states. It is a study of the interactions between
design and control in the processes, and strategies to develop process designs
that make control of the processes easier. The designs of existing chemical and
biochemical processes with unstable and/or non-minimum phase steady states will
be studied to identify the design features that give rise to such process
behavior. Alternative new process designs, if possible, will then be developed
for the processes such that the same level of profitability is maintained but
the instability and non-minimum-phase behavior are eliminated. For processes for
which such desired alternative designs cannot be found, new differential-
geometric, model-based control laws will be developed that are applicable to
general nonlinear processes, whether minimum-phase or non-minimum-phase.
Initially, control laws will be developed for general, nonlinear, continuous-
time processes without deadtimes or input-saturation constraints. Subsequently,
the latter two complications will be addressed, and the methods will be extended
to multi-input-multi-output (MINO) systems and tested for chemical,
petrochemical, and biochemical processes. A prototype symbolic-manipulation
software that, given a process model, automatically generates differential
geometric control laws will be developed to simplify their industrial
implementation and testing.&lt;br/&gt;