* 0101581
* A Community College-Led Partnership to Develop High School Biotechnology Education
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Todd Bergren, Community College of Aurora
* Standard Grant
* David A. Hanych
* 06/30/2005
* USD 347,319.00

This award is helping to meet the growing demand for biotechnology technicians
in Colorado's Front Range corridor by establishing close collaborations among
K-12 school systems, two-year and four-year educational institutions, and the
business community. The project is utilizing previous interactions with BioLink
and BioTechEd, NSF-funded Advanced Technology Education efforts in the
biotechnology area. High school teachers from throughout the region are being
recruited and supported to develop biotechnology curriculum for their particular
secondary system, they are attending the Biotechnology Institute established at
the Community College of Aurora, and they are introducing into their curriculum
biotechnology topics such as the handling and manipulation of DNA and proteins
in a manner consistent with research and industry protocols. Once fully
implemented, the project is impacting 9000 or more high school students over
three years as the 75 teachers trained in the Institute implement biotechnology
activities, modules, and courses in their high schools.

Final outcomes from the award will include: - an active, ongoing Advisory
Committee to provide guidance on project activities and links to needed
resources. - a total of 75 area high school teachers trained at the introductory
and advanced levels in biotechnology topics. - weekend laboratory sessions for
high school teachers. - on-line learning opportunities and resources to discuss
and share implementation of Institute training in the classrooms, the
opportunity to attend industry-related events, and assistance with guest
speakers and field trips. - teachers with ready-to-use biotechnology equipment
and supplies from a college-maintained lending library. - model curricula that
additional teachers may use as they develop biotechnology courses appropriate to
their district science standards. - information for students and their parents
about career opportunities in biotechnology with special efforts to reach those
from ethnically diverse neighborhoods and schools.

