* 0101837
*  Workshop: "The Future Revolution in Optical Communications and Networking" to be held at the Doubletree Hotel in Arlington, VA on December 4-5, 2000.
* ENG,ECCS
* 12/01/2000,05/31/2001
* Alan Willner, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 05/31/2001
* USD 69,542.00

0101837&lt;br/&gt;Willner&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed NSF Workshop,
scheduled forDec. 4-5, 2000, will examine critical and enabling optical
technologies that will be required to meet the needs of the coming bandwidth
revolution. The location for the workshop will be the Marriott Key Bridge in
Rosslyn, VA. This proposal contains the fruits of a planning meeting by the
Steering Committee held on August 8" at the NSF. Specifically, this proposal
addresses: (i) a description and rationale for the workshop, (ii) a list of
topics and potential speakers to be considered, (iii) an agenda, and (iv) a
budget.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The NSF Workshop will explore research
opportunities in critical enabling technologies, with the goal of assuring
continued bandwidth and capacity growth in optical communications and networking
systems throughout the next decade. The workshop will address forward-looking,
high-impact research, including technologies for all-optical packet switched
networking, novel technologies for increasing the optical fiber communications
bandwidth beyond 50 THz, and microwave photonics for LANs and very high
frequency wireless systems. Potential bottlenecks will be identified and means
of overcoming them will be explored with a view towards achieving 50-100 Tb/s
networks. Moreover, the workshop will also explore how the NSF can play a
strategic role in alleviating the critical shortage of trained optical engineers
for the workforce.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The workshop will bring together experts
from academia, industry, and government to discuss these areas and identify
critical issues in materials, device, systems, and networking research. The
final report prepared by the workshop participants will detail important
challenges, both fundamental and technological, that are likely to be at the
forefront of this field for many years to come.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
workshop is being organized by several NSF directorates, including: ENG,
MPS/DNM, and CISE/ANIR.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;