* 0101397
* GLOBEC 2000:  Responses of the Neocalanus spp. - Microplankton Community to Physical forcing in the Coastal Gulf of Alaska
* GEO,OCE
* 01/01/2001,12/31/2006
* Suzanne Strom, Western Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 12/31/2006
* USD 654,754.00

Ocean and atmospheric conditions in the coastal Gulf of Alaska vary widely over
daily, seasonal, and interannual time scales. The abundance of dominant upper
trophic level species, including salmon, has been shown to vary in concert with
this environmental change, most notably on decadal time scales. The mechanisms
linking these large-scale population shifts with climate are not clear, but may
involve lower trophic level responses (i.e. bottom-up effects). Although lower
trophic level species are less well studied in the CGOA, preliminary data
indicates that the abundance and activity of microplankton populations also
respond strongly at least to short-term changes in CGOA physical regimes.
Additionally, microzooplankton are likely the dominant consumers of
phytoplankton on the shelf, thus consituting a key link between physical forcing
of primary production and higher trophic levels. The PIs will examine the
processes structuring microplankton communities and link them with populations
of Neocalanus spp., the dominant particle-grazing copepods in the coastal Gulf
of Alaska. Collectively, 3 species of Neocalanus (N. flemingeri, N. plumchrus,
N. cristatus) contribute substantially to total spring and summer
mesozooplankton biomass in the CGOA. Neocalanus are capable of consuming both
phytoplankton and microzooplankton, though the factors dictating this diet
partitioning are not well understood. Furthermore, these copepods have been
shown to alter individual body size, population biomass, and life cycle timing
in response to variations in ocean conditions. Finally, the size and abundance
of Neocalanus make them an important potential prey for pink salmon fry and
other coastal fish species. Thus the microplankton - Neocalanus food web is a
potential locus for the translation of environmental variation into higher
trophic level responses. Specific measurements to be made are: 1) Microplankton
abundance and composition (phytoplankton size structure, microzooplankton
species and size composition); 2) Rates of microzooplankton herbivory; and 3)
Rates of Neocalanus spp. grazing on microzooplankton and phytoplankton. A novel
element of the work is the use of the FlowCAM (Flow Cytometer and Microscope) to
characterize microplankton abundance and community composition during feeding
experiments. This new imaging-in-flow technology should allow us to conduct many
more copepod grazing experiments than would be possible with complete reliance
on conventional microscopy. By sampling across a range of coastal physical
regimes and seasons, this work will test the hypothesis that variation in the
physical environment dictates production levels and food web structure in the
CGOA, altering the timing, amount and quality of resources available to
Neocalanus and ultimately to other higher trophic level species.

