* 0101794
* GOALI:  Multilayered Polymer Hybrid Optoelectronic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2001,04/30/2006
* Sue Carter, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 04/30/2006
* USD 270,000.00

0101794&lt;br/&gt;Carter&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Liquid processable solid state
semiconductors show promise of dramatically changing
future&lt;br/&gt;technologies by offering improved and new device functionality
at significantly lower energy, environmental and processing costs than
traditionally processed semiconductors. In the class of liquid processable
materials for optoelectronic applications, polymer-based semiconductors offer
some of the highest charge carrier recombination and generation efficiencies
combined with advantages of being highly tunable, flexible, light weight and
dopable. Nonetheless, significant challenges exist for making high performance
polymer-base devices due to difficulties in achieving both efficient charge
injection into the polymer and high current densities with long device lifetimes
under ambient conditions. Recent work on multilayered and blended polymer-based
structures that contain charge-transport layers has been undertaken to overcome
these limitations. While this direction is promising, it has also introduced a
new challenge, namely how do we understand charge injection, transport,
generation and recombination in multilayered heterostructures of polymer-
based&lt;br/&gt;devices?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this proposal is
to address this question through systematic experiments
and&lt;br/&gt;simulations on multicomponent polymer-based light emitting diodes
and photovoltaics. To&lt;br/&gt;accomplish this objective, they have brought
together an interdisciplinary team of three scientists from academic, industrial
and government labs. Sue Carter, a physics professor at the University of
California, is an expert in electrical and optical characterization of polymer-
based optoelectronic devices. J. Campbell Scott, a Research Staff Member at IBM
Almaden Research Center, is an expert in the design, characterization and
simulation of organic-based light emitting devices. Finally, David Ginley, a
principle scientist at the National Renewable Energy Laboratories, is an expert
in photovoltaic technologies and the synthesis of inorganic semiconducting
nanoparticles. This extensive experience, combined with their demonstrated
commitment to the education of students and to the advancement of these fields,
should enable them to achieve their goal to have significant impact on their
understanding of multilayered polymer-based optoelectronic devices, increasing
their potential for scientific innovation and technological
viability.&lt;br/&gt;