* 0101840
* GOALI:  Adhesion, Lubrication, and Wear of Aluminum
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* James Adams, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 06/30/2005
* USD 240,000.00

0101840&lt;br/&gt;Adams&lt;br/&gt;This award is a GOALI (Grant Opportunities for
Academic Liaison with Industry) grant supporting research and education in the
area of adhesion, lubrication, and wear of aluminum surfaces. This GOALI award
involves collaborative research with the Aluminum Company of America (ALCOA) and
General Motors (GM) and addresses fundamental tribological issues that impact
aluminum processing and long-term durability of aluminum parts. Adhesion and
wear processes are complex, and can involve many mechanisms. This project
focuses on three important mechanisms, namely metal adhesion (when the lubricant
and bulk oxide are penetrated), lubricant adhesion (how to maintain the
lubricant on the surfaces during high stresses and temperatures), and wear
processes (how material is removed, and the factors that control that removal).
There are three major goals of the work.&lt;br/&gt;1. Understand the factors
that control metal-ceramic adhesion: In previous work, interfaces between
aluminum and a model oxide and a model carbide were investigated. Density
functional calculations explored many possible interface structures to determine
the most favorable one. The PI investigated the electronic structure of these
interfaces, using density of states, charge density, bond-order, Mulliken
population analysis, and the Electron Localization Function, which, when
combined, give a rich understanding of the type of bonding across the interface.
The PI will extend this work from model systems to new carbide and nitride
interfaces, as those materials are the most promising candidates for wear-
resistant coatings. The effect of common alloying elements (Cu, Mg, Mn, Zn, and
Si) on adhesion will be investigated because it is known that they have a major
effect on adhesion and wear. In support of this work, GM will carry out
experimental studies to measure interfacial adhesion energies for direct
comparison with these calculations.&lt;br/&gt;2. Investigate how lubricant
boundary additives react with and bond to aluminum surfaces: These molecules are
added to lubricants so that one end can bind to the surface while the other end
is compatible with the lubricant, so that the lubricant is kept on the surface
during high stresses. Previous work involved electronic structure investigations
of how typical boundary additives (alcohols, carboxylic acids, and esters) react
and bond to the surface. A combination of ab-initio molecular dynamics and
geometry optimization enabled the determination of optimal reaction paths and
typical products for several boundary additive species. This award will extend
previous work that focused on additives used for metals processing to
investigate additives used for automotive engine lubricants. A similar set of
complementary simulations and calculations will be performed to determine
optimal reaction pathways and final structures of typical bound species. The PI
will also explore how high compressive and shear loads can cause some
interfacial lubricants to react with and soften the surface.&lt;br/&gt;3.
Investigate the factors that control nanoindentation and wear: In previous work,
empirical MD simulations were used to investigate many factors that affect
nanoindentation, including temperature, surface orientation, indent load/speed,
tip geometry, and tip-substrate interactions. Atomic scale deformation
mechanisms, including local amorphization/melting and dislocation nucleation and
motion, were visualized. Similar studies for asperity-asperity shear were also
carried out. These calculations were complemented by experimental
nanoindentation studies at GM, AFM tip dragging studies at ALCOA, and GM's
continuum mechanics/finite element modeling of nanoindentation/wear. In this
award, the PI plans to extend these nanoindentation and asperity-asperity
simulations to include the effect of alloying elements (Cu and Mg), for both low
concentrations (solid solutions) and high concentrations (precipitate
formation), to see how those affect deformation mechanisms. Simulations of AFM
tip dragging will be performed and compared with experimental results. The
effect of thin native oxides on the surface, and boundary lubricants will also
be explored.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award is a GOALI (Grant Opportunities
for Academic Liaison with Industry) grant supporting research and education in
the area of adhesion, lubrication, and wear of aluminum surfaces. The research
is a collaborative effort involving the University of Arizona, the Aluminum
Company of America (ALCOA), and General Motors (GM) and addresses fundamental
tribological issues that impact aluminum processing and long-term durability of
aluminum parts. Adhesive and abrasive wear during bulk aluminum forming limits
the stresses that can be applied, damages processing equipment, and impacts
surface properties such as image clarity, spot weldability, and lubricant
retention. Similarly, improvements in wear and lubrication of aluminum will
enable greater use of aluminum in automobile engine applications, allowing
weight reduction and increases in fuel efficiency, durability, and performance.
The award supports interaction with industry on problems of fundamental and
industrial interest using the tools of molecular dynamics simulation and
electronic structure tools. The results will be tested at ALOCA and GM
laboratories. The award provides an opportunity for graduate students trained in
the use of materials simulation methods and electronic structure theory to
tackle real-world problems and develop skills useful for industry and academe
alike.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;