* 0101822
* Development of Courses and Recruitment Models for Attracting and Preparing Middle Grade Mathematics Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2006
* Dorina Mitrea, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Tzur
* 07/31/2006
* USD 1,199,179.00

"Development of Courses and Recruitment Models for Attracting and Preparing
Middle Grade Mathematics Teachers" is a three-year project that addresses the
needs of middle grade mathematics teachers through the development and delivery
of four foundational mathematics courses with accompanying support materials and
the development and implementation of an aggressive teacher recruitment model.
Funded under the Teacher Enhancement guidelines for Mathematics and Science
Courses for Improving Teacher Qualifications, the project's leadership -- a
collaborative between mathematics faculty from the College of Arts and Science
and mathematics education faculty from the College of Education at the
University of Missouri - Columbia -- develops three-credit courses designed to
provide middle grade teachers with a strong mathematical foundation and connect
the mathematics they are learning with the mathematics they will be teaching.
Courses focus on algebraic and geometry structures, data analysis and
probability, and the mathematics of change; and employ standards-based middle
grade mathematics instructional materials as a springboard to learn mathematics
in depth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The courses are designed for teachers choosing a
grade-level change (primarily elementary), middle/secondary teachers in
oversupplied disciplines, individuals seeking career changes for entry into
teaching, middle grade mathematics teachers seeking to upgrade their content
knowledge, and traditional pre-service middle grade mathematics teachers. The
recruited teachers pilot the courses and supplemental materials [companion
modules] in Summer Institutes and in semester courses offered at off-campus
sites. The program of courses provides a core that leads to certification for
teaching middle school mathematics for participants and others throughout
Missouri and is informed by the current national recommendations of the CBMS
Mathematical Education of Teachers Project, Draft
Report.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first year of the project's timeline is devoted
to the development of the courses and materials, including a contractual
commitment from a professional publisher for the publication and national
dissemination of the supplemental materials, and the development of recruitment
models for identifying and attracting middle school mathematics teachers. The
remaining two years are spent on implementing the recruitment models, field-
testing, revision of materials, and dissemination in Missouri and nationally.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project evaluation focuses on participants' understanding
of the fundamental mathematics concepts within each course, their knowledge of
standards-based middle school mathematics instructional materials and how these
relate to the mathematical content in the four courses, as well as the
effectiveness of the courses on changes in teachers' classroom practice.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;