* 0101809
* Studies of High-Tc Superconductors and Molecular Materials under Extreme Hydrostatic Pressure
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2001,03/31/2004
* James Schilling, Washington University
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 03/31/2004
* USD 389,614.00

Despite enormous efforts, high-temperature superconductors have yet to fulfill
the vaunted expectations placed in them. There exists neither a good basic
understanding of these materials, nor the ability to process them for many
potential applications. Progress has been impeded by the complexity of the
perovskite-like structure and the important influence of defects. This
individual investigator award will fund a project to study the temperature- and
pressure-activated defect relaxation processes in both bulk high-Tc materials
and their grain boundaries. The knowledge gained will help develop strategies to
optimize the superconducting properties, in particular the current carrying
capacity, and stabilize them for long-term applications. In addition, by
suppressing the relaxation processes in a low-temperature experiment, the
intrinsic dependence of Tc on pressure will be determined over a broad range of
lattice parameter and carrier concentration, thus allowing a meaningful test of
theory and perhaps pointing the way to higher values of Tc. High-pressure
experiments on molecular magnets and superconductors are also planned. The
research will involve a collaboration with a Russian scientist. Graduate and
undergraduate students working on this project will benefit from the exposure to
international collaborations as well as learn skills that will prepare them for
future scientific careers. %%% High-temperature superconductors have yet to
fulfill the vaunted expectations placed in them after their discovery nearly 15
years ago. Only a few specialized applications have reached the marketplace.
Progress has been impeded by the complicated structure of these materials and
the presence of many kinds of structural defects. Some of these defects can even
migrate around at room temperature, thus degrading important properties, such as
the current carrying capacity. This individual investigator award will fund a
project to study the properties of mobile defects and try to develop a strategy
to prevent their migration. This will open the door to further applications and
also permit a better understanding of why these materials are superconducting at
such high temperatures and perhaps point the way toward superconductivity at
much higher temperatures. The research will involve a collaboration with a
Russian scientist. Graduate and undergraduate students working on this project
will benefit from the exposure to international collaborations as well as learn
skills that will prepare them for future scientific careers. ***