* 0101249
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Consumption in Late Soviet and Post-Soviet Russia
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2001,10/31/2002
* Victoria Bonnell, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 10/31/2002
* USD 12,450.00

This project investigates how and why consumption tastes and practices have
changed in Russia from the late-Soviet period to the post-Soviet period. In the
last 25 years, party-state control over production and distribution of consumer
goods, so central to the organization of Soviet power, has been supplanted by
private production and exchange. As Soviet scarcity of goods has given way to
post-Soviet scarcity of money, Russians have developed diverse strategies for
provisioning themselves and their households. Despite the emergence of a market
economy, then, consumption in Russia differs from that in western capitalist
nations, and the changes taking place there require separate study. Further,
since existing theories of how class and status affect consumption in western
capitalist societies may not explain the changes in Russian consumption,
theoretical work on the topic needs to be revised and extended. In addressing
these needs, this project contributes both to a specific understanding of
changes in consumption in one former socialist nation, and to a broad-based
understanding of the importance of the political and economic context to
consumption.

To reach its goals, the project surveys consumers of different socioeconomic
status in a medium-sized Central Russian city (Kaluga). The retrospective
interviews used in the survey draw on the memories of consumers who lived
through the great transformation, and describe changes in the correspondence
between status, class, and consumption. The analysis uses quantitative
techniques to describe types of consumption lifestyles, position in the
stratification system, and upward and downward mobility. It also uses
qualitative techniques to analyze preferences and values not easily captured
with quantitative techniques.