* 0101836
* Algebraic Automorphisms of Affine Space
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Gene Freudenburg, University of Southern Indiana
* Standard Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 08/31/2005
* USD 61,275.00

The investigator studies the general affine groups and their related geometry
(affine algebraic geometry). These groups are the algebraic automorphisms of
affine spaces over a field. Group actions and their associated rings of
invariants play a central role in this investigation. Of particular interest are
actions of the additive group of the underlying field, or equivalently, locally
nilpotent derivations of polynomial rings. These automorphisms are related to
several deep problems of algebraic geometry, such as the Jacobian Conjecture,
the Nagata Conjecture, the Affine Cancellation Problem, and the Embedding
Problem.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the simplest and most important
mathematical functions is a polynomial. A polynomial can be defined using any
number of unknowns (variables). The branch of mathematics known as algebraic
geometry studies the geometric objects naturally associated with polynomials: a
polynomial in 2 variables defines a curve in the plane, a polynomial in 3
variables defines a surface in 3-dimensional space, and so on. These objects can
be remarkabley complex, and one wishes to understand their symmetries, their
intrinsic properties, how they intersect, etc. While aspects of algebraic
geometry were already studied in classical Greece, it is a mainstream field of
modern mathematics, both in theory and application. Two areas where recent
research has led to fruitful applications are in high-speed computing (solving
large polynomial systems) and in cryptography (fast and secure coding
schemes).&lt;br/&gt;