* 0101161
* Micro-Scale, Multi-Spectral Flourescent Imaging for Bio-Heat Transfer Applications
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* John McGrath, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Gilbert B. Devey
* 07/31/2003
* USD 59,859.00

0101161&lt;br/&gt;McGrath&lt;br/&gt;Living biomaterials spanning the size scale
from cells and tissues to entire organs can be damaged by accidental exposure to
temperature extremes (e.g. frostbite and burns). Unusually high or low
temperatures can also be used clinically to kill tumors by heating or freezing
respectively. In contrast, proper use of low temperature exposure can be used to
preserve cells and tissues for virtually indefinite periods. Furthermore,
between the extremes of preserving and killing there are many surgical and
biotechnology procedures that amount to producing biomaterials with modified
characteristics by using heating or cooling (freezing). Examples include heating
treatments for stabilizing joints, relieving spinal pain, cosmetic surgery and
heart disease. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In all of these cases it is very important
to understand how the biomaterial responds to the temperature changes and
associated events such as the phase changes which occur during freezing.
Unfortunately, very often not enough is known about the detailed responses of
cells, tissues and organs to temperature excursions. Furthermore, the
experimental tools available to study the detailed responses are limited or
lacking. We have identified two specific needs that are the focus of the
proposed research. Current methods often use temperature-measuring devices that
disturb the system measured (invasive), only measure at one location and are too
large relative to the small sizes of interest. Thus the first need addressed by
the proposed research will be to provide a means of continuously measuring
temperature non-invasively (using optical methods) over entire surfaces of
biomaterials (rather than single locations) with micro-scale spatial resolution.
The current state of the art is also limited with regard to methods to measure
whether cells within tissues are alive or dead. Thus the second need addressed
by the proposed research will be to provide a means of continuously measuring
tissue cell viability non-invasively (using optical methods) within tissues with
micro-scale spatial resolution. Molecular biology methods are applied to
accomplish this using tumor cells as an example. These two optical methods
provide a means of directly linking the applied thermal history of the
biomaterial to the biological response in a manner not possible previously.
Examples of the successful implementation of these two methods will be developed
as part of the proposed research. The successful completion of this research
will provide tools that can be used to develop a better understanding of the
response of many types of biomaterials to a variety of applied thermal
challenges. This will form the basis of future methods of rationale design of
thermal treatments for improved health care. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;