* 0101083
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Social Structure and the Male Urban Life Course
* SBE,SES
* 05/15/2001,04/30/2002
* David Greenberg, New York University
* Standard Grant
* Reeve D. Vanneman
* 04/30/2002
* USD 7,375.00

Survey research has consistently demonstrated variation in the intimate lives
and dyadic arrangements of heterosexual and homosexual men, including rates of
partner change, expectations of emotional commitment, and acceptance of non-
monogamous practices. However, the pathways to these differences are less well
understood. Theories and studies often treat preferences of gay and straight men
as fixed "traits" of individuals, when orientations develop and change over the
life course. Taking a social constructionist life course perspective, this
project examines how structural contexts of opportunity and relational histories
affect the development of intimate orientations and careers, and how
orientations are constructed in response to these opportunities and constraints.
The project gathers life histories of 100 heterosexual and homosexual (black and
white) males between 21 and 49 years of age in New York City. The life history
method tracks continuities and turning points in intimate practices and dyadic
arrangements from baseline orientations to the present. It also explores racial
differences in these processes. Rather than make generalizations about gay and
straight men, the project captures the dynamic interplay of structure and
process, and thereby contributes to a more sociological understanding of
behavior that is often viewed from individualistic or biological perspectives.