* 0101659
* Electron Correlation Effects on the Photophysics and Device Physics of Pi-conjugated Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,03/31/2006
* Sumitendra Mazumdar, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 03/31/2006
* USD 180,000.00

0101659&lt;br/&gt;Mazumdar&lt;br/&gt;This grant, jointly funded by the Materials
Theory Program in DMR and the Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program in
CHE, supports theoretical and computational research on the fundamental science
and device physics of p-conjugated polymers. The research has three foci: (1)
The PI aims to develop a complete theory of excited state absorption in
photoluminescent p-conjugated polymers like poly(para-phenylenvinylene) (PPV)
and poly(paraphenylene) (PPP), and of acene molecular crystals. This will
involve understanding the nature of two-photon states seen in ultrafast
spectroscopy and their relaxation mechanisms. (2) A goal of the work is to
develop a conceptual framework for designing photoluminescent p-conjugated
polymers that emit in the infrared. Identification of real materials that have
small optical gaps, but nevertheless, posses the excited state ordering
conducive to photoluminescence is planned. (3) The PI plans to develop a general
theoretical technique for calculating the relative cross-sections of competing
charge-transfer reactions between molecular components of organic light emitting
diodes (OLEDs) and photovoltaic devices. The aim is to reach a quantitative
theory of the yields of singlet verses triplet excitations in OLEDs and to
understand the material dependence of the efficiencies of photoinduced charge
transfer processes. &lt;br/&gt;To describe the electronic states in these
materials, the PI will begin from the Pariser-Parr-Pople p-electron Hamiltonian
for oligomers and molecular systems and perform calculations using the multiple-
reference doubles configuration interaction (MRDCI) and a diagrammatic exciton
basis valance bond method developed by the PI. The MRDCI allows proper
truncation of basis states, while the exciton basis gives pictorial descriptions
of correlated eigenstates, which in turn lead to mechanistic descriptions of the
photophysics. Calculations of the intermolecular or interchain charge transfer
reactions that occur in OLEDs and photovoltaic processes will be performed
within a time-dependent Schr0101659&lt;br/&gt;Mazumdar&lt;br/&gt;This grant,
jointly funded by the Materials Theory Program in DMR and the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program in CHE, supports theoretical and computational
research on the fundamental science and device physics of pi-conjugated
polymers. The research has three foci: (1) The PI aims to develop a complete
theory of excited state absorption in photoluminescent pi-conjugated polymers
like poly(para-phenylenvinylene) (PPV) and poly(paraphenylene) (PPP), and of
acene molecular crystals. This will involve understanding the nature of two-
photon states seen in ultrafast spectroscopy and their relaxation mechanisms.
(2) A goal of the work is to develop a conceptual framework for designing
photoluminescent pi-conjugated polymers that emit in the infrared.
Identification of real materials that have small optical gaps, but nevertheless,
posses the excited state ordering conducive to photoluminescence is planned. (3)
The PI plans to develop a general theoretical technique for calculating the
relative cross-sections of competing charge-transfer reactions between molecular
components of organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs) and photovoltaic devices.
The aim is to reach a quantitative theory of the yields of singlet verses
triplet excitations in OLEDs and to understand the material dependence of the
efficiencies of photoinduced charge transfer processes. &lt;br/&gt;To describe
the electronic states in these materials, the PI will begin from the Pariser-
Parr-Pople pi-electron Hamiltonian for oligomers and molecular systems and
perform calculations using the multiple-reference doubles configuration
interaction (MRDCI) and a diagrammatic exciton basis valance bond method
developed by the PI. The MRDCI allows proper truncation of basis states, while
the exciton basis gives pictorial descriptions of correlated eigenstates, which
in turn lead to mechanistic descriptions of the photophysics. Calculations of
the intermolecular or interchain charge transfer reactions that occur in OLEDs
and photovoltaic processes will be performed within a time-dependent Schrodinger
formulation that allows the monitoring of relative yields of competing charge
transfer interactions. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This grant, jointly funded by
the Materials Theory Program in DMR and the Theoretical and Computational
Chemistry Program in CHE, supports theoretical and computational research on the
fundamental chemical, photophysics, and device physics of pi-conjugated
polymers. The PI will study the fundamental physical processes involved in, or
that interfere with, the absorption and emission of light in pi-conjugated
polymers. Quantum chemical techniques together with methods developed by the PI
will be used to perform quantitative calculations that include the effects of
electronic correlations. The work will contribute to the search for novel
photoluminescent materials that are candidates for use in infrared lasers and
research on the OLEDs is expected to predict dependencies of electroluminescence
efficiency on materials properties. This project will provide a graduate level
and higher learning environment for training in the chemistry, physics, and
optics of pi-conjugated polymers.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;dinger
formulation that allows the monitoring of relative yields of competing charge
transfer interactions. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This grant, jointly funded by
the Materials Theory Program in DMR and the Theoretical and Computational
Chemistry Program in CHE, supports theoretical and computational research on the
fundamental chemical, photophysics, and device physics of p-conjugated polymers.
The PI will study the fundamental physical processes involved in, or that
interfere with, the absorption and emission of light in p-conjugated polymers.
Quantum chemical techniques together with methods developed by the PI will be
used to perform quantitative calculations that include the effects of electronic
correlations. The work will contribute to the search for novel photoluminescent
materials that are candidates for use in infrared lasers and research on the
OLEDs is expected to predict dependencies of electroluminescence efficiency on
materials properties. This project will provide a graduate level and higher
learning environment for training in the chemistry, physics, and optics of
p-conjugated polymers.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;