* 0101309
* Effect of Alloying and Thermo-Mechanical-Treatment on Anisotropic Creep and Deformation of Ti-alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* K. Linga Murty, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 08/31/2006
* USD 380,319.00

This project addresses the influence of thermo-mechanical-treatment (TMT) and
alloying on deformation and creep anisotropy of titanium alloys. The research
involves characterization of anisotropic biaxial creep of Ti alloys using
closed-end internally pressurized thin-walled tubing superimposed with an axial
load. The approach is to investigate these behaviors in Ti and Ti- 3Al-2.5V
following stress-relief anneal and complete recrystallization. Alloying
additions such as Al to Ti result in significant modification of
crystallographic texture and operating slip systems. Cold-working leads to
grain-shape anisotropy of the otherwise equiaxed grain structure of Rx
materials. The effects of these variables on deformation microstructures are to
be investigated along with deformation anisotropy following biaxial loading
under varied stress-states and stress-levels. Transitions in creep mechanisms
and the effect of underlying deformation mechanism(s) on creep anisotropy will
also be addressed. Such studies are important for realistic estimates of creep
strains and life of these structural materials in service. %%% The project
addresses basic research issues in a contemporary topical area of materials
science with technological relevance in aerospace, automobile, and chemical
sectors where Ti-alloys are used in tube form. An important feature of the
program is the integration of research and education through the training of
students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area. The project is
expected to provide unique opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students
to develop strong technical, communication, and organizational/management skills
through experiences in a forefront research environment. ***