* 0101350
* Synoptic Studies of Solar Magnetism and Dynamics Using the 150-foot Solar Tower on Mt. Wilson
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2004
* Roger Ulrich, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Bellaire
* 05/31/2004
* USD 432,238.00

The investigators will conduct research primarily to enhance understanding of
solar variability. The main effort is to continue, and indeed to improve, the
synoptic program of observations at the 150-foot solar tower on Mt. Wilson that
measures and records the state of solar surface magnetism and dynamics. The sun
is the dominant source of external variability for the Earth's climate system
and is the source of space weather. Direct study of the sun is an essential part
of a program to understand climate change and to monitor and predict the state
of space weather. This project emphasizes solar magnetism because most solar
variability is directly influenced by the state of the sun's magnetic field. The
cause or causes of the twenty-two-year solar magnetic cycle remain an elusive
problem that prevents addressing variability in a fully satisfactory manner.
Since the magnetic cycle is of a fully global scale on the solar surface, data
on all timescales are essential to discover the underlying causes of solar
variability. Each day the Mt. Wilson Observatory (MWO) program obtains up to
twenty full disk scans of the sun's magnetic field and velocity field to provide
a record which can address questions of global solar variability. The historical
time series of both fields must be sufficiently long to study the solar cycle
and the 150-foot tower program has provided this history since its digital
record began in 1967. As part of this project the investigators will consider
several corrections to the older data and will organize a workshop for the
intercomparison of the magnetic field data among investigators who now regularly
obtain full-disk magnetogram and dopplergram records.