* 0101229
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Spatial and Institutional Approaches to Governing U.S. International Trade: A Case Study of Section 301
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* John Jones, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 07/31/2003
* USD 9,958.00

First introduced as part of the U.S. Trade Act of 1974 (and amended by the
Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988 and in the Uruguay Round
Agreements Acts of 1994, Section 301 provides the opportunity for interested
parties to charge other nations with unfair trading practices by filing a
petition with the U.S. Trade Representative's office. This doctoral dissertation
research project will constitute a descriptive, explanatory, and institutional
analyses ofthe disposition of Section 301 cases since the legislation's
inception, and it will evaluate both industry and government views of the
effectiveness of Section 301, not only in terms of the outcomes of individual
cases, but also in terms of its larger impact on global trade. By examining not
only the geographic implications of trade policies as reflected in Section 301
cases, this project also will explore the geographic context within which trade
policy is developed, enacted, and operationalized. The research will consist of
two components. Descriptive and explanatory analyses of Section 301 cases from
1975 to 2001 will provide the basis for analysis of the patterns of Section 301
cases in terms of their evolution over time, the countries and regions targeted,
the types of "unfair" practices cited, the economic sectors involved, the types
of complainant, and case outcomes. These descriptive analyses will be augmented
by chi-square analyses and refinement of a explanatory multinomial logit model
aimed at identifying the factors that have influenced the success or failure of
Section 301 cases. The second part of the project will consist of interviews
with key informants in the USTR's office and with three trade associations that
have been active in Section 301 cases. Emphasis will be placed on identification
of the processes that led to decisions to file Section 301 petitions and
reports, the associations' and the USTR's views of the policy, the USTR's
selection of cases for prosecution, and the interactions between the
associations and the USTR. Archival research will complement the semi-structured
interviews with staff and officers of the associations and the USTR's
office.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will produce the first extensive
examination of the geographic, temporal, and sectoral characteristics of Section
301 cases as well as the dynamics between those and other characteristics. The
project should result in the most comprehensive and current analyses of the
outcomes of Section 301 cases as well as the case-specific and structural
factors that explain Section 301 case success. These kinds of analyses should
enhance understandings of the ways that trade policies like Section 301 affect
on the magnitude and direction of trade, then we need to know under what
conditions those effects are manifested. The project should help clarify what
role policies like Section 301 play in the larger geography of trade, especially
the ways that these policies define what constitutes "unfair" practices. More
generally, the project will contribute toward broader economic geographic
understandings of the ways that institutions, policies, and trade interact with
each other. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this award
also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a strong
independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;