* 0101985
* National Teachers Enhancement Network for Elementary Teachers
* EHR,DRL
* 05/01/2001,04/30/2006
* George Tuthill, Montana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Haney
* 04/30/2006
* USD 2,000,130.00

The National Teachers Enhancement Network for Elementary Teachers (NTEN) will
electronically provide professional development to elementary teachers on
science concepts based upon selected kit-based curricula from FOSS, STC, BSCS
Science and Delta Education II. The project will assist elementary teachers in
deepening their science content knowledge and improve their ability to
incorporate technology into their classes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development
team will consist of MSU and other faculty with NTEN experience (from the
Keystone project), K-6 master teachers and instructional technologists. Each
module will be of 4-6 weeks' duration. Initially, four modules will be pilot
tested with 25 teachers. A second pilot for 50 teachers will occur in the second
year of the project. NTEN will specifically target teachers of Native American
and other minority students. The project will provide an Instructional
Technology and Technical Support team to module instructors and participants.
This team will provide training in using technology to the instructors and
develop an online professional development package for participants.
Furthermore, the Support team will provide an electronic listserve and chat room
to establish a distance learning community for NTEN participants. As further
support, teachers will be encouraged to participate in school teams.&lt;br/&gt;&
lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;