* 0101488
* Japan STA Fellowship:  Measurement of Beta-Decay Rates of r-Process and Other Exotic Neutron-Rich Nuclei
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2003
* Michael Famiano, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Myra McAuliffe
* 06/30/2003
* USD 10,000.00

0101488 Famiano

This award supports a two-year Science and Technology Agency (STA) Postdoctoral
Fellowship for Michael Famiano of Ohio State University. He will be undertaking
his research with Professor Isao Tanihata at the Institute of Physical and
Chemical Research (RIKEN) in Saitama, Japan. Dr. Famiano will be researching the
measurement of beta-decay rates of r-process and other exotic neutron-rich
nuclei. The proposed work involves both experimental and theoretical efforts
surrounding the rapid-neutron capture process, which is believed to be the
source of heavy elements in stars and planets. He will be carrying out
sophisticated r-process calculations in which he will insert his predictions for
excited state beta-decays into a state-of-the-art r-process code to observe the
impact of the excited state decay half-lives on the r-process abundance
predictions.

The research will result in solving a longstanding problem in the formulation of
r-process nucleosynthesis calculations. The findings will then allow the
incorporation of the calculated rates into more elaborate r-process models, and
the experimental verification of these calculations. Useful contributions to the
field are likely, and the exposure of the awardee to a new research setting will
be intellectually stimulating. The proposed work will benefit through
collaboration with the Japanese host laboratory, where Dr. Famiano will have
access to the necessary experimental systems, equipment and expertise.