* 0101219
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Regional Economic Integration and the Changing Spaces of Politics in the Caribbean
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2001,09/30/2002
* Victoria Lawson, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2002
* USD 9,990.00

Supra-national and transnational regional economies are emerging as a
territorial response to the competitive pressures of trade-led development.
Analysis of these emerging regional institutions has tended to focus on their
implications for the management and control of economic flows and their
potential threat to the sovereignty of nation-states. Less attention has been
directed to the impact of regional economic integration on the political spaces
in which local communities can articulate their concerns over trade-led
development. Preliminary evidence suggests regional economic integration is
remaking the geography of political opportunity and creating new possibilities
for marginalized communities to demand accountability and action at scales
beyond the nation-state. Focusing on regional integration in the Caribbean, the
doctoral dissertation research project will compare how two non-governmental
organizations (one labor- and one feminist-oriented) have interpreted and
interacted with regional economic institutions to advance the interests of those
they represent. A combination of archival research, interviews with
organizational representatives and participant observation will be employed in
three locations: Barbados, Guyana, and Trinidad. Using a text-based manager,
data will be analyzed to reveal a narrative of the changing nature and scale of
political opportunity in the Caribbean. Comparing two very different
organizations makes it possible to assess which issues have been addressed most
successfully at the regional scale. Understanding how non-state actors operate
within this complex landscape of political opportunities will advance
theoretical and empirical understandings of how regional economic integration
transforms political space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The significance of this
research lies in its investigation of how regional economic integration
reorganizes political space to create opportunities for political action at
scales beyond the nation. The research contributes to empirical and theoretical
debates within political and economic geography and feminist studies. It extends
and deepens analysis of regional economic integration through its attention to
cultural discourses and the activities of non-state actors. Exploring how
Caribbean community is transformed and how different actors interpret
regionalism is key to understanding how supra-national regions are emerging as
potential sites for increased public engagement and reinvigorated democratic
politics. Advancing empirical understanding of the process of regional
development in the Caribbean provides unique insight into meeting the needs of
poor and marginal populations at a time of intensified globalization and
institutional erosion. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award,
this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish
a strong independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;