* 0101808
* The Intermediate Phase in Network Glasses
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2001,03/31/2005
* Punit Boolchand, University of Cincinnati Main Campus
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 03/31/2005
* USD 345,503.00

This project concerns the properties of glasses and their phase transformations.
The physical nature of the Intermediate phase (IP) that separates the Floppy
phase (FP) from the Rigid Phase (RP) in select chalcogenide glass systems will
be examined. These properties will be investigated in four different sets of
experiments. First, temperature-dependent Raman scattering studies of Ge-Se, As-
Se and Ge-As-Se bearing bulk glasses will be performed over the range from 78K
to Tg+200 K to examine the nature of molecular structure changes taking place
across Tg in the FP, IP and the RP. Second, the same glass systems, but now
synthesized as obliquely deposited thin-films (obliqueness angle in the range
from 0 to 80 degrees) will be examined in their virgin and photo-illuminated
state in Raman, 119Sn Mossbauer effect and photo-contraction studies. The
columns formed in the porous (obliquely) deposited films may represent the
elements of medium range structure responsible for the rather unique physical
properties of glasses in the IP. Third, pnictide based glass systems, such as
As-Se, As-S and As-Ge-Se bearing glasses will be examined in Raman, NQR, EXAFS
and 129I Mossbauer spectroscopic studies to elucidate new aspects of molecular
structure recently inferred from the discovery of the IP in Modulated
Differential Scanning Calorimetry (MDSC) measurements. Lastly, 119Sn Lamb-
Mossbauer factors in select glasses will be established as a function of mean
coordination number to contrast the local elastic response of glasses in the IP
from those in the FP and the RP. Students will participate in this research and
will thereby be prepared to enter the scientific technical work force of the
21st Century.

This research concerns the properties of glasses and glass systems. Glasses are
characterized by progressive cross-linking of a floppy network that will render
it rigid at a critical connectivity. This is often realized by systematically
changing the chemical composition in a glass system. Experiments on sulfur- and
selenium-bearing glasses have shown however that a floppy phase (FP) and a rigid
phase (RP) are separated by an intermediate phase (IP). Four different sets of
experiments will be performed to establish the physical nature of the IP in
select glass systems. Different experimental techniques will be brought to bear
on selected glass systems over a range of glass compositions that encompass the
three different phases. The experiments will be performed over a wide
temperature range that embraces the transitions among the phases. Furthermore,
specially fabricated thin films of these glasses will be investigated. These
experiments are expected to shed light on the intricacies of glass systems under
various conditions of temperature and composition and the results will be of use
for the incorporation of new glasses in advanced technological devices. Students
will participate in these investigations. They will thereby acquire training in
one of the important contemporary areas of condensed matter physics and
materials science and will be prepared to enter the scientific/ technical work
force in industry, academe, and the government.