* 0101506
* Collaborative Research: The Role of Curvature in Combinatorics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,03/31/2004
* Jon McCammond, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 03/31/2004
* USD 269,979.00

DMS-0101506&lt;br/&gt;Jonathan McCammond&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In recent years
ideas from geometry have driven some of the &lt;br/&gt;most exciting
developments in combinatorics such as Gromov &lt;br/&gt;hyperbolic groups and
CAT(0) spaces, combinatorial Morse theory, combinatorial Ricci curvature,
combinatorial differential &lt;br/&gt;manifolds and matroid bundles. The central
unifying notion &lt;br/&gt;in geometry is that of curvature. Now, through these
diverse&lt;br/&gt;geometric and combinatorial theories, curvature is emerging
&lt;br/&gt;as a powerful tool and fundamental unifying concept in
&lt;br/&gt;combinatorics as well. This Focused Research Group will
&lt;br/&gt;explore some of the specific notions of
combinatorial&lt;br/&gt;curvature driving current combinatorial work, and also
the &lt;br/&gt;role of curvature as the basis for a coherent geometric
&lt;br/&gt;vision of combinatorics itself.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The notion of
curvature has been one of the grand unifying &lt;br/&gt;concepts in geometry and
physics for well over a century. &lt;br/&gt;For example, Gauss, the originator
of our modern understanding &lt;br/&gt;of curvature, showed that Euclidean
geometry was distinguished &lt;br/&gt;from other geometries as being the
geometry of a space with &lt;br/&gt;zero curvature. As an application he showed
that it is&lt;br/&gt;precisely the curvature of the surface of the Earth which
makes &lt;br/&gt;it impossible to draw a map of the Earth's surface (on a flat
&lt;br/&gt;piece of paper) that accurately portrays all lengths and
angles.&lt;br/&gt;Riemann generalized Gauss's work to smooth spaces of higher
&lt;br/&gt;dimensions, and Einstein observed that Riemannian
geometry&lt;br/&gt;was precisely the right setting in which to describe his
&lt;br/&gt;theory of general relativity (in which the curvature of the
&lt;br/&gt;universe is the result of gravitational forces). Partly as a
&lt;br/&gt;result of Einstein's work, the last century saw an intensive
investigation into the curvature of smooth spaces.&lt;br/&gt;Combinatorics,
roughly defined, is the study of objects which &lt;br/&gt;can be described by a
finite amount of information. This is &lt;br/&gt;precisely the mathematics that
computers can do. This type of mathematics seems far removed from the geometric
investigations &lt;br/&gt;of Gauss, Riemann and countless others. However, there
is a &lt;br/&gt;growing collection of combinatorial phenomena which can best
&lt;br/&gt;be viewed as being finite analogues of facts about the curvature
&lt;br/&gt;of smooth spaces. The goal of this proposal is to come to
a&lt;br/&gt;coherent understanding of curvature as a combinatorial notion.
&lt;br/&gt;In addition, bringing together researchers from a variety of
mathematical disciplines, we wish to bridge the chasms between geometry,
combinatorics, algebra and topology, using curvature &lt;br/&gt;as the unifying
theme.&lt;br/&gt;