* 0101969
* Hamiltonian Motions Under Strong Constrains
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Chongchun Zeng, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 06/30/2005
* USD 70,339.00

The project focuses on Hamiltonian ODEs and PDEs under strong
constraining&lt;br/&gt;forces. For an given Hamiltonian composed of the kinetic
energy and a&lt;br/&gt;potential energy, consider particles restricted to a
submanifold&lt;br/&gt;(independent of time) in the configuration space, i.e. a
holonomic&lt;br/&gt;constraint. The idealization of the constrained particles'
motion is&lt;br/&gt;governed by a Hamiltonian system defined on the tangent
bundle of this&lt;br/&gt;submanifold involving geometric notions. In physics, an
alternative way to&lt;br/&gt;realize the constraint is to consider the system in
the original space&lt;br/&gt;with an extra strong potential which penalizes the
distance to the&lt;br/&gt;constraining submanifold. This idea applies to both
Hamiltonian ODEs and&lt;br/&gt;PDEs. While the convergence of the motions under
strong constraining&lt;br/&gt;potentials to the limit geometric Hamiltonian
motions on finite time&lt;br/&gt;intervals has been studied for ODEs, the
problem in PDEs is basically&lt;br/&gt;untouched. The project focuses on two
questions. The first is the&lt;br/&gt;convergence of the strongly penalized
motions, both on finite and infinite&lt;br/&gt;time intervals. The second
question is the relation between the dynamics of&lt;br/&gt;the strongly
penalized motions and their limits, i.e. the structural&lt;br/&gt;stability
under strong constraining forces. The subjects are stability,&lt;br/&gt;periodic
motions, homoclinic motions, resonances, etc. The problem can also&lt;br/&gt;be
viewed as homogenization or elliptic type singular
perturbations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problem of motions of particles
restricted to submanifolds in the&lt;br/&gt;configuration space appears
naturally in both classical mechanics and&lt;br/&gt;PDEs. For example, in
classical mechanics, whenever a rigid rod is&lt;br/&gt;considered as elastic
with a large elastic coefficient, the problem falls&lt;br/&gt;in this category.
Also, it is found, in material science, that some&lt;br/&gt;anti-ferromagnetic
systems converges to geometric wave equations&lt;br/&gt;targeted on the unit
2-dimensional sphere formally. Therefore, it is&lt;br/&gt;important to study how
the constrained motions converge. Moreover, as the&lt;br/&gt;penalized motions
have high frequency oscillations, it is even more&lt;br/&gt;important to
investigate the relation between the asymptotic
qualitative&lt;br/&gt;behaviors.&lt;br/&gt;