* 0101106
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Understanding the Proliferation and Operation of Stock Markets in a Global Economy - Phase Three (Iceland)
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2001,08/31/2001
* Ronald Aminzade, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Fred C. Pampel
* 08/31/2001
* USD 10,297.00

At the end of 1997, there were stock markets in 103 different countries, and 48
were established between 1988 and 1997. Some of these new stock markets appear
similar to those established elsewhere, but others involve substantial local
control and have special characteristics. What explains the proliferation of
these stock markets, and the different forms they can take in different
countries? Four theories provide competing answers to these questions. First, a
'strong' theory of global change suggests that states are increasingly powerless
against homogenizing global economic forces. Second, a 'hollowing out' theory
predicts that global markets weaken and constrain rather than destroy state
capacity, and leave room for local control of markets. Third, a 'skeptical'
theory argues that states actively participate to varying degrees with
international economic forces, produce diverse national institutions, and allow
for considerable local control of markets. Fourth, a 'world culture' theory
explains increasing similarity across nations through the international
diffusion of organizational norms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project -- the
third phase of a larger study of recently-created stock markets -- examines
these questions and evaluates these theories through the study of new stock
markets in Fiji, Ghana, and Iceland. It uses methods of participant-observation,
in-depth interviews with market participants, and archival analysis to test
predictions about the global economy and state power in affecting the
establishment and operation of new stock market exchanges. In particular, the
study describes and analyzes the sources and types of information market
participants draw on, the connections of the market to international
organizations, and local and regional dynamics in market practices. &lt;br/&gt;