* 0101428
* Topics in Stochastic Control
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Wendell Fleming, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2004
* USD 54,995.00

This research program concerns several topics in stochastic control theory and
related areas of applied probability and nonlinear partial differential
equations. One topic is risk-sensitive control on an infinite time horizon,
motivated by problems of robust feedback controller design for nonlinear
systems. Another application of risk-sensitive control is in mathematical
finance, including dynamic portfolio allocation problems on long time horizons.
Yet another research topic concerns first order partial differential equations
of Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman type. While such equations are nonlinear in the usual
sense, they are linear with respect to max-plus algebra operations. This allows
for approximate solution via max-plus basis expansions. Finally stochastic
control models for economic growth and debt which arise in international finance
are being studied.

Stochastic control provides a framework for modeling and analysis of dynamic
decision making in the presence of uncertainty. The method of dynamic
programming provides a way to obtain optimal stochastic control policies by
solution of corresponding nonlinear partial differential equations. The research
funded through this grant is motivated by a range of applications in engineering
and financial economics, including robust feedback controller design, nonlinear
estimation and filtering and optimal dynamic investment allocation. In
international finance,growth/debt models are considered in which the goal is to
choose national investment and consumption policies which optimize a suitably
chosen criterion subject to imposed constraints. The model performance under
optimal control may provide benchmarks to suggest whether actual current account
deficits and levels of foreign debt are sustainable under current policies.