* 0101118
* M-I Coupling:  A Model for Ionospheric Velocity Structure in the High-Latitude F Region
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Roderick Heelis, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Robert B. Kerr
* 08/31/2005
* USD 210,001.00

As coupled magnetospheric, ionospheric and thermospheric models mature it is
increasingly apparent that Joule heating may take place over a wide variety of
spatial scale sizes. Current models used for space weather estimate Joule
heating rates by using average bulk plasma flow velocities (Vb) in large-scale
high-latitude convection patterns. However, recent studies suggest that
structure in the ion drift over smaller scale sizes of 10 to 100 km may change
the estimated Joule heating rate by more than a factor of 2. This proposal will
use data from the Dynamics Explorer-2 satellite and from the DMSP satellites to
describe the average and maximum amplitude of velocity structure (AV) at high
latitudes as a function of position, season, solar cycle and geomagnetic
activity. Thus, Joule heating rates previously calculated using only the average
bulk flow rate Vb of the plasma will be improved to become a function of Vb +
AV. The data description will be cast in the form of a model that functionally
describes the magnitude of the velocity structure in terms of the bulk flow so
that these refined estimates of Joule heating rates can be easily used both in
thermospheric models and as boundary conditions for coupling magnetospheric
models with the ionosphere. A first order dependence of the model on magnetic
activity will allow a better specification of the high latitude thermosphere and
ionosphere for space weather applications.