* 0101610
* Workshop and Symposium:  GENOMICS: BEYOND THE SEQUENCE, Edinburgh, Scotland, March 26-27, 2001
* BIO,DEB
* 03/15/2001,02/28/2002
* James Staley, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Matthew Kane
* 02/28/2002
* USD 32,680.00

DEB-0101610&lt;br/&gt;James T. Staley&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;James T. Staley of
the University of Washington has been awarded a grant to to support 8 U.S. PIs
and 8 students/postdocs to attend a 2-day public symposium and 1-day workshop
entitled "Genomics: Beyond the Sequence" in Edinburgh, Scotland, 26-27 March,
2001. The event is sponsored by the Systematic and Evolutionary Group of the
Society of General Microbiology and the International Committee for Systematic
Bacteriology. Participants at the symposium and workshop will discuss, digest
and forecast the impact that genomics will have on our understanding of the
evolution of prokaryotes and their inter-relationships. It is intended that
speakers will draw heavily from data, tools, etc. derived from complete genome
sequencing projects and develop a perspective of future developments at the
interface of microbial systematics and genomics. Prokaryotic microbes are the
oldest, most abundant and most diverse forms of life on earth. They are
responsible for maintaining Earth's biogeochemical cycles, sustaining its
ecosystems, and regenerating the air that we breathe, the water that we drink,
and the soil in which we grow our food. Microorganisms are also at the
foundation of the modern revolution in biotechnology. An understanding of the
evolutionary patterns and processes of these organisms is essential to all
microbiological research, and genomics offers the ultimate tool for resolving
their phylogeny, taxonomy and classification. Half of the funds of this award
will go to supporting training for students and postdoctoral participants in the
symposium and workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;