* 0101246
* Oxygen Exchange Rates At Aluminum Polynuclear Complexes: Models For Mineral Surfaces
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2005
* William Casey, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 12/31/2005
* USD 360,063.00

Casey and Phillips&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0101246&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main goal of
this project is to determine rate laws for exchange of individual oxygens
between structural sites in large clay-like aluminum complexes and water. The
aluminum nanoclusters are chosen to have structural elements in common with soil
mineral surfaces and a similar surface charge density of protons. Unlike bulk
studies of mineral reactions with fluid, our experiments yield information about
rate laws for exchange of individual oxygens with the bulk solution at a scale
that is suitable for computer simulation. This molecular-scale research requires
reconsideration of much current thinking about mechanisms for mineral reaction
in water. For example: 1) The important oxygens for mineral dissolution are
apparently highly coordinated oxygens deeper in the molecule. 2) Proton transfer
to the bridging hydroxyls, which precedes exchange of the oxygens, commonly
takes place internally and not by proton uptake from the solution. 3)
Dissociation of a surface-bound water molecule controls the rates of many
adsorption reactions, yet the rates at individual sites are largely unknown. We
find that these solvolysis rates for large polyoxocations fall into the same
range as dissolved aluminum monomers, suggesting that the rates for edges of
clays and protonated aluminum hydroxide minerals are similar. 4) The rates of
oxygen exchange are highly sensitive to metal substitutions, in ways that could
not have been anticipated from bulk studies or by changes in from bond lengths
determined by X-ray crystallography. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;