* 0101935
* Development of a Distance Learning Program for K-12 Science and Mathematics Teachers
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Luis de Jesus-Berrios, University of Puerto Rico
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Haney
* 08/31/2006
* USD 1,352,150.00

The Puerto Rico Resource Center for Science and Engineering (RCSE) and partners
are instituting a distance learning program for K-12 science and math teachers.
The content strands are the "areas of special emphasis" that emerged from the
Puerto Rico Statewide Systemic Initiative (PRSSI). The workshops and courses are
delivered by the University and designed to meet the needs of local teachers in
district efforts to implement standards-based mathematics and science
instruction. Thirty lead teachers provide local technical and content support
for districts that participate in the project. Over five years, 1000 K-12
teachers will participate in and take courses through the project. Much of this
is done through telecommunications technologies, which are used for delivery,
collaboration, access, reflection, inquiry, online discussions and mentoring.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project builds on the SSI which has impacted nearly
50% of the island's schools. It clearly notes the work completed under the SSI
and delineates what is left to be done. It is this remaining work that
constitutes the core of the project. These efforts are supported by networking
being installed throughout the island (T1), a number of earlier grants, and
links to New York City (Lehman College). In addition, the project uses a
supporting technology called mindtools. These are defined as "computer-based
tools and learning environments that have been adapted or developed to function
as intellectual partners with the learner in order to engage and facilitate
critical thinking and higher order learning." In addition to content and
methods, the project provides teachers with badly needed training in the use of
computer-based technologies. The project also carries out research on the
necessary conditions to scale such technologies.&lt;br/&gt;