* 0101269
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Rainfall Characteristics and the Influence of Urban Land Use on Shallow Landslide Initiation in Seattle, Washington
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2001,11/30/2003
* T. Nelson Caine, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 11/30/2003
* USD 5,280.00

Shallow landslides often occur on natural hillslopes during rainstorms of high
intensity or long duration. While researchers have examined the profound effects
that that an urban environment can have on surface hydrology and drainage
morphology, relatively little attention has been given to the effects of
urbanization on landslide hazards. This doctoral dissertation research project
will address the influence of impervious surfaces on shallow landslide
occurrence in Seattle, an urban area with a precipitation climatology
characterized by winter rainstorms of long duration and low intensity. The
project will use a geographic information system (GIS) framework to combine
rainfall data from a dense gauge network, high-resolution digital topography, a
historical record of landslide occurrence, and a remotely sensed map of
impervious surfaces. Analyses of these data will facilitate evaluation of the
watershed-scale effects of surface drainage alteration on landslide
susceptibility. Research methods will include compilation of historical shallow
landslide occurrence and associated precipitation climatology. Empirical
relations between rainfall intensity/duration will be defined. Field
investigations of large or recent landslides will provide information on the
geologic setting, style of landslide failure and deposition, and influence of
drainage modifications. To evaluate the effect of impervious surfaces on
landslide occurrence, a coupled rainfall-infiltration/slope-stability model will
be used to describe the spatial distribution of pore-water pressures at depth
during rainstorms in which landslide are known to have
occurred.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine the influence of
impervious surfaces on landslide hazard in an urban setting where slope failure
occurs during rainstorms of low intensity and long duration by applying a
coupled, physically based model in a GIS framework. The study will illuminate
the processes through which the urban environment has a significant impact on
hillslope processes at the watershed scale. In a broader context, the project
will add to the understanding of human impact on geomorphic systems. Results
from this study should provide predictive and design tools for emergency
management and planning. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award,
this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish
a strong independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;