* 0101030
* Dynamics of Brittle Fracture
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Harry Swinney, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 08/31/2005
* USD 493,820.00

0101030 &lt;br/&gt;Marder &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We will carry out studies in
single crystal silicon to find how the speed of a rapidly running crack depends
upon loading magnitude, loading mode, crystal plane, orientation, and
temperature. The studies will include the first investigations of crystalline
fracture at temperatures below 100K. We will also provide careful measurements
of the structures left behind the cracks, both on and below the fracture
surface. In addition, we will investigate the brittle-ductile transition for
polymers, glasses, ionic crystals, and alloys, and study the laws governing
crack paths in crystalline and amorphous materials.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;When
airplanes or bridges fail, the culprit is often fracture. Cracks race across
solid structures near the speed of sound, ripping them in two. At the same time,
fracture underlies many processes used to shape materials, such as cutting,
sanding, or polishing. The first motivation to study fracture is therefore to
protect engineering structures, and the second is to learn new ways to
manipulate and form them. We have been constructing experiments to obtain
detailed information on how fracture proceeds under precisely controlled
conditions. Our experiments will be performed in single crystals of silicon at
temperatures that are 200 degrees C below room temperature. The information from
these experiments will tell us how the structure of matter at the atomic scale
affects fracture, and will test theories claiming to make predictions about
&lt;br/&gt;possible atomic effects. As the experiments in silicon are completed,
we will broaden our studies to investigate crack motion in other crystalline and
glassy materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;