* 0101897
* Facilitating Lenses on Learning:  Developing Leadership to Support Excellent Teaching in Elementary Mathematics
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2009
* Barbara Nelson, Education Development Center
* Continuing Grant
* John S. Bradley
* 07/31/2009
* USD 1,673,137.00

Under prior grants from the National Science Foundation, Education Development
Center (EDC) has developed two year-long courses, called "Lenses on Learning: A
New Focus on Mathematics and School Leadership," and "Lenses on Learning:
Classroom Observation and Teacher Supervision," that provide school and district
administrators with the opportunity to explore new ideas about mathematics,
learning and teaching; to think critically about the nature of mathematics
instruction; and to think through the implications of these ideas for how they
support teachers and standards-based instruction. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Building
on previous work, this project ensures the availability of highly qualified
Lenses on Learning facilitators on a national scale. Professional associations
in mathematics and school administration, state departments of education, state-
wide principal's academies, regional consortia for mathematics and science, and
large school districts are project partners key to national dissemination
efforts. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Facilitator Institutes will provide prospective
facilitators with the orientation and skills they need to teach either Lenses on
Learning course. In the years 2001-2002, 2002-2003, and 2003-2004 EDC will offer
year-long Facilitators Institutes, each consisting of a two-week residential
summer program, on-line support during the following academic year, and two
three-day retreats during the academic year. EDC also will offer facilitators an
Advanced Institute. Participating organizations and districts are required to
teach Lenses on Learning courses in their home sites in the year(s) following
their participation in the Institute.&lt;br/&gt;