* 0101781
* Tropical Cyclogenesis via Non-Axisymmetric Upscale Energy Cascade and Its Disruption by Vertical Shear
* GEO,AGS
* 05/15/2001,10/31/2006
* Michael Montgomery, Colorado State University
* Continuing Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 10/31/2006
* USD 777,103.00

This project involves studies of tropical cyclogenesis and development along
three avenues. Previous work by the PI and his group advanced the understanding
of the axisymmetrization for vortices where the mean vortex intensifies at the
expense of the small-scale vorticity anomalies through an upscale energy cascade
process using a fairly simple model. As the first avenue of investigation, the
PI will further explore the validity of the theory using a more realistic three-
dimensional cloud-resolving model under various initial conditions. The second
avenue is to examine and determine the conditions for the disruptions of the
upscale energy cascade. If a barotropic vortex is tilted from its rotation axis,
it may or may not return to its upright position (alignment) and disrupt the
upscale energy cascade. This work seeks to determine the conditions that enable
a finite Rossby number vortex to resist the adverse effects of vertical shear.
The third avenue will be the testing of the theory using the airborne Doppler-
radar data from a tropical cyclone field experiment done in 1991. This part of
the work will be done in collaboration with Drs. Frank Mark and Paul Reasor of
HRD and Prof. Lance Bosart of SUNY/Albany. The results of this project have the
potential to enhance the understanding of tropical cyclogenesis and to improve
the prediction of tropical cyclone intensity.