* 0101856
* In Situ Characterization of Electrical and Optical Properties of Air-Sensitive Ultra-Thin Films and Thin-Film Interfaces
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Arthur Hebard, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 08/31/2004
* USD 334,106.00

The focus of this project is on the fabrication and in situ characterization of
air sensitive ultra-thin films and thin-film interfaces. The capability to
perform these investigations relies on a recently constructed Sample-Handling-
In-VAcuum (SHIVA) chamber in which thin-film samples can be reliably
connected/disconnected at the deposition station (where optical and transport
measurements can be made) and then transferred, without exposure to air, to the
bottom of a vacuum-compatible cryostat for low temperature (1.3K) and high field
(7T) magnetotransport measurements. The rationale for this approach centers on
observations that air sensitivity can be a primary impediment to unraveling
intrinsic behavior in a variety of systems. The scope of work will be
concentrated in four overlapping areas: percolation and the metal-insulating
transition, metal/C60 bilayers and composites, magnetism in reduced dimensions,
and the determination of screening lengths at metal-dielectric interfaces.
Specific systems to be studied include Ag films near the percolation threshold
(exhibits pure geometric behavior and a negative classical magnetoresistance),
magnetic (Ni, Fe, Co, Gd) metal/C-60 bilayers and composites (exhibits charge
transfer and anomalous positive magnetoresistance), thin disordered magnetic and
magnetic semiconductor (e.g., Fe, GdxSi1-x) films, and tunnel junction capacitor
structures with magnetic electrodes (exhibits magnetocapacitance due to
dependence of screening length on magnetic field). We expect that the SHIVA
system will greatly facilitate a comprehensive understanding of novel physical
phenomena occurring in air sensitive systems. This research is carried out with
students who will acquire training skills that will prepare them for future
employment in the scientific/technological sector of our economy.

As the thickness of a metallic film decreases, its electrical properties become
increasingly sensitive to its interface with the underlying substrate and its
interface with the ambient environment. For example, many freshly deposited thin
films (e.g., Al, Fe) will rapidly oxidize when exposed to air and, if
sufficiently thin, will in a short time become totally oxidized. To measure the
intrinsic electrical properties of such air-sensitive thin films, it therefore
becomes necessary to utilize specialized techniques in which air is prevented
from reaching the sample in the period between its fabrication and electrical
characterization. The capability to perform these investigations relies on a
recently constructed Sample-Handling-In-VAcuum (SHIVA) chamber in which thin-
film samples can be reliably connected/disconnected at the deposition station
(where optical and transport measurements can be made) and then transferred,
without exposure to air, to the bottom of a separate vacuum-compatible chamber
for electrical measurements at low temperatures and high magnetic fields.
Specific systems to be studied include metal films near the conduction
threshold, magnetic metal/Carbon-60 bilayers and composites, thin disordered
magnetic and magnetic semiconductor films, and tunnel junction capacitor
structures with magnetic electrodes. We expect that the SHIVA vacuum deposition
and characterization system will greatly facilitate a comprehensive
understanding of novel physical phenomena occurring in air sensitive systems.
Students will participate in this research. They will thereby acquire skills and
training in preparation for employment in scientific/technological sectors of
industry, academe, and government.