* 0101244
* CISE Research Infrastructure:  MultiStore:  A Research Infrastructure for Management, Analysis and Visualization of Large-Scale Multidimensional Data Sets
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2001,02/29/2008
* Russ Miller, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Chitaranjan Das
* 02/29/2008
* USD 1,003,091.00

EIA-0101244&lt;br/&gt;Aidong Zhang&lt;br/&gt;SUNY at
Buffalo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;MultiStore: A Research Infrastructure for
Management, Analysis and Visualization of Large-Scale Multi-dimensional Data
Sets&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project establishes a research infrastructure
(MultiStore) for supporting integrated research in specific targeted areas of
Computer Science, including Multimedia, visualization, Geographical Information
Systems (GIS) and Bioinformatics. The research objective is to develop
computational theories and algorithms for storing, managing, analyzing, querying
and visualizing multi-dimensional data sets that are generated from the related
fields. The research components include: (1) Data storage and management. We
develop approaches to manage large-scale multi-dimensional data sets. Particular
research issues include: multi-dimensional data storage, indexing, and
clustering. (2) Data visualization. We develop effective graphics and
visualization techniques that can help the user in information processing tasks.
Particular research topics addressed include graph visualization and detecting
clusters in a multidimensional data set through visualization. The visualization
tools will be used in biomedical image understanding and analysis. (3) Data
analysis and querying. We focus on geographical image understanding, analysis
and querying. The particular research issues include geographical
metadata/knowledge extraction, geographical metadata/knowledge representation
and management, and geographical metadata/knowledge querying. (4) Data mining
and bioinformatics. We develop data mining techniques for determination of
protein structures and detection of gene expression patterns. Through these
research activities, the fundamental understanding and novel techniques will be
provided to support the management of various large-scale multi-dimensional data
sets. &lt;br/&gt;