* 0101692
* A Career for Computer Techs in the Four Corners
* EHR,DUE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Katherine Larason, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 08/31/2002
* USD 51,903.00

This project is designing and implementing courses and curricula to produce
well-qualified computer technicians and Web designers who will serve rural
northwestern New Mexico--specifically, McKinley County, the Navajo Nation, and
Zuni Pueblo. Largely by adapting and implementing resources from other
institutions, the project is developing (1) a new certificate program and A.A.S.
degree program in computer repair and networking technology and (2) a new
certificate program and A.A.S. degree program in Internet technology and Web
design. The student audience is community college students at UNM-Gallup and
high school students who participate in a dual-enrollment vocational program at
UNM-Gallup. The project is also offering several workshops on basic computer
maintenance and Web operations for UNM-Gallup faculty and prospective and
current high school teachers.

Gallup (population 20,000) is located on I-40 in McKinley County, one of the
poorest counties in the United States, between the Navajo Nation (population
250,000) and Zuni Pueblo (population 10,000). UNM-Gallup is both a two-year
community college and a branch campus located 140 miles from the main UNM campus
at Albuquerque, with a full-time enrollment of approximately 1,500 students,
most of whom are Native American. Major area employers are local and federal
schools, healthcare facilities, and governments. Many Native Americans are self-
employed craftspeople. Although local unemployment is high (8.4% in December
1998), most residents are reluctant to leave the area because of historical and
cultural ties to the land and their families.

According to a Vocational Needs Assessment that surveyed students, parents, and
employers, UNM-Gallup has a pressing need for a program to train technicians to
maintain the increasing numbers of computers and networks in the college's
service area. Skilled applicants are needed for this growing job market. This
project is a response to the problem. It provides local students with the
technical education and assistance they need to find local jobs, and it also
translates into more Native American students seeking four-year electrical and
computer engineering degrees.

