* 0101793
* Pattern Formation in Non-equilibrium Systems:  Self-organization and Stochasticity
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Herbert Levine, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 06/30/2005
* USD 219,000.00

0101793&lt;br/&gt;Levine&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research on pattern formation with applications to physical,
chemical, and biological problems. The focus of the research includes pattern
nucleation, self-organized flocking states, and stochasticity in interface
dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;The PI aims to apply a combined numerical and analytical
approach to the problem of pattern nucleation. Pattern nucleation refers to the
creation of patterns by fluctuation effects in systems exhibiting
multistability. The research effort will include applications. Of immediate
interest is the spontaneous creation of intracellular calcium waves by
stochastic channel openings. &lt;br/&gt;Flocking behavior occurs in interacting
multiparticle systems away from any simple equilibrium state. Self-organized
structures arising from flocking have been found in a wide range of diverse
systems from microorganism colonies to human pedestrian traffic. Continuum
equations will be devised for these processes with an aim to better understand
allowed parameter ranges and instability mechanisms. Results from model
calculations will be compared to real-world data obtained in part through
collaboration with leading experts in the fields of animal flocking, traffic
patterns, and amoeba aggregation. &lt;br/&gt;The PI will also continue his
studies of how stochasticity influences interface dynamics. Efforts will focus
on extending two possibilities, pulse backfiring in excitable systems and noise-
induced diffusive instabilities. The PI aims to find an analytic approach and to
find necessary and sufficient conditions for the occurrence of these anomalous
noise effects. A new effort is planned on an application to noise effects during
infection spreading. &lt;br/&gt;This award also supports education through
research results that are incorporated into a course on pattern formation and
through the preparation of a textbook on pattern
formation.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical and
computational research on the physics of non-equilibrium processes, especially
in the emergence of spatial patterns in extended systems. The research will in
part, capitalize on tremendous advances in the field over the past decade to
make critical and nontrivial predictions regarding the behavior of a wide
variety of complex systems. The work will focus on how fluctuations influence
the formation of patterns in systems with coexisting dynamical states, on
understanding the self-organizing properties of interacting self-propelled
particles, and on better characterizing the conditions under which noise-
sensitive interfaces occur.&lt;br/&gt;Results of this work will provide a
foundation for a wide range of specific applications to physical, chemical, and
biological systems. The PI will focus on the spontaneous creation of
intracellular calcium waves by stochastic channel openings, animal flocking,
traffic patterns, amoeba aggregation, and infection spreading. This award also
supports education through research results that are incorporated into a course
on pattern formation and through the preparation of a textbook on pattern
formation.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;