* 0101529
* Pointwise and Semigroup Methods in Viscous Conservation Laws and Completely Integrable Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2001,10/31/2001
* Jonathan Goodman, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Roger T. Lewis
* 10/31/2001
* USD 31,000.00

Viscous conservation laws arise in a wide variety of physical
&lt;br/&gt;applications, including fluid dynamics,
magnetohydrodynamics,&lt;br/&gt;and materials science. Of particular importance
are solutions&lt;br/&gt;of such equations that are stable and hence typically
&lt;br/&gt;correspond with observable phenomena. Unfortunately,
establishing&lt;br/&gt;the stability of these solutions has proven to be a
quite&lt;br/&gt;difficult problem. The pointwise Green's function
approach,&lt;br/&gt;however, initiated by Liu and developed by Liu and his
&lt;br/&gt;collaborators, has proven quite robust: in applications to
&lt;br/&gt;viscous shock waves arising in single conservation laws
of&lt;br/&gt;arbitrary order, viscous shock waves arising in systems
&lt;br/&gt;with second order diffusion, planar viscous shock waves,
&lt;br/&gt;degenerate viscous shock waves, and rarefaction waves. &lt;br/&gt;We
propose to continue and extend this promising line of&lt;br/&gt;research in
three directions. First, new techniques &lt;br/&gt;recently developed by Howard
and Zumbrun appear suitable&lt;br/&gt;for extension to (i) systems of viscous
conservation &lt;br/&gt;laws admitting degenerate viscous shock waves, and
(ii)&lt;br/&gt;systems of viscous conservation laws with high
order&lt;br/&gt;viscosity. Second, we propose to develop further
&lt;br/&gt;techniques that will extend the pointwise Green's &lt;br/&gt;function
approach to the case of viscous rarefaction &lt;br/&gt;waves. Finally, we would
like to incorporate new techniques&lt;br/&gt;recently developed in the context
of perturbation theory&lt;br/&gt;for completely integrable systems into the
study of &lt;br/&gt;the necessarily oscillatory dynamics that arise in
&lt;br/&gt;viscous conservation laws of order higher than
two.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The conservation of such fundamental
properties as energy and&lt;br/&gt;momentum often leads to partial differential
equations&lt;br/&gt;that model some underlying physical process. For
example,&lt;br/&gt;the Navier-Stokes equations of fluid dynamics and
&lt;br/&gt;the Maxwell equations of electromagnetism follow this
&lt;br/&gt;paradigm. Of primary concern are stable phenomena:
those&lt;br/&gt;whose principal structure is robust to minor
environmental&lt;br/&gt;fluctuations. We propose to continue and extend a
&lt;br/&gt;promising line of research that has been extraordinarily
&lt;br/&gt;successful in establishing a clear criterion for
such&lt;br/&gt;stability. A direct consequence of the approach is a
&lt;br/&gt;detailed understanding of certain fundamental
partial&lt;br/&gt;differential equations.&lt;br/&gt;