* 0101122
* Suppression of Friction-Induced Oscillations Through Use of High-Frequency Dither Signals
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2001,12/31/2005
* Aldo Ferri, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Eduardo Misawa
* 12/31/2005
* USD 238,446.00

PI: Kenneth A. Cunefare, The Georgia Institute of Technology&lt;br/&gt;Proposal
number: 01001122&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Suppression of Friction-Induced
Oscillations Through Use of High-Frequency Dither
Signals&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project Abstract: This research project
investigates the suppression of friction-induced oscillations through the use of
high-frequency dither signals. The primary application of this research effort
is that of brake squeal, which is a self-excited vibration that afflicts most
braking systems. Brake squeal has been an elusive problem to solve because it
involves an interaction of multiple brake components. This project builds upon
research conducted on Georgia Tech's brake squeal dynamometer, which
demonstrated that a high frequency dither in the brake pressure could
effectively eliminate squeal. This dither force, supplied by means of a
piezoceramic actuator, used frequencies beyond the audible range, thus silencing
the brake system. This research project aims to understand more fully how dither
suppresses brake squeal and how to develop more effective dither-control
strategies. The proposed work uses a combination of analytical and experimental
techniques. Nonlinear mathematical models of brake systems and subsystems will
be developed and validated against experimental observations. The experimental
program will explore the use of alternative dither signals as well as feedback
to enhance performance and robustness. The influence of dither on mean braking
torque will also be assessed. This work promises to have a significant impact in
a variety of industrial and scientific applications. Brake squeal-related
warranty claims impose a high cost upon the automotive industry. Additionally,
brake manufacturers must currently make design compromises in the selection of
brake pad materials, compromising on materials that are less prone to induce
squeal. Therefore, a low-cost, simple technology that permits improved braking
performance while reducing development and warranty costs would yield
substantial benefits.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;