* 0101052
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Intrametropolitan Geography of Producer Services
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2001,04/30/2003
* Susan Fainstein, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 04/30/2003
* USD 10,000.00

In recent decades, suburbs have expanded their share of the metropolitan job
base and matured into bustling economic centers blurring the once distinct
boundaries between the urban core and the suburban periphery. As metropolitan
regions have been transformed, so has the nature of the relationship between
central cities and suburbs, prompting a debate that has penetrated both policy
circles and the popular press about the importance of the central city to the
metropolitan economy. This doctoral dissertation research project will examine
urban-suburban economic relationships and the unique agglomeration economies
central cities are purported to have through an analysis of the intra-
metropolitan location of producer service industries and the spatial linkages
between producer service establishments and their clients, competitors and
suppliers. Producer services are an important group of industries to study given
that they are held to be traditional "city" industries and represent a dynamic
segment of the economy. This project will use data on employment, wages, output,
and the spatial linkages between major U.S. firms and their producer service
providers to examine the intra-metropolitan location of producer services and
the spatial division of producer service functions in 20 major U.S metropolitan
areas. This analysis will provide a backdrop for a comparative case study of the
accounting industry in the New York and Minneapolis-St. Paul regions. Case study
data will be collected through a telephone survey of accounting firms and
supplemental interviews with firm representatives, development officials, and
industry experts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research project will contribute to
the industrial location literature by identifying trends in the intra-
metropolitan location of producer service industries and the factors that drive
location decisions. This research also has the potential to influence local and
regional development policy. Greater insight into why certain producer services
continue to cluster in central cities and the extent to which suburbs and
central cities compete as producer-service providers will advance understanding
of the economic interdependencies of cities and suburbs and help to determine if
agglomeration economies represent a competitive advantage of central cities.
Identifying and building upon competitive advantages will help jurisdictions in
crafting local and metropolitan-wide development strategies aimed at maximizing
economic competitiveness. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award,
this award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish
a strong independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;