* 0101004
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Biogeography of Island Flora in the Georgian Bay, Lake Huron, Ontario
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2001,10/31/2002
* Jacob Bendix, Syracuse University
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 10/31/2002
* USD 10,000.00

Concepts of species-island relationships originated in and have been widely
applied to islands in marine environments. Among the factors most often examined
biogeographers and ecologists exploring variations as they examine species
richness on islands have been the relative and absolute distances separating
islands from sources of colonists and the area of the islands under examination.
More recent studies have highlighted the possible role that factors like
effective distance, island morphology, environmental heterogeneity, disturbance,
species interactions, and vegetation dynamics may play. This doctoral
dissertation research project will expand the application of island biogeography
concepts through analysis of islands in freshwater environments, particularly
the factors influencing spatial and temporal variation of island vegetation
within the Massasauga Provincial Park on the eastern shore of the Georgian Bay.
Among the research questions to be addressed are: Do species-area and species-
distance relationships apply in the Massasauga islands? What mediating factors
besides area and distance affect species richness on the islands? Do forest age-
class structures help determine whether there is a long-term equilibrium of
species richness, or do current characteristics of vegetation represent only one
stage in a process of dynamic change? To answer these questions, herbaceous and
woody species richness will be determined along two 1-m-belt transects on each
of 50 islands selected through stratified random sampling. Within 100-m-squared
quadrats centered randomly along the transects, the number of trees, saplings,
and seedlings will be recorded by species. The diameter of all trees within the
quadrats will be recorded, and tree cores will be taken from a subset of those
trees. Substrate texture, pH, and depth to bedrock will be recorded from the
center of the quadrats. Topographic maps and hydrographic charts will be used to
measure island size and perimeter, island distances, and topographic
variability. Distance variables, prevailing atmospheric patterns, lake currents,
and island density (i.e. stepping stones) will be used to determine effective
distance. Island shape will be calculated as a perimeter/area ratio. The
dependent variable, species richness, will be calculated for the overall data
set and for subsets consisting of forest, shrub, and herbaceous species. The
ratio-level independent variables will be tested for their relative impact on
species richness using multiple regression. Simple regression will be used to
establish relationships between diameters and age in order to estimate ages for
all of the sampled trees. Age-class plots of stands on each island will be drawn
to help determine whether or not dominant species are reproducing themselves.
This will allow inferences to be made about the possibility of changing species
dominance and therefore of changing species richness within ecological time
scales. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigating measurable factors influencing
species richness of Massasauga park will further understanding of island
biogeographic concepts in freshwater settings. By incorporating a temporal
dimension of forest dynamics as an indicator of the stability or impermanence of
current species richness, the results of the proposed research will be
generalizable to broader issues of ecological change. This research will provide
management officials with baseline data and insight regarding island vegetation
and biodiversity. Research results will also pertain to current issues
concerning the ecological integrity of the Georgian Bay shoreline, including the
Massasauga islands. Two initiatives (Ontario's Heritage Coast Project and the
Thirty Thousand Islands United Nations Biosphere Reserve proposal) are planned
to generate eco-tourism and development activities in the region, which would
increase island use. Increasing human pressures may eventually lead to shifts in
the species richness and composition of the islands. As a Doctoral Dissertation
Research Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a
promising student to establish a strong independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;