* 0101193
* Teaching Excellence and Mathematics II (TEAM II)
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2001,01/31/2009
* Gwendolyn Clay, Meredith College
* Continuing Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 01/31/2009
* USD 1,658,960.00

The TEAM II project, submitted in the area of Teacher Retention and Renewal,
will develop highly qualified elementary mathematics teacher leaders throughout
North Carolina. Principals and central staff will locally support teacher
leaders. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the project is to develop the state's
leadership infrastructure by improving teachers' leadership skills, mathematical
and pedagogical content knowledge. Staff development will provide in-depth
investigation focused on: (a) national and state mathematics standards; (b)
mathematics content and pedagogy; (c) curricular materials that support
standards-based learning; and (d) the process of change.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Administrators are extensively involved in this project.
Lenses on Learning staff development materials will be used to increase
administrators' knowledge of mathematics content and pedagogy. Administrators
and lead teachers will receive support to develop long- and short-range plans to
effectively implement reform-based curricula at the school level.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Internal evaluation will include surveys of participants
during summer institutes, interviews with project staff and instructors,
conversations with school system principals and central office staff, and
participants' reflections on the usefulness of project activities. External
evaluation will document increased knowledge of participants, application of
this knowledge in instruction, effects of improved teaching on student learning,
and leadership by participants in NC mathematics reform. Data will be gathered
through content assessments, interviews, written reflections, classroom
observations, analysis of end-of-grade test scores and reports of leadership
activities.&lt;br/&gt;