* 0101574
* Collective Dynamics and Mesoscale Physics of Quasi-One-Dimensional Conductors
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2001,02/29/2004
* Robert Thorne, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 02/29/2004
* USD 380,000.00

This individual investigator award will fund a project to study moving charge-
density waves (CDWs) in niobium triselenide films and single crystals. The
project will combine crystal and film growth with various characterization
techniques. The materials will be explored through the application of spatially
and temporally resolved transport measurements as well as novel diffraction
tools. In particular, spatially-resolved transport and coherent x-ray
diffraction measurements will explore the cause of a recently discovered form of
extremely slow creep-like collective motion that exhibits temporal order. A
related first-order dynamic transition will also be studied. Spatially-resolved
measurements of CDW conduction noise will be used to investigate spatio-temporal
correlations in CDW dynamics. Through growth chamber and target modifications
and lattice-matched substrates fully oriented films with improved grain sizes
and transport properties will be grown. These films as well as single crystals
will be used to fabricate a variety of CDW microstructures and heterostructures
that will allow study of fundamental aspects of CDW physics, of interactions
between the CDW, superconducting, and metallic states, and of potential
applications of these remarkable materials. This work will provide excellent
training to graduate and undergraduate students in the concepts and techniques
of modern materials science, solid-state physics, and
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Novel electronic materials including high-
temperature superconductors, conducting polymers, carbon nanotubes, and charge-
density-wave (CDW) conductors illuminate the fundamental physical processes that
underlie how solid state electronic devices work, and provide opportunities for
creating the electronics of tomorrow. Next to superconductors, CDW conductors
are perhaps the most remarkable electronic materials ever discovered. An
important barrier to the understanding, and practical application, of these
materials has been the lack of high-quality thin films from which to fabricate
devices. This barrier is now being overcome, and the first thin films of the CDW
conductor niobium triselenide have been prepared. This individual investigator
award will fund a project that focuses on improving the quality of these films,
preparing unusual device structures from them, and then exploring the
fundamental and useful properties of these devices. This work will provide
excellent training to graduate and undergraduate students in the concepts and
techniques of modern materials science, solid-state physics, and nanotechnology.
&lt;br/&gt;