* 0101119
* M-I Coupling: High-Latitude Plasma Outflow as Measured by the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) Spacecraft
* GEO,AGS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* William Coley, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Robert B. Kerr
* 08/31/2005
* USD 180,001.00

There are indications that the dominant source of plasma for the plasma sheet
and the near-Earth portion of the magnetosphere may be the ionosphere. Over the
past two decades there have been numerous investigations involving spacecraft
observations, radar observations, and simulations directed toward understanding
the possible mechanisms that drive the upward/outward ionospheric plasma flow
observed in the high-latitude F region above 500 km
altitude.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A good empirical model has not been generated for
the outflow (inflow) of plasma from (to) the auroral zone and polar cap as a
function of geomagnetic activity, solar activity, and season. This proposal
seeks to address this latter issue through the utilization of ion flow data from
the Defense Meteorological Satellite Program (DMSP) series of spacecraft, flying
in the topside F region at the 800 km altitude level. The database from these
high duty cycle spacecraft observations extends from 1987 to the present,
covering more than a complete solar cycle.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Major proposed
tasks in performing this research are 1) the determination of the seasonal
variation in the plasma outflow in the topside F region, 2) investigation of the
baseline values of the outflux and velocity structure and of the magnitude of
storm-time perturbations in the plasma outflow, 3) performing a superposed epoch
analysis to establish the characteristic response of the ionosphere to changes
in magnetic activity, and 4) development of an analytic model of plasma outflow
suitable for use by the general scientific community.&lt;br/&gt;