* 0101775
* Botanical Inventory of the Madidi Region, Bolivia
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Timothy Killeen, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* James Woolley
* 08/31/2003
* USD 225,000.00

0101775&lt;br/&gt;Jorgensen, Churchill, Killeen, Telleria.&lt;br/&gt;Bolivia is
one of the most biologically diverse countries in the world and the Madidi
region has the highest level of biodiversity within Bolivia. A collaborative
research effort is underway to catalogue and describe the plant and fungal
diversity of that region. The survey is designed to measure biodiversity at
different levels using complementary methodologies: 1) A general inventory will
be based on newly collected specimens in order to produce a comprehensive list
of fungi, mosses, and vascular plants. Collections will contribute to
phylogenetic and biogeographic research carried out by specialists all over the
world using both traditional and DNA sequencing techniques. 2) Permanent study
plots will be used to determine plant species richness within specific habitats
and to establish a long-term effort to monitor the health of the ecosystems that
house that biodiversity. 3) Satellite images will be combined with data on
topography, elevation, geology, and climate in a geographic information system
(GIS) to create detailed vegetation maps that provide estimates of both habitat
and landscape-level biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;The project involves research
institutions and conservation organizations from Bolivia, the United States of
America, and Spain, as well as the close collaboration of the Bolivian National
Park Service. The lead institution in Bolivia is the National Herbarium of
Bolivia, which is coordinating with the Missouri Botanical Garden (under the
overall supervision of Dr. Jorgensen) and the Royal Botanical Garden of Madrid.
Also collaborating are the Ecology Institute of La Paz, the Noel Kempff Mercado
Natural History Museum of Santa Cruz, Bolivia and the Center for Applied
Biodiversity Science of Conservation International. The project involves a large
training component for both graduate and undergraduate level students at
Bolivian universities. The information produced by the project will be used by
the Bolivian National Park Service to support a variety of management
initiatives within Madidi National Park and the adjacent Pilon Lajas and
Apolobamba Biosphere Reserves.&lt;br/&gt;