* 0101847
* GOALI:  Ultrasensitive Amperometric Detection of Redox Molecules:  Fundamentals and Bioanalytical Applications
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Gary Blackburn, Clemson University
* Standard Grant
* Zeev Rosenzweig
* 08/31/2006
* USD 262,560.00

The Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) award to Dr.
Stephen Creager of Clemson University entitled "Ultrasensitive Amperometric
Detection of Redox Molecules: Fundamentals and Bioanalytical Applications" is
supported by the Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program and the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities. The goal of the project is the development of an
electrochemical amplification strategy which will have superior sensitivity to
existing techniques. The amplification strategy is based on redox active
molecules used as tags for detecting important biomolecules. Additionally
studies will be performed on a new class of monolayer-coated electrodes based on
carbon. These surfaces are predicted to have enhanced stability compared to
electrodes currently in use. The analytical developments will be complemented by
computer modeling and simulation experiments. The final stage of the research
will be the application of the technique for specific DNA detection assays.

The research is interdisciplinary, challenging and original, and will have
potential impact on the fields of physical chemistry, biochemistry, clinical
chemistry, electrochemistry and sensor technology. The research shows a true
integration of University and Industry efforts. Students will get an outstanding
exposure to industrial R&D during the course of the project and a product with
significant societal impact could well result.

