* 0101134
* Constraint Databases:  Optimization Techniques and Applications
* CSE,IIS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Oscar Ibarra, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing grant
* Gia-Loi Le Gruenwald
* 08/31/2005
* USD 460,000.00

Constraint databases integrate database and constraint technologies for spatio-
temporal database applications including GIS and moving objects. Constraint data
models emphasize logical properties while hiding physical representations; they
enable general purpose data management capabilities. The project investigates
constraint databases in three aspects: algorithms, applications, and
foundations. In algorithms, it aims at optimization techniques for constraint
database queries. Joins with the intersection predicate are known as spatial
joins. Traditional algorithms use heuristics, indexes, and computational
geometry techniques to evaluate the join on minimum bounding rectangles of
objects as a filter. Recent algorithms allow better approximations for filter,
or even perform a direct join on objects. A focus of this project is to study
and compare performance of such new algorithms and develop further improvements
and models for predicting filter effectiveness in terms of dataset properties
and approximations. Moreover, the techniques for intersection join are extended
for joins with other topological (e.g., containment, meet), distance, and
direction predicates, and to multiway spatial joins. More fundamentally,
optimization issues are often related to decision problems of logical properties
such as containment, equivalence, and disjointness of transactions
(queries/updates). Abstract machines are a recently developed tool for studying
such problems. Transactions are often designed in advance with parameters
instantiated at runtime. The abstract machine techniques are extended for
studying logical properties of parameterized transactions and related
computational complexity issues. In applications aspect, the project uses the
constraint approach to develop data models and query languages for moving object
databases and study query optimization Constraint databases integrate database
and constraint technologies for spatio-temporal database applications including
GIS and moving objects. Constraint data models emphasize logical properties
while hiding physical representations; they enable general purpose data
management capabilities. The project investigates constraint databases in three
aspects: algorithms, applications, and foundations. In algorithms, it aims at
optimization techniques for constraint database queries. Joins with the
intersection predicate are known as spatial joins. Traditional algorithms use
heuristics, indexes, and computational geometry techniques to evaluate the join
on minimum bounding rectangles of objects as a filter. Recent algorithms allow
better approximations for filter, or even perform a direct join on objects. A
focus of this project is to compare and characterize performance of such new
algorithms and develop further improvements and models for predicting filter
effectiveness in terms of dataset properties and approximations. Moreover, the
techniques for intersection join are extended for joins with other topological
(e.g., containment, meet), distance, and direction predicates, and to multiway
spatial joins. More fundamentally, optimization issues are often related to
decision problems of logical properties such as containment, equivalence, and
disjointness of transactions (queries/updates). Abstract machines (in automata
theory) have been found to be a very useful tool for studying such problems.
Transactions are often designed in advance with parameters instantiated at
runtime. The project intends to extend these automata-theoretic techniques for
studying logical properties of parameterized transactions and related
computational complexity issues. In applications aspect, the project applies the
constraint approach to develop data models and query languages for moving object
databases. The goal is to provide a conceptual framework and optimization
techniques for managing and querying moving objects.