* 0101360
* Multivariate Statistical Methodology for the Virtual Observatory
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2005
* Gutti Babu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 05/31/2005
* USD 1,026,289.00

The NAS Taylor/McKee Decadal Report on astronomy for 2000-2010 recommends as a
top priority the formation of a National Virtual Observatory (NVO) to link
archival data sets and catalogues from many existing astronomical surveys. The
effective use of such integrated massive data sets involves more than just
access and extraction of information -- scientific understanding requires
sophisticated statistical modeling of the selected data. This effort falls under
the rubric of statistical inference and includes the fields of multivariate
analysis, nonparametrics, Bayesian analysis, spatial point processes, density
estimation and data mining.&lt;br/&gt;Large-scale multiwavelength astronomical
surveys present a variety of new challenging statistical and algorithmic
problems that require methodological advances. The principal investigator and
his colleagues address some of the critically important statistical challenges
raised by the NVO. Specific approaches include: low-storage percentile
estimation for large data sets, multi-resolutional K-Dimensional trees for
clustering and outlier detection, and multi-dimensional goodness-of-fit tests
for comparison of multivariate astronomical data sets with astrophysical models
and simulations. Such an endeavor needs close collaboration of statisticians,
astronomers and NVO specialists who reside at different institutions. Developing
a statistical toolkit within the NVO software environment implementing both new
and existing methods is one of the central goals of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As the data volume and complexity of astronomical
findings have enormously increased in recent decades, a paradigm shift is
underway in the very nature of observational astronomy. While in the past a
single astronomer might observe a handful of objects, today data mining of large
digital sky archives obtained at all wavelengths of light is becoming a major
mode of study. The astronomical community thus faces a key task: to enable
efficient and objective scientific exploitation of enormous multifaceted data
sets. In recognition of this need, the National&lt;br/&gt;Virtual Observatory
(NVO) initiative has recently emerged to federate numerous large digital sky
archives and develop tools to explore and understand these vast volumes of data.
The investigation here aims at developing statistical and computational methods
to achieve these goals. The cross-disciplinary team, of astronomers and
statisticians, brings advances in these fields into the toolbox of observational
astronomy. The project seeks not only to formulate effective techniques to
address NVO problems, but also to code these methods into statistical toolkits
within NVO software environments for the entire astronomical community. The
collaboration includes two institutions skilled in astrostatistics (Penn State
and Carnegie Mellon) and an institution at the center of the NVO effort
(California Institute of Technology). The participation by graduate students and
postdocs give them a rare opportunity to develop skills needed for cross-
disciplinary work.