* 0101561
* K-theory of Operator Algebras and Its Applications to Topology of Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2007
* Guoliang Yu, Vanderbilt University
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2007
* USD 361,962.00

Project Title: K-theory of operator algebras and its&lt;br/&gt; applications to
topology of manifolds &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Guoliang Yu
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract: The investigator proposes to study
the K-theory &lt;br/&gt;of operator algebras associated to metric spaces and
groups, and its &lt;br/&gt;applications to topology of manifolds. The K-theory
of such &lt;br/&gt;operator algebras are receptacles of higher indices of
elliptic &lt;br/&gt;differential operators and have important applications to
problems &lt;br/&gt;in differential geometry and topology of manifolds such as
&lt;br/&gt;the existence problem for Riemannian metrics with
positive&lt;br/&gt;scalar curvature, the Novikov conjecture on homotopy
invariance of&lt;br/&gt;higher signatures. The methods to be employed include
&lt;br/&gt;controlled operator K-theory, infinite dimensional almost flat
bundles, &lt;br/&gt;and geometric group theory. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Manifolds
are spaces glued together by Euclidean spaces. Examples &lt;br/&gt;of manifolds
include spheres and tori. In differential geometry &lt;br/&gt;one studies how
manifolds are curved. For example a flat piece of &lt;br/&gt;paper has zero
curvature while the sphere has positive curvature. &lt;br/&gt;This is why we can
not bend a piece of paper into a sphere. A basic&lt;br/&gt;problem in
differential geometry is to determine when a manifold &lt;br/&gt;can have
positive scalar curvature. Another important problem in &lt;br/&gt;mathematics
is the classification of manifolds. By surgery theory &lt;br/&gt;the
classification problem for higher dimensional manifolds &lt;br/&gt;can be
essentially reduced to the Novikov conjecture. The K-theoretic &lt;br/&gt;higher
indices of certain elliptic differential operators can be used&lt;br/&gt;to
attack the positive scalar curvature problem and the Novikov
&lt;br/&gt;conjecture. A key step in this analytic approach is the computation
&lt;br/&gt;of the K-theoretic higher indices, which can be
essentially&lt;br/&gt;reduced to the problem of computing the K-theory of
operator algebras &lt;br/&gt;associated to metric spaces and groups. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt
;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;