* 0101507
* Ag Knowledge The National Center for Agriscience &amp; Technology Education
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2001,05/31/2006
* WILLIAM THIEMAN, Kirkwood Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Eileen L. Lewis
* 05/31/2006
* USD 3,121,526.00

&lt;br/&gt;AgTEC, a National Partnership, is improving the mathematics, science,
and technical competencies of agriculture technology graduates who are preparing
for careers that support the most efficient and sustainable food and fiber
production in the world. Kirkwood Community College with partner colleges,
secondary schools, and universities, guided by the vision of the agriculture
industry, is institutionalizing improvements in select agriculture technology
education programs that serve as models for the nation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To
accomplish this vision, AgTEC is focusing on three areas of activity: curriculum
development, faculty development and capacity building. Specific directions in
each of these activity areas are being determined annually by a Critical Issues
Conference. Conference breakout sessions address needs and establish outcomes
for annual projects. Projects are being accomplished by a team of lead partners
and then institutionalized, in following years, by all appropriate partners. The
annual conferences also address best practices in the three primary areas of
activity as improvements are institutionalized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
curriculum development, the center is (a) defining advanced technological
careers in Agriculture Business/Services, Agriculture Production, Agriculture
Science and Advanced Agriculture Technology, and identifying the knowledge and
skill competencies required by students entering careers in these fields; (b)
validating and enhancing existing curriculum and developing new curriculum
driven by emerging technologies and critical issues influencing 21st century
agriculture; and (c) developing all courses/modules with strong science,
mathematics, and technical skill components.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The center is
also helping to develop faculty expertise by (a) hosting workshops for college
and high school instructors to strengthen their skills in using and applying new
technology, curriculum, and electronic resources; (b) coordinating instructor
internships at agricultural research centers and in industry; (c) identifying
and promoting model agriculture teacher education programs at four-year colleges
and universities; and (d) assisting partner colleges and high schools to
integrate advanced mathematics, science and technology through one-on-one
mentoring and technical assistance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To help build capacity,
the center and partner colleges are enrolling students previously denied access
to advanced Agriculture Technology Education by identifying and implementing
successful recruitment and retention models. The Center is maintaining a
national clearinghouse of electronic resources and reports to be used by the
nation's educational institutions for program improvement and facilitating 2 + 2
+ 2 articulation between high schools, two-year and four-year colleges and
universities. Ongoing assistance is being provided by an Industry Council of
leading agri-businesses, a University Council of leading university agriculture
programs, and local teams of community colleges, universities, and secondary
agriculture programs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;