* 0101493
* SGER: A Rare Opportunity to Study Hydrothermal Activity Along an Unexplored Region of the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, 5 to 15 degrees N
* GEO,OCE
* 01/15/2001,12/31/2001
* Carol Chin, Oregon State University
* Standard Grant
* David E. Epp
* 12/31/2001
* USD 32,044.00

The PI will participate on a cruise aboard the German research vessel FS Sonne
to collect samples on the MAR leg of the cruise as a complement to their methane
sampling, through which they are hoping to identify anomalies resulting from
hydrothermal activity or serpentinization. This project will study hydrothermal
activity along the MAR from 5' to 15' N. Most of this section of the MAR has not
been explored previously. Samples will be collected for transition element
analyses including dissolved and particulate Fe and Mn. A WetLabs/SeaTech Light
Scattering Sensor (LSS) will be used so that evidence of hydrothermal activity
can be assessed in real time, based on hydrothermal particle anomalies in the
water column. The LSS will also help in making informed decisions, based on the
observation of hydrothermal particle plumes, about when to close Niskin bottles
for sample collection. The MAR between 5' and 15'N is host to large fracture
zones, where ultramafic exposures are likely to be found. It is possible that
active hydrothermal sites occur within a ridge offset in this region, in a
setting similar to that which is host to the Rainbow hydrothermal site at
36'16'N on the MAR. The Rainbow site shows extremely high concentrations of
hydrothermal particles in the water column, along with methane anomalies, so if
a similar venting system exists within the 5' to 15'N region of the MAR, we will
undoubtedly observe the hydrothermal anomaly in one of the above tracers.