* 0101035
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: A 1,200-Year, High-Resolution Record of Hurricane Activity for Southern New England
* SBE,BCS
* 03/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Raymond Bradley, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 08/31/2002
* USD 10,000.00

The present record of the natural variability of hurricane activity is
insufficient to accurately predict the recurrence intervals for hurricane
catastrophe events. The study of coastal sedimentary sequences that provide
long-term proxy records of hurricane activity can be used to address this issue.
This doctoral dissertation research project will develop a 1,200-year-long high-
resolution record of hurricane and tropical storm activity for the Boston area
based primarily on the sedimentary record from the Lower Mystic Lake. The Mystic
Lake record is laminated and appears to hold an annually resolvable archive of
sedimentation for the last millennium. Hurricane storm surge and overwash events
can be detected in the sediments by changes in physical sedimentology and diatom
assemblages. Based on microscopic examination of the laminae and radiometric
dating, this project will develop a high-resolution record of these events for
the region over the last millennium. The record will be compared with a lower-
resolution record developed from a marsh in Boston Harbor. This second record is
more typical of studies carried out elsewhere to reconstruct past hurricane
frequency. It is expected that the Mystic Lake record will preserve more subtle
events and events that are closely spaced in time, occurrences that are not
evident in a lower-resolution record.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will
contribute to understanding of how synoptic climate controls may moderate
different regional modes of hurricane activity. By examining the frequency of
hurricane events in the context of long-term climate changes, in particular the
frequency of events over the past millennium from the cold episodes of the
"Little Ice Age" compared to warmer periods, results of the project may suggest
the expected hurricane activity in a climate warmed by greenhouse gases. The
value of better understanding hurricane activity and recurrence intervals is
enhanced by populations that have led increasing numbers of people to live along
or near coastlines that are subject to hurricanes. More than half of the total
U.S. population currently is located in vulnerable coastal zones, and these
populations are expected to swell another 20 percent by 2015. Combined with the
uncertainty of how global warming may affect hurricane activity, civic planners,
disaster management agencies, and the global insurance industry have begun to
wonder whether recent disasters like Hurricane Andrew are simply a precursor to
an increasing number of even more costly and deadly tropical storms in the
coming decades. Results from this project will contribute to the growing body of
knowledge necessary to answer this question. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
student to establish a strong independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;