* 0101036
* Use of Global Positioning Satellites (GPS) Occultation Data in Numerical Weather Prediction
* GEO,AGS
* 08/01/2001,11/30/2005
* Xiaolei Zou, Florida State University
* Standard Grant
* Jay S. Fein
* 11/30/2005
* USD 365,862.00

Extensive efforts have been made to properly incorporate remotely sensed
atmospheric data from open oceans where conventional data are sparse into the
numerical prediction models. Along this line, the PI seeks to advance the
assimilation of the Global Positioning Satellites (GPS) occultation data by
improving old approaches as well as exploring a new method. The degree of
refraction of the radio signals transmitted by the GPS depends on the properties
of the atmosphere through which the signals travel, and thus can be used to gain
the knowledge of the atmospheric thermodynamic state. This research project is
divided into four areas: 1) Improve the computational efficiency of the
raytracing approach (a forward modeling calculation to match the bending angle
profile with the observed profile) used by the PI in her previous study and
improve its performance in the lower troposphere; 2) Develop an efficient
refractivity assimilation method by estimating the averaged atmospheric
refractivity information along the ray path to obtain the integrated effect of
refractivity index; 3) Assess and quantify errors in the GPS-derived
refractivity data; 4) Evaluate and examine existing physical parameterization
schemes using the information retrieved by the GPS data. The potential impact of
this study on weather predictions is significant considering the role that GPS
data likely will play in the future.