* 0101424
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: The Three-Dimensional Bed and Flow Structure of Pool-Riffle Sequences in the Embarras River
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2001,11/30/2001
* Bruce Rhoads, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 11/30/2001
* USD 9,150.00

Alternating shallows and deeps, or riffles and pools, are common features in
many alluvial rivers. Pool-riffle structures affect the dynamics of river
meandering, and they provide morphological and hydraulic diversity for stream
habitat. This doctoral dissertation research project will further the
understanding of the three-dimensional dynamics of pool-riffle sequences. The
project will focus on different aspects of pool-riffle form and dynamics through
a case study in a reach of the Embarras River, a small, low-gradient, gravel-bed
agricultural stream in east central Illinois. Among the activities to be
undertaken are the development of a 3-D form index that defines pools and
riffles based on parameters the include downstream and cross-stream asymmetry of
channel morphology and the total vertical difference between riffle crests and
pool troughs. The project will explore related sequences of upstream riffles and
downstream pools and point bars in order to test hypotheses that associate these
kinds of pools and riffles as important elements that initiate meandering. The
project also will include direct comparisons of the patterns of fluid motion
through a variety of pool-riffle types. Fluid-flow velocity measurements will be
used to estimate patterns of near-bed shear stress measurements and relate these
patterns to sediment transport through pool-riffle sequences. The methods
employed in this study will include surveying of channel form, measurements of
three-dimensional flow structure and sediment transport, and textural analysis
of bed material.

Results of the research will yield basic knowledge on the three-dimensional form
and dynamics of pools and riffles. Such knowledge will advance basic theory on
stream channel form and dynamics. It also will be important for the development
of design criteria for stream naturalization, a type of stream management that
seeks to establish morphologically and hydraulically diverse, dynamically stable
stream channels that are capable of supporting healthy, biologically diverse
aquatic ecosystems. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research Improvement award, this
award also will provide support to enable a promising student to establish a
strong independent research career.