* 0101242
* CISE Research Infrastructure:  The Metaverse:  A Laboratory for Digital Media Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2007
* Kenneth Calvert, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Urban
* 08/31/2007
* USD 824,621.00

EIA-0101242&lt;br/&gt;James Griffioen&lt;br/&gt;University of
Kentucky&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CISE Research Infrastructure: The Metaverse: A
Laboratory for Digital Media Networks&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary goal of
our research is to investigate and develop new techniques to support networked,
collaborative, visually immersive environments and applications. The objective
is to design visually compelling collaborative spaces (where people interact
with computer simulations and each other) that are inexpensive, extensible,
automatically configurable, adaptable, and scalable. The work involves an
interdisciplinary team of researchers exploring system-level issues including
visualization, network communication, and computer vision, with others studying
application-level issues such as scientific (CFD) visualization, presentation of
new-media/art, and the educational &lt;br/&gt;efficacy and impact of the
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The requested infrastructure will be used to
create three physically separate, networked visualization laboratories supported
by two new technical staff. Each visualization environment will have a distinct
configuration and objective. The CORE (COllaborative Rendering Environment) will
explore compelling collaborative immersive spaces, while the VIDE (Visually
Immersive Display Environment) investigates stereo visualization. Unlike the
CORE and VIDE, where users are immersed in pixels, the DOME (Digital Object
Media Environment) will be a head-tracked ``outside looking in'' configuration.
The environments will demonstrate the versatility of the underlying base
technology by using the same techniques to support multiple application domains.
A fourth environment will be deployed at the University of Puerto
Rico.&lt;br/&gt;