* 0101530
* RUI: Interpolation and Sampling in Bergman Spaces; Factors of Harmonic Polynomials
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2005
* Sheldon Axler, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Dmitry Khavinson
* 07/31/2005
* USD 45,000.00

The methods used to characterize interpolation sequences vary depending upon
whether the context is the Hardy space, the Bergman space, the Fock space, or
the Dirichlet space. This research will attempt to unify these theories, using
the concept of weak interpolation, which can be defined in the general context
of a Hilbert space of analytic functions with a reproducing kernel. Moving away
from the Hilbert space setting, an additional avenue of research will focus on
obtaining a geometric characterization of interpolating sequences for the Bloch
space. Yet another direction of research, suitable for experimental computer
work by undergraduates who could search for useful evidence, involves the
question of polynomial factors of harmonic polynomials in Euclidean spaces of
arbitrary dimension. A polynomial that has an isolated zero at the origin cannot
be a factor of a nonzero harmonic polynomial. This raises the question of which
polynomials are factors of nonzero harmonic polynomials.

Harmonic and analytic functions have been the subject of intense scrutiny by
mathematicians, scientists, and engineers for the past two centuries. The
Laplacian operator, whose vanishing characterizes harmonic functions, appears
naturally in several areas of science and engineering, ranging from the heat
equation to the distribution of electric charges. This project investigates
properties of collections of analytic and harmonic functions in an attempt to
understand deep aspects of the behavior of these functions. A key part of this
project is the involvement of advanced undergraduates, who will be introduced to
the world of mathematical research in the hope of inspiring them to pursue
further studies and a career in mathematics. Showing these students the
excitement of discovering new mathematical knowledge may help create the next
generation of mathematicians.