* 0101714
* Strengthening Aquatic Science Programs in Secondary Schools and Community Colleges
* NONE,NONE
* 06/01/2001,09/30/2004
* Douglas Caddell, Gadsden State Community College
* Standard Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 09/30/2004
* USD 343,068.00

This project is expanding an NSF-funded, pilot program that is improving aquatic
science education at the college and in high schools located in Eastern and
Western Alabama. The project is (1) allowing existing educational resources to
be used more efficiently; (2) increasing the quality of aquatic science
education in high schools; (3) increasing the technical proficiency of secondary
school teachers; (4) improving the technical quality and reputation of the
college's Aquatic Sciences Program; and (5) increasing recruitment, retention,
and placement of students in technical careers in the aquatic sciences,
especially the aquaculture industry.

These goals are being enhanced by installing recirculating systems in high
schools and establishing distance education capability at the college's
aquaculture facility. A core group of secondary teachers is participating in
technical workshops. Self-sufficiency among teachers and their classes is being
accelerated by the establishment of an electronic network. The focus is on the
improvement of aquatic science education and career preparation through distance
education and locating intern positions for students within the private sector.
An additional 18 high schools (bringing the total to 28) are being equipped with
a tilapia recirculating system and at least 20 additional secondary teachers are
increasing their technical knowledge and teaching capacity. The college is
developing a 2-year degree program and a transfer degree program in aquaculture
technology. Partners include Auburn University and the University of Alabama in
Birmingham.