* 0101719
* A Collaborative Biotechnology Program for Delaware
* EDU,DUE
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* Douglas Hicks, Delaware Technical & Community College Stanton-Newark Campus
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne Small
* 07/31/2004
* USD 320,576.00

This project is in direct response to the needs of the emerging biotechnology
industry and involves major industrial companies that are developing strong
technical capabilities in biotechnology such as AstraZeneca, DuPont, Gore and
Hercules. Spanning the market from pharmaceuticals to health care, food,
agricultural products, and biomaterials, the Delaware region is becoming a major
source in biotechnology. As the biotechnology industry grows and matures, there
is an increasing demand for well-trained biotechnicians in both research and
manufacturing. Through the development of a Biotechnology Program, this project
is enabling AAS degreed technicians to perform many of the same jobs and job
tasks previously being done by BS degreed
professionals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The partnership with the Delaware
Biotechnology Institution (DBI), its research facility and industry network, is
serving as an extension of Delaware Tech's laboratories and provides a
transition to the real world working environment. DBI provides a facility for
faculty and students to learn new skills and applications in the field of
biotechnology and assists college faculty and staff in determining short-term
training needs of industry workers. This collaboration creates a unique
opportunity for college faculty and students to use the latest laboratory and
manufacturing equipment in the industry while learning alongside experts in the
biotechnology field. A focus on functional genomics, proteomics, bioinformatics
and bioimaging makes this program unique among community college biotechnology
programs and builds upon the partnership with DBI which specializes in these
research areas. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project incorporates adaptations of
exemplary educational materials; upgraded laboratory equipment and experiments;
student technical internships coordinated through the DBI; and extensive faculty
development including attendance at workshops, seminars, and conferences and
participation in technical internships coordinated by DBI. The biotechnology
program serves a diverse student population including those who wish to graduate
as AAS technicians and those who transfer to baccalaureate institutions. A
certificate in Biotechnology, based on the program's capstone courses, is
offered to individuals with baccalaureate degrees in science who need hands on
experience in the biotechnology laboratory. Specialty training courses for
technicians employed in the field provide continuing education opportunities to
program graduates and others who wish to enhance their skills.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;