* 0101124
* Nonlinear heat equations applied to geometry and mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2006
* Sigurd Angenent, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Continuing Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 05/31/2006
* USD 192,003.00

The PI intends to continue the study of singularities of nonlinear heat
equations in differential geometry and mathematical physics, such as The Ricci
flow, Harmonic Map flow, Mean curvature flow, and the Porous medium equation.
Possible singularities will be analyzed by means of matched asymptotic
expansions. In addition to this the PI hopes to continue his collaboration with
groups in medical imaging, serving at least as a source of theoretic knowledge
for such groups and perhaps collaborating more intensely.

Nonlinear diffusion equations occur in many forms in mathematical physics and
engineering, as well as in pure mathematics (differential geometry).
Understanding of the solutions to such equations can be gained by studying their
singularities. E.g. singularities of a solution to an equation modeling a
chemical reaction in a reactor may correspond to explosion as opposed to steady
reaction. The PI intends to study such singularities. In addition, the PI
intends to continue his collaboration with a research group in Medical Imaging.
The practical problems of how to automatically process 3D fMRI images all belong
to a branch of mathematics called differential geometry. A detailed knowledge of
differential geometry has proved to be very useful in medical imaging in the
past, and promisses to stay important. Conversely, medical imaging problems may
serve as a source of new mathematical problems and theories.

