* 0101386
* Teaching Mathematics and its Applications (TeachMap)
* EHR,DUE
* 04/15/2001,10/31/2005
* Solomon Garfunkel, Consortium For Mathematics & Its Applications Inc
* Standard Grant
* David C. Royster
* 10/31/2005
* USD 696,698.00

This award is drawing upon the experience of the Consortium gained from its
production of a two-semester developmental mathematics program, Developmental
Mathematics and its Applications (DevMap), that offers an alternative approach
to the traditional elementary and intermediate algebra courses typically offered
at two-year and four-year colleges. In producing materials for the DevMap
curriculum, the theme that mathematics is central to most advanced technological
fields was incorporated. Applications and modeling problems from an array of
industries and technical areas including engineering, biology, biochemistry,
environmental science, precision agriculture, and GPS were developed. DevMap
problems are authentic and current, are often open-ended and without unique
solutions, and are true representations of what students will encounter in the
workplace.&lt;br/&gt; Successful implementation of the DevMap curriculum and
materials will be largely dependent on the ability of teachers to work with
authentic but often unfamiliar applications of mathematics. Additionally, it
will be extremely beneficial for instructors to develop additional applications
tailored to meet the interests of their own students and the needs of the local
employers. Thus, TeachMap is now addressing the need to provide teachers with
the experience necessary to adapt the DevMap curriculum into their classrooms.
This award creates a professional development program for teachers of
mathematics in ATE and ATE-type programs that is preparing them to meet two
challenges:&lt;br/&gt;1. how to use ATE-type applications to enhance student
learning; and&lt;br/&gt;2. how to develop ATE-type applications that are
responsive to the interests of the students and the needs of the local
employers.&lt;br/&gt; Through participation in the TeachMap program, instructors
are learning how to:&lt;br/&gt;- use open-ended, authentic applications in
developmental mathematics classes;&lt;br/&gt;- locate sources of new problems
suitable for students in particular ATE programs;&lt;br/&gt;- identify resources
(including the WWW) that might provide data and specific problem
settings;&lt;br/&gt;- create new problems that are open-ended and, in some
cases, that require student research;&lt;br/&gt;- access and use appropriate
technologies including geometric utility programs, spreadsheets, &lt;br/&gt;and
virtual laboratories;&lt;br/&gt;- construct learning environments appropriate to
the problems being modeled by using short- &lt;br/&gt;and long-term group
activities and project-based assessments.