* 0101092
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Political Contestation of Race and State Response During the Civil Rights Movement
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2001,04/30/2003
* Elisabeth Clemens, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* beth rubin
* 04/30/2003
* USD 4,420.00

Studies of the Civil Rights Movement have done much to describe and explain how
such movements emerge and recruit members, are influenced by the political
environment, and change their strategies and leadership. However, the response
of states to challenges of the Civil Rights Movement is less well-studied and
understood. When movements engage states in battles over inequality and the
meaning of race, for example, the state can defend its use of racial
classifications, make symbolic rather than real concessions, or bring about
reform through voting rights and integration. At the same time, state officials
in choosing their response must consider the meanings their actions have to
diverse audiences - the federal government, the national public, local
officials, movement activists, and state voters. This project thus examines the
actions one state took in response to civil rights challenges and to the
competing claims of multiple audiences. In so doing, it contributes to our
understanding of how states deal with political conflict and change, try to
maintain their legitimacy, and obstruct or facilitate changes in
inequality.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More specifically, the project examines the
actions of the Mississippi State Sovereignty Commission (1956-1977), an
organization created by the state legislature during the Civil Rights Movement
to monitor race relations and defend against "encroachment." It uses primary
data from the files of the commission and interviews with persons familiar with
the commission, and uses secondary literature on the Civil Rights Movement and
commissions in other states. The data from these sources show how the commission
framed its efforts to legitimate segregation to multiple audiences, and faced
challenges to the state's system of racial classification.&lt;br/&gt;