* 0101703
* IT Applications Across Career Clusters
* EDU,DUE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Kimberly Green, Education Development Center
* Continuing Grant
* Michael Haney
* 08/31/2005
* USD 600,000.00

In December 1999, the U.S. Department of Education redefined career education by
structuring occupational programs into 16 new career clusters. One of these
clusters is Information Technology (IT), but the remaining 15 all have IT
aspects. The basic premise of this project is that there should be commonality
of approach to IT curriculum over the remaining 15 clusters. The project assumes
that all technician workers need IT content as part of their preparation, and
that content should include a core of knowledge necessary for IT literacy. This
project is developing a guiding curriculum framework and associated materials
for instructors in schools and two-year colleges to use in addressing the IT
aspects in 6 of the clusters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major objectives are
to:&lt;br/&gt;a. Develop a common language defining "IT applications" and to
develop a common curricular framework that apply across the clusters;
&lt;br/&gt;b. Work with community and technical college faculty to develop,
pilot and validate a set of resource guidebooks in 6 of the 15 clusters
(Manufacturing; Transportation; Distribution and Logistic Services; Health
Services; Human Services, Scientific Research, Engineering and Technical
Services; and Education and Training Services.) Each guidebook is designed to
give practical information for teaching IT applications in a particular cluster,
providing instructional models on how to develop scenario-based lessons
structured around tasks and problems found in authentic workplace situations,
assessment rubrics, and student record-keeping tools.&lt;br/&gt;c. Enhance the
educational outcomes of the career cluster initiatives by ensuring that the IT
applications are integrated into the curriculum developed by each of these
clusters.&lt;br/&gt;d. Disseminate Resource Guides through each career cluster's
own dissemination mechanism and through the national leadership
organizations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Partners in this project include Lorain
County Community College, Middlesex Community College, MPR Associates, and The
National Association of State Directors of Vocational and Technical
Education.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;