* 0101725
* Adaptation and Implementation of MATEC ATE Center Model For Web Based Controls Technology Program
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2004
* Doyle Meyer, San Juan College
* Standard Grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 06/30/2004
* USD 215,231.00

This project is adapting and implementing the processes developed by the NSF
funded ATE Center - Maricopa Advanced Technology Education Center (MATEC). MATEC
has developed competency based multimedia modules to educate instructors of
semiconductor manufacturing technology programs in specific processes and
equipment of the semiconductor industry. Embedded in the MATEC model is a
learner focus. This project uses the MATEC model to develop Web based
experiential laboratory exercises for students in an Associate of Applied
Science in Controls Technology and Manufacturing Technology programs. These
simulations or experiential modules replace the traditional laboratory exercises
of a site based Manufacturing, Instrumentation or Controls Technology
curriculum, and instead do them in a Web environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
theory components of the curriculum are already commercially available in a
digital format and have been satisfactorily tested for past the 5 years at San
Juan College. The missing and critical component for effective delivery of the
curriculum via distant education is the experiential or hands on laboratory
exercise in a format suitable for effective learning in a Web environment. The
rapid growth of web-based education and the rapid rate of technology changes in
industry and society have created a need for a revised methodology in
educational curriculum and delivery. This refocus must facilitate lifelong
learning and have a learner driven process. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is
creating 16 virtual laboratory or experiential modules for two different classes
over the two-year life of the project. It is developing a distance education
competency based experiential model that can be used to implement the curricular
objectives of the traditional 'hands on' or laboratory exercises in the virtual
world of a web based program.&lt;br/&gt;