* 0101736
* Creating Avenues, Support and Equity for Women and Minorities in Advanced Technologies
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Susan Sloan, Portland Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Bevlee Watford
* 06/30/2005
* USD 556,833.00

This project is developing, implementing, and evaluating a model that uses a
non-traditional approach to the recruitment of women and minorities into
advanced technical careers, particularly in the information technology (IT)
field. The model features not just recruitment, but academic advising, career
exploration and support services. Over 800 students are being served by the
program. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Project objectives are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1:
Introducing and exposing women and minorities in a five county area of Portland
to education and employment opportunities in advanced technical fields in which
they are underrepresented. Key outcomes include increased awareness by women and
minorities about advanced technical careers and programs and identification of
potential project participants.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. Facilitating enrollment
and success of educationally and/or economically disadvantaged women and
minorities in advanced technical education programs. Key outcomes include
increased enrollment by women and minorities into advanced technical programs;
increased retention and improved academic performance in technical programs such
as Computer Information Systems, Welding Technology, Advanced Facilities
Maintenance, Computer Sciences, Microelectronics, and Engineering Technology;
and enhanced educational opportunities in specialized
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3: Facilitating school-to-work transitions in
Information Technology (IT) and other advanced technical fields. Key outcomes
include women and minorities employed in higher paying jobs and a 20% increase
in the number of women and minorities who are participating in cooperative
education with an industry partner in targeted science and technology
fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;4. Training instructors, tutors, career counselors,
and academic advisors in gender and culturally equitable teaching, learning,
assessment, and advising practices. Key outcomes include improved instruction,
career counseling and academic advising delivered with more
equity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;5. Involving IT and other employers in recruitment,
retention, and school-to-work transition activities.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;