* 0101288
* Furthering U.S. Interests and Leadership in the International Council for Science (ICSU)
* O/D,OISE
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2007
* Wendy White, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Edward Murdy
* 07/31/2007
* USD 4,934,624.00

0101288&lt;br/&gt;White&lt;br/&gt; Furthering U.S. Interests and Leadership in
&lt;br/&gt;the International Council for Science (ICSU)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Due
to the global character of contemporary science and engineering, it is essential
for U.S. scientists and engineers, as well as their professional organizations,
to remain in close contact with the activities and plans of their foreign
counterparts, in part as a means to facilitate the development of collaborative
programs. Additionally, gaining a better understanding of many important
problems, such as those associated with the global environment, data quality and
access, and the training and utilization of research personnel, require
cooperative efforts on a multilateral basis. An increasing number of such
problems cut across and transcend individual scientific disciplines.
The&lt;br/&gt;oldest and most extensive mechanism for facilitating world-wide
communication between U.S. scientists and engineers and their foreign
counterparts is the array of non-governmental international disciplinary unions
and interdisciplinary organizations that together comprise the International
Council for Science (ICSU), a non-governmental, multilateral organization
comprised of an adhering organization in over 90 countries. This award will
enable the National Academy of Sciences/National Research Council (the U.S.
adhering organization to ICSU) to continue to manage U.S. participation in ICSU.
The award provides dues payments to ICSU, and support for two international
disciplinary unions (the International Commission of Mathematical Instruction
and the International Union of Theoretical and Applied Mechanics) as well as two
interdisciplinary organizations (the Pacific Science Association and the
Committee on Science and Technology for Development). &lt;br/&gt;