* 0101991
* Flora of China
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Ihsan Al-Shehbaz, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Continuing Grant
* James Woolley
* 08/31/2003
* USD 461,999.00

FLORA OF CHINA&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Flora of China (FOC) is a collaborative
international project to publish the first English-language treatment of the
approximately 30,000 species of vascular plants of China, or about 12% of the
world's total. All accounts of FOC are jointly co-authored by non-Chinese
(mostly American and European) and Chinese scientists. To date, the FOC project
has published seven of the 25 text volumes and four of the 25 illustration
volumes. All accounts are downloadable as pdf files and ASCII-delimited text
files. The FOC websites at Harvard University Herbaria (HUH)
&lt;http://flora.huh.harvard.edu/china&gt; and Missouri Botanical Garden
&lt;http://www.mobot.org/research/asia.html&gt; (MBG) provide dynamic links to
distribution maps, illustrations, and other relevant data such as botanical
names, bibliographic citations, altitudinal ranges, synonyms, and species status
(endemic, native, cultivated, or naturalized). The project has eleven centers:
HUH, California Academy of Sciences, Smithsonian Insti-tution, Royal Botanic
Garden Edinburgh, Royal Botanic Gardens (Kew), Museum National d'Histoire
Naturelle (Paris), MBG (the coordination center), and the institutes of botany
in Beijing, Kunming, Nanjing, and Guangzhou. These institutions complement each
other in their excellent libraries and rich collections of Chinese plants and,
they exchange material and literature during work on the FOC accounts.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major results expected during this two-year award
include the publication of four text volumes treating 44 families and 4,560 (or
about 15% of the entire flora). These include important species of food,
horticultural, medicinal, and timber values, especially members of the
buttercup, rose, orchid, mulberry, and elm families. Work on additional volumes
will also be at various stages of editing or near completion, especially on
members of the large and taxonomically difficult rhododendron, palm, carrot, and
sedge families. In addition, at least three illustration volumes will be
published, and the images of the scanned illustrations and finalized legends
will be placed on the web and linked to the descriptions and checklist data.
Because FOC is the first up-to-date, English-language account on the plants of
China, the information included will be of tremendous value to horticulturists,
conservationist, botanists, and scientists in related fields. Study of the FOC
is important for understanding modern floristic affinities between North America
and eastern Asia because species of many genera are found only in these two
areas. The fragmentation of China's vegetation makes it all the more important
to have accurate, up-to-date information. Consistent efforts will be made during
the course of the FOC project to identify threatened and endangered species and
those that have not been collected recently. The information included in FOC is
extremely important for the proper management of the plant resources of China
and for solutions that address environmental issues.&lt;br/&gt;