* 0101539
* 2001 Ahlfors-Bers Colloquium
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2002
* Irwin Kra, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 08/31/2002
* USD 30,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0101539&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: William Abikoff&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ahlfors-Bers Colloquium
is to be held in October 2001 at the&lt;br/&gt;University of Connecticut campus
at Storrs. This award primarily&lt;br/&gt;supports the participation of graduate
students, junior&lt;br/&gt;researchers, and speakers. Plenary lectures are
planned to cover&lt;br/&gt;a wide-ranging agenda in geometric function theory,
hyperbolic&lt;br/&gt;geometry, dynamics, and other topics and workshop days
early in&lt;br/&gt;the meeting are planned to showcase junior
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ahlfors-Bers Colloquium is one of a series
of conferences on&lt;br/&gt;geometric function theory, Riemann surfaces and
related topics&lt;br/&gt;that have been held every three or four years since
1965. The&lt;br/&gt;meetings' name honors Lars Ahlfors and Lipman Bers, two
giants in&lt;br/&gt;complex analysis who shaped the meeting's subjects over
the&lt;br/&gt;twentieth century. The current core of geometric function
theory&lt;br/&gt;consists mainly of Riemann surfaces (two-dimensional
spaces&lt;br/&gt;defined over the complex numbers, such as the collection of
all&lt;br/&gt;complex solutions to a typical single polynomial equation in
two&lt;br/&gt;variables), Teichmueller theory (an approach to studying
the&lt;br/&gt;variations of structure possible for a particular
Riemann&lt;br/&gt;surface), Kleinian groups (the most important discrete groups
of&lt;br/&gt;isometries of hyperbolic three-space), iteration of
rational&lt;br/&gt;functions (which combines dynamical systems ideas with
function&lt;br/&gt;theory), and hyperbolic manifolds. This core reaches back
150&lt;br/&gt;years and meets or includes some of the most active
specialties&lt;br/&gt;in current mathematical
research.&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award:
DMS-0101539&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: William
Abikoff&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ahlfors-Bers Colloquium is to be held in
October 2001 at the&lt;br/&gt;University of Connecticut campus at Storrs. This
award primarily&lt;br/&gt;supports the participation of graduate students,
junior&lt;br/&gt;researchers, and speakers. Plenary lectures are planned to
cover&lt;br/&gt;a wide-ranging agenda in geometric function theory,
hyperbolic&lt;br/&gt;geometry, dynamics, and other topics and workshop days
early in&lt;br/&gt;the meeting are planned to showcase junior
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Ahlfors-Bers Colloquium is one of a series
of conferences on&lt;br/&gt;geometric function theory, Riemann surfaces and
related topics&lt;br/&gt;that have been held every three or four years since
1965. The&lt;br/&gt;meetings' name honors Lars Ahlfors and Lipman Bers, two
giants in&lt;br/&gt;complex analysis who shaped the meeting's subjects over
the&lt;br/&gt;twentieth century. The current core of geometric function
theory&lt;br/&gt;consists mainly of Riemann surfaces (two-dimensional
spaces&lt;br/&gt;defined over the complex numbers, such as the collection of
all&lt;br/&gt;complex solutions to a typical single polynomial equation in
two&lt;br/&gt;variables), Teichmueller theory (an approach to studying
the&lt;br/&gt;variations of structure possible for a particular
Riemann&lt;br/&gt;surface), Kleinian groups (the most important discrete groups
of&lt;br/&gt;isometries of hyperbolic three-space), iteration of
rational&lt;br/&gt;functions (which combines dynamical systems ideas with
function&lt;br/&gt;theory), and hyperbolic manifolds. This core reaches back
150&lt;br/&gt;years and meets or includes some of the most active
specialties&lt;br/&gt;in current mathematical research.