* 0101100
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Assessing Connectivity Among Grizzly Bear Populations Near the U.S.-Canada Border
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2001,09/30/2003
* George Hepner, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Thomas Baerwald
* 09/30/2003
* USD 10,000.00

The long-term maintenance and survival of the endangered species like the
grizzly bear depends on the capabilities of small groups of animals to move and
interact with other groups of the same species, thereby reducing the negative
effects of an increasingly narrow gene pool over time. Grizzly populations
inhabiting the Selkirk and Cabinet-Yaak ecosystems along the U.S.-Canada border
are is dependent upon periodic interactions with other Canadian grizzly
populations. Although researchers have studied many facets of grizzly activity,
the have not yet determined how dispersed populations stay connected and what
demographic and genetic effects current levels of connectivity have individual
populations. Previous studies addressing connectivity between various
populations of a species have used field studies to collect and analyze data or
have taken a theoretical landscape ecology modeling approach. Though a landscape
modeling approach allows examination of the issue from the correct spatial
scale, it falls short of fully capturing the spatial dynamics of bear movement.
Field methods and fine scale studies can capture the dynamics of bear movement,
but because of low population densities and life history traits of bears in
settings like the those along the U.S.-Canada border, the collection of data on
bears at the appropriate spatial and temporal scales is very difficult. This
doctoral dissertation research project will use an autonomous agent methodology,
object-oriented design principles, and remote sensing and geographic information
system (GIS) technologies to develop a spatially and behaviorally explicit,
individual-based model replicating the movements of grizzly bears. Movements
within and between local populations will be generated and analyzed by means of
a computer simulation. More specifically, the project will examine the
theoretical foundations of bear behavior across geographic space and develop a
simulation model that evaluates the current level of connectivity between the
different populations of grizzly bears. The latter task will be done by defining
population boundaries between local populations, by determining the probability
and frequency of bears in one population successfully dispersing and breeding in
another population, and by determining the demographic and genetic effects that
dispersals have on each of the individual local populations. The project also
will identify any connectivity barriers between local
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The integration of GIS and remote sensing
technologies with theoretical models should provide a valuable new tool for
inquiry and understanding. This integration will provide a level of spatial
realism that cannot be achieved by theoretical modeling alone. Use of an
autonomous agent approach should allows the explicit inclusion of the
interaction between individuals and between individuals and their habitat. The
inclusion will produce a more accurate model of wildlife spatial dynamics.
Because of the increased spatial realism and dynamics, this project will
advances the current understanding of how spatial structure influences animal
movement. This is critical to the investigation of the importance of considering
spatial structure when exploring the affects of human factors, such as human-
induced landscape fragmentation and global warming, on endangered species
persistence. In addition, this research will advance knowledge about the
importance of including local interactions in the regional level assessment of
ecological connectivity between geographically disjunct populations. This
research will offer an advancement in bear conservation, because it will go
beyond discerning potential corridors based on habitat to assessing the
contribution of current corridors to the long-term genetic and demographic
viability of each of the local populations. As a Doctoral Dissertation Research
Improvement award, this award also will provide support to enable a promising
student to establish a strong independent research career.&lt;br/&gt;