* 0101820
* Environmental Science and Education Articulation Partnership with Tribal Colleges
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2006
* Karl Topper, Colorado Mesa University
* Standard Grant
* Sharon M. Locke
* 06/30/2006
* USD 369,454.00

This project supports the need for tribal communities to have a Native American
work force who can help meet their local needs in science education and in the
management of their resources. The main objective is to increase the number and
quality of community college students who transfer into Bachelor of Science K-12
teaching programs or environmental science programs. Emphasis is being placed
upon Tribally Controlled Colleges (TCCs) using environmental science as an
educational implementation mechanism. Strategies used to address this objective
include development of recruitment programs for each participating TCC,
development of recruitment programs, faculty/student articulation agreements,
transition support for the students to successfully enter an appropriate
baccalaureate program, support for student retention, dissemination of program
results and program evaluation. The project utilizes a successful student
retention program, the Mesa State College New Environmental Student Transition
(MSC-NEST), as a model developed to attract, motivate, and retain students. The
focus is upon using the Environmental Science and Technology Bachelor of Science
degree program as a model articulation partnership program with the
participating community colleges. This degree program enables a student to
select either a K-12 teaching degree path or an environmental science/technology
related degree.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;