* 0101107
* Advanced Research Workshop on Future Trends in Microelectronics: the Nano Millennium, Ile de Bendor, France on June 24-29, 2001
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2001,03/31/2003
* Serge Luryi, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 03/31/2003
* USD 36,618.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed ARW is to provide a
forum for free-spirited exchange and debate of views,&lt;br/&gt;visions, and
ideas. The format includes both prepared invited presentations and ad
hoc&lt;br/&gt;contributions with uninhibited exchange of views and rebuttals.
Some of the key luminaries&lt;br/&gt;will come to share their opinions and to
lead the discussions on where the technologies &lt;br/&gt;are going and/or
should be going. Balanced representations of advocacy and
opposition&lt;br/&gt;will be intentionally sought.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Each day
will start with presentations given by key speakers on subjects in one or
two&lt;br/&gt;chosen themes. It is then followed by debates and invited talks by
other participants.&lt;br/&gt;All oral presentations (in morning sessions) are
to focus on the presenter's views and&lt;br/&gt;projections of future
directions, assessments or critiques of important
new&lt;br/&gt;ideas/approaches, and NOT on their own achievements. The
presenters are asked to be&lt;br/&gt;provocative and/or
inspiring.&lt;br/&gt;Latest advances made and results obtained by the
participants will be presented in the&lt;br/&gt;afternoon sessions in the form
of posters and group/individual discussions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The day will
be concluded by an evening panels session that attempts to further
the&lt;br/&gt;debates on selected controversial issues connected to the theme of
the day. Each session&lt;br/&gt;will be chaired by one forceful character that
will invite 2-3 attendees of his/her choice&lt;br/&gt;to lead with a position
statement, all other attendees being the panelists. The debate&lt;br/&gt;will be
forcefully moderated and irrelevant digressions will be cut off without
mercy.&lt;br/&gt;Moderators will be also assigned a hopeless task to forge a
consensus on critical issues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For these considerations, a
format has been choosen that is less rigid than normal workshops
to&lt;br/&gt;allow and encourage uninhibited exchanges and sometimes
confrontation of different views.&lt;br/&gt;A design a central theme will be
designed together with the speakers for each day.&lt;br/&gt;