* 0101093
* Expanding the Impact: Bringing Effective Biotechnology Instructional Resources to Diverse Students and Teachers
* NONE,NONE
* 04/15/2001,03/31/2005
* Joy McMillan, Madison Area Technical College
* Continuing grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 03/31/2005
* USD 639,220.00

The overall goal of this award is to expand the impact of previous work
supported by the Advanced Technological Education (ATE) program in order to
increase the number of well-prepared individuals, including those from under-
represented groups, entering technical positions in the biotechnology work
force. This goal is being accomplished through two tightly interrelated
objectives. The first objective is focussing on faculty enhancement workshops
related to biotechnology methods and the biotechnology workplace. The second
objective is focussing on the dissemination of quality biotechnology
instructional materials directly to secondary school classrooms. Activities for
both objectives incorporate instructional materials created by other ATE
projects. This project involves partnerships with the Wisconsin School for the
Deaf, the University of Wisconsin-Madison College of Education, the Wisconsin
Department of Public Instruction, the Wisconsin Educational Communications
Board, and the ATE-funded "Cases in Industry Practices in Biotechnology", the
"Shoestring" Biotechnology Project, and the Bio-Link Center of Excellence in
Biotechnology. Project objectives and outcomes are expected to be: OBJECTIVE 1:
To enhance the skills and knowledge of faculty from two- and four- year colleges
and secondary schools so that they: Effectively incorporate important
biotechnology workplace skills into their curricula Promote student awareness of
varied technical career opportunities in biotechnology Incorporate effective
active learning and laboratory activities into their classrooms Establish
relationships among educators and industry representatives Introduce laboratory
and work place curricula into traditional baccalaureate programs OBJECTIVE 2: To
adapt and disseminate quality instructional materials for biotechnology
technical education that were developed with previous ATE funds so that: +
Quality materials are customized for different target populations of students,
including those in under-represented groups + Secondary students are aware of
biotechnology workplace opportunities + Secondary students' math and science
skills improve + Secondary students' skills in biotechnology improve + Quality
instructional materials reach diverse students + Pre-service teachers learn
about biotechnology and the biotechnology workplace