* 0101000
* 2002 NSF Design, Service and Manufacturing Grantees and Research Conference; San Juan, Puerto Rico; January 7-10, 2002
* ENG,CMMI
* 01/15/2001,06/30/2002
* Patrick Patterson, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* KAMLAKAR P RAJURKAR
* 06/30/2002
* USD 299,897.00

The award is to conduct the annual National Science Foundation Design, Service
and Manufacturing Research Conference. The conference will involve researchers
in all program areas within the Division of Design, Manufacture and Industrial
Innovation (DMII), the manufacturing researchers in the Divisions of Engineering
Education and Centers (EEC), Electrical and Communication Systems (ECS), Civil
and Mechanical Structures (CMS), located within the Directorate for Engineering,
Information and Intelligent Systems (IIS), located within the Directorate for
Computer and Information Science and Engineering, Materials Research (DMR),
located within the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical Sciences,
International Programs (INT), Social, Behavioral, and Economic Research,
specifically the Innovation and Organizational Change Program (IOC), located in
the Directorate for Social, Behavioral and Economic Sciences who are in
manufacturing related research will present ongoing activities in their current
research and attend sessions which will extend beyond their immediate area of
research. Ongoing research in manufacturing related research activities are
presented by the grantees from the Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnologia
(CONACyT), from locations within Mexico, and grantees from the Natural Sciences
and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) and the National Research Council
(NRC), from locations within Canada. The conference ensures that the individual
researchers are informed about the ongoing activities of their colleagues. An
elimination of duplication of their efforts may be achieved and a degree of
cooperation may result from this activity. An overall improvement of efficiency
of the research activity could be expected. In addition, the conference program
organization allows for ample time to discuss manufacturing research in detail
with the collective research community at the meeting, with feedback to and
input from the National Science Foundation. Finally, personal contacts between
the grantees and program directors in the Divisions should contribute to clarify
many current issues in their work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aims of the
conference are: (1) to broaden the outlook of all participants; (2) promote
transfer of ideas and technology from one area of research to another; (3) to
allow those working in a related area of research to get to know their peers so
as to avoid duplication of research and to encourage cooperation, and (4) to
allow personal contacts from the collective research community, the NSF,
CONACyT, NSERC, and NRC program staff to discuss manufacturing research in
detail (this should contribute to clarifying many current problems in ongoing
projects). Attendees to the conference gain an early access to the information
disseminated.