* 0101254
* CISE Research Infrastructure:  An Infrastructure for Integrated Systems Education and Innovation
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2007
* Mani Soma, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Joseph Urban
* 08/31/2007
* USD 872,490.00

0101254&lt;br/&gt;Scott A. Hauk&lt;br/&gt;University of
Washington&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CISE Research Infrastructure: An Infrastructure
for Integrated Systems Education and Innovation &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research contained in this proposal represents a wide-ranging investigation into
the future of single-chip systems. We will seek to develop a design methodology
that can provide the benefits of multiple different resource types for numerous
design domains. To support the design of such cutting-edge silicon systems, we
will develop innovative techniques to handle numerous design issues. These will
include investigations into the following critical issues in chip design:
Development of techniques for integrating RF and Analog components into future
1V SoC designs. Creation of high-performance, power efficient digital logic
families for supporting the stringent requirements of these systems.
Investigation into reconfigurable subsystems for SoC designs, providing post-
fabrication customization for support of multi-protocol and multi-algorithm
systems. Integrated testing methodologies for complex, heterogeneous systems
that can provide complete system test. Complete simulation and design
methodologies that can handle complete system integration, architectural
exploration, and validation. In addition to the development of new approaches to
future chip design, we will also develop innovative techniques for educating
future chip designers. By providing an integrated curriculum in VLSI/CAD,
embedded systems, and complex system design, we will help create system
architects capable of harnessing these radically new design techniques and
opportunities. We will also seek to increase the opportunities in chip design
for new constituents, especially under-represented groups to help increase the
pipeline of new designers&lt;br/&gt;