* 0101438
* Materials Processing for Ferromagnetic Wide Bandgap Nitride Heterostructures
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2001,03/31/2004
* Stephen Pearton, University of Florida
* Continuing grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 03/31/2004
* USD 220,282.00

This project will investigate advanced materials processing methods that do not
disrupt spin-injection and transport in order to polarize, inject, transport,
control, store and detect spins in semiconductors. The discovery of
ferromagnetism in (In, Mn)As and (Ga,Mn)As opens an opportunity to explore the
combination of high purity heterostructures and ferromagnetism. However the low
Curie temperature for these materials (<35K and 110K, respectively), limits
their practical impact; in sharp contrast, (Ga,Mn)N is predicted to have a TC
~400K. This project will address the following topics: (i) development of low
resistance p-ohmic contacts with sharp metal/semiconductor interfaces to allow
efficient injection of spin-polarized currents into various heterostructures,
e.g., (Ga,Mn)N/GaN, (Ga,Mn)N/InGaN; (ii) the development of appropriate plasma
chemistries for equi-rate and selective dry etching of (Ga,Mn)N and related
materials. For etching Mn, high density F2-based plasma chemistries have been
successful. The normal Cl2-based chemistries for GaN will need to be altered in
order to obtain equi-rate removal of all three lattice constituents in the
(Ga,Mn)N; (iii) implantation/isolation needed in selective area doping for
contact formation and for intra-device electrical and optical isolation. It is
expected to achieve efficient doping of (Ga,Mn)N using Si+ for n-type and Mg+/P+
for p-type doping. The thermal stability of the (Ga,Mn)N during annealing will
also be explored, in order to study formation of other phases or precipitates;
(iv) examine the interaction of H with Mn-if passivation occurs, this will lower
TC. The thermal stability of the effect, the reactivation kinetics (both thermal
and by minority-carrier injection) and the H diffusivity, will be investigated;
(v) fabrication of various test structures to enable a measurement of the spin
injection efficiency- these include a GaMnN/AlGaN/GaN light-emitting diode and a
GaMnN spinfet. The significance of the research will be the development of an
understanding of how to process (Ga,Mn)N to achieve efficient spin injection and
transport, as the basis for novel device structures. %%% The project addresses
basic research issues in a topical area of materials science having high
technological relevance. The research will contribute basic materials science
knowledge at a fundamental level to important aspects of electronic/photonic
devices. The basic knowledge and understanding gained from the research is
expected to contribute to improving the perform-ance and stability of advanced
devices and circuits by providing a fundamental understanding and a basis for
designing and producing improved materials, and materials combinations. An
important feature of the program is the integration of research and education
through the training of students in a fundamentally and technologically
significant area. ***