* 0101533
* A Plasma-Aided Manufacturing Course for ATE  Programs in Semiconductor Manufacturing and Related Fields
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Dave Hata, Portland Community College
* Continuing grant
* Duncan E. McBride
* 08/31/2005
* USD 649,816.00

Plasma is a manufacturing medium with unique properties, and its use has led to
more efficient processes and products that could not be fabricated without them.
Yet, despite the importance of plasma-aided manufacturing, few community
colleges currently offer courses and prepare technicians in this critical
technology. To address this urgent need, the project is developing essential
resources that will enable community colleges to implement plasma-aided
manufacturing courses. These resources include outcomes- based instructional
materials, training systems in plasma technology, and workshops for community
college faculty. Outcomes-based instructional materials are organized around
three fundamental components of a plasma processing system. These fundamental
components include plasma physics, RF power subsystems, and gas delivery
subsystems. Modules on plasma applications, e.g. plasma etch, chemical vapor
deposition, and sputtering, integrate the three fundamental components into a
capstone-type learning experience for students. Laboratory improvement will
focus on the design of plasma training systems at RF frequencies. Project staff
are working with equipment suppliers to adapt current manufacturing systems for
community college laboratories. Finally, faculty enhancement workshops provide
hands-on opportunities with plasma training systems and disseminate
instructional materials developed through this project.