* 0101679
* Northern Colorado Community College/University Teacher Preparation Initiative
* EHR,DUE
* 07/01/2001,12/31/2005
* Monica Ramirez, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Joan T Prival
* 12/31/2005
* USD 300,083.00

This project focuses on the recruitment and retention of rural and
underrepresented students into teaching careers in mathematics, science, and
technology through a partnership involving Colorado State University and four
community colleges: Aims Community College, Morgan Community College,
Northeastern Junior College, and Front Range Community College. Preservice
preparation competencies required of future teachers are being incorporated into
an associate degree program. Future Teacher Mentors on each community college
campus advise and mentor community college students as they transition into
university programs preparing them to teach mathematics, science, and
technology. The project focuses on three outcomes: 1) to attract and retain
greater numbers of students into targeted teaching areas to serve rural
communities; 2) to attract and retain larger numbers of minority students into
teaching in the targeted areas; and 3) to improve the preparation and current
teaching of mathematics, science, and technology teachers and preservice
providers. Recruitment efforts include Future Teacher Clubs on each campus,
scholarships for prospective teachers, and recruitment in high school
mathematics, science, and technology classes. An annual needs assessment
determines the professional development needs of K-12 and community college
faculty and guides yearly conferences and on-line workshops. The project builds
on the course reform efforts of the Rocky Mountain Teacher Education
Collaborative (RMETC).

