* 0101060
* Classification of Nuclear C*-algebras and (Noncommutative) Dynamical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Cornel Pasnicu, University of Puerto Rico
* Standard Grant
* Joe W. Jenkins
* 07/31/2005
* USD 77,776.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Pasnicu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The ASH algebras (respectively
AH algebras) are C*-algebras arising as inductive limits of finite direct sums
of subalgebras (respectively corner subalgebras) of matrix algebras over
unital,commutative C*-algebras.A C*-algebra is said to have the ideal property
if each ideal is generated by projections.The investigator proposes to classify
a large class of nuclear ASH algebras with the ideal property and also to
classify the AH algebras with the ideal property.He also proposes to work on a
conjecture which states that "many" nuclear,separable C*-algebras with the ideal
property which are the crossed product of a unital,commutative C*-algebra or of
an AF algebra by the integers is an ASH algebra in the above class.This project
is related to Elliott's program of the classification of the separable,nuclear
C*-algebras and to a problem of Effros and could have an impact in operator
algebras but also in ergodic theory,in the study of the (noncommutative)
dynamical systems and in geometry.&lt;br/&gt;C*-algebras could be thought as
collections of infinite matrices of numbers endowed with an interesting
algebraic and topological structure. The C*-algebras have significant
applications to other parts of mathematics (geometry,topology,ergodic theory),to
parts of physics (quantum mechanics and statistical mechanics) or to other
sciences (the structure of DNA and other molecules).A complete classification
("enumeration") of a special class of operator algebras,called amenable von
Neumann algebras,was given by Connes in his Fields Medal winning work. This
project has two main goals.One is to classify ("enumerate") large classes of
amenable (nuclear) C*-algebras with the ideal property (an interesting technical
condition) which are defined by a particular construction ("inductive
limits").The other one is to show that many amenable C*-algebras with the ideal
property arising from a completely different and natural construction ("crossed
products") belong in fact to one of the above classes (of "inductive limits")
that the investigator proposes to classify ("enumerate").This project could have
an important impact in several mathematical fields including operator algebras,
dynamical systems,geometry and also in some domains outside mathematics (e.g. in
quantum physics).&lt;br/&gt;