* 0101231
* Inorganic and Organic Thin Film Interface Studies
* MPS,DMR
* 03/01/2001,05/31/2004
* Eugene Irene, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 05/31/2004
* USD 315,431.00

This project addresses inorganic and organic interfaces composed of inorganic
films resulting from key microelectronics reactions of oxidation and nitridation
of Si (SiO2 and Si3N4 and SiOxNy) and organic polymer films (poly
o-methoxyaniline (POMA), poly p-phenylenevinylene (PPV) and the hererocyclic
polypyrrole and derivatives that have interesting electronic and optical
properties with semiconductors (Si, Ge and GaAs) metals (Au, Al, Ir, ITO) and
insulators (SiO2 and Si3N4). The fundamental materials science aim is to
understand the nature and extent of interface reactions. The key research
strategy is to follow the evolution of interface formation in real time. The
approach is to use in situ real-time ellipsometry along with in situ real-time
characterization methodologies in a configuration that can provide interface and
film formation dynamics, chemical composition, and structure and optical
properties. Additional interface sensitive characterization techniques include:
spectroscopic immersion ellipsometry, Fractal analysis, and Fowler-Nordheim
tunnel current oscillations. Interface and thin film preparation processes
include: thermal (rapid and conventional), electron cyclotron resonance (ECR)
plasma and ion sputtering for inorganic interfaces and chemical and
electrochemical solution methods for organic films. Interface reaction models to
be used for ellipsometric data analysis can be compared in both the inorganic
and organic materials systems. In both systems metal oxide/insulator
semiconductor (MOS) devices can be used as electronics properties test vehicles
with similar electronics characterizations. Comparisons that are not usually
made are a feature of the approach. &lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project
addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials science with high
technological relevance. These studies will improve the fundamental
understanding of dissimilar materials interfaces, which are key to advanced
microelectronics and photonics. An important feature of the program is the
integration of research and education through the training of students in a
fundamentally and technologically significant area. &lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;