* 0101740
* Collaborative Research: Training Water Science Technicians
* EDU,DUE
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Glenn Merrick, Lake Superior College
* Standard Grant
* David B. Campbell
* 07/31/2004
* USD 199,802.00

&lt;br/&gt;This collaborative project between a four-year and a two-year
institution is developing an Internet-based laboratory curriculum in water
science, with a goal of preparing future water science technicians for the
increasingly high-technology, interdisciplinary, and often contentious world of
water resource management in the 21st century. Through the on-line curriculum,
students learn and apply their knowledge and skills using inquiry-based problems
derived from real-world and real-time data collected by state-of-the- art water
quality monitoring technology. The curriculum is designed as a two-semester lab
sequence targeted toward second-year technical students in water resource
management, water science, or environmental resource management programs. It
consists of six key units that cover the range of knowledge and skills needed by
future water science technicians: the knowledge base, experimental design, data
collection, data management, data analysis and interpretation, and management
policy, outreach and education. Each unit in turn consists of a series of three
to eight interactive modules that cover specific topics (e.g. the Data Analysis
Unit includes web-based modules on Exploratory Data Analysis, Trend Analysis,
Spatial Analysis, and Modeling). The modules are linked through a series of
inquiry lessons designed around current water quality management issues and
using real-time water quality data. This approach allows community college
teachers considerable flexibility in adopting the entire curriculum, or in using
the units, modules and inquiry lessons to fit the needs of their particular
program. This curriculum serves as either a capstone experience for students
completing a technician program, or a gateway for students interested in
pursuing water science degrees at four-year institution.