* 0101567
* Preparing Tomorrow's Science and Mathematics Teachers: The Community College Response
* EHR,DUE
* 04/01/2001,09/30/2003
* Patricia Cunniff, Phi Theta Kappa Headquarters
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 09/30/2003
* USD 440,900.00

Phi Theta Kappa, the honor society for two-year colleges, in cooperation with
the American Association of Community Colleges (AACC), is conducting a multi-
disciplinary, multi-component, nationwide mentoring project to enhance and
expand the role of community colleges in providing teacher preparation programs
for future K-12 science and mathematics teachers.

This project responds to the recommendation areas put forth in the NSF report,
"Investing in Tomorrow's Teachers: The Integral Role of Two Year Colleges in the
Science and Mathematics Preparation of Prospective Teachers." Project objectives
are being accomplished through a set of proven mentoring activities that extend,
for replication and/or adaptation, the knowledge, experience and materials
achieved by seven community college teacher preparation programs recognized as
exemplary by NSF --first to 18 competitively selected community colleges, and
then, via extensive dissemination activities, to community, technical, and
junior colleges nationwide.

Project activities include: national competition to select 18 colleges; two
National Teacher Preparation Conferences, at which mentors, and resource persons
from their four-year college partners, work with their assigned four-member
college teams to develop action plans; mentoring services, including site
visits, throughout the project; a periodic networking/collaboration-building
newsletter, available electronically and in print; a case study monograph for
distribution to presidents, academic deans, education chairs, science or
mathematics chairs, and education institutions in the participating colleges
regions; and a broad range of other dissemination activities through Phi Theta
Kappa and AACC websites, conferences, and publications. The 18 community
colleges selected to participate are each working with one assigned community
college educator/mentor and one four year college resource person from exemplary
teacher preparation programs at El Camino College, CA; William Rainey Harper
College, IL; Henry Ford Community College, MI; Tulsa Community College, OK;
Community College of Philadelphia, PA; Prince George's Community College, MD;
and Green River Community College, WA. Mentors and resource persons represent
disciplines of mathematics, biology, physics, chemistry, and education.

Taken as a whole, these teacher preparation programs address NSF's teacher
preparation recommendation areas: recruitment of prospective teachers;
strengthening undergraduate courses and infrastructure; preservice experiences;
inservice activities; and liaison between two and four year institutions.