* 0101314
* Collaborative Research:  Contrasting Styles of Ca. 1.4 Ga Tectonism in the Southern Rockies:  Evidence for a Fossil Rheologic Transition in a Deeply Exhumed Intracontinental Orogen
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2001,12/31/2003
* Christine Siddoway, Colorado College
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 12/31/2003
* USD 30,504.00

Karlstrom 0003500 Connelly 0003528 Williams 0003569 Siddoway 0101314 Proterozoic
rocks in central Colorado preserve a transition, from semi-brittle upper crust
to pervasively ductile middle crust, that was frozen in at about 1.4 Ga. This
rheologic transition is expressed as a regionally significant change in the
style of ca. 1.4 Ga intracratonic tectonism. Field observations suggest that a
subhorizontal boundary separates a domain in northern and central Colorado
(exemplified by the Colorado Mineral Belt), where 1.4 Ga deformation is
characterized by discrete mylonite zones, from a domain in southern Colorado and
northern New Mexico dominated by penetrative ductile deformation. Geodynamic
models developed for intracontinental orogens such as Tibet, Altiplano-Puna, and
the Sevier-Laramdie indicate that such mechanical decoupling may be a critical
factor in controlling the tectonic evolution of intracontinental deformation.
Like some of its younger analogs, the structural transition of central Colorado
apparently corresponds with a magma- and fluid-rich, high-strain layer.

These deeply exhumed rocks present intriguing opportunities to directly
investigate deep-crustal processes that are inaccessible in younger orogens.
Issues of general impact include characterization of: (1) the controls on the
depth and thickness of the brittle/ductile transition (e.g. temperature,
lithology, fluids), (2) the kinematics and dynamics of deformation near the
rheological transition, (3) mechanisms of accommodating strain incompatibility
between different deformation regimes, and (4) the role of granitoid melts
and/or a widespread melt-fluid layer, in localizing middle crustal flow and
structural decoupling of upper and lower crust. In addition to exploiting the
deep crustal exposures of central Colorado to study general processes of
intracontinental deformation, this study is contributing to the understanding of
the Proterozoic tectonic evolution of the southwestern United States. In
particular, alternate models for "anorogenic" (extensional) versus "orogenic"
(transpressional) tectonic settings for 1.4 Ga tectonism can perhaps be
reconciled in an orogenic plateau model where regional horizontal contraction is
balanced by more localized gravitational collapse.

The study uses an integrated data set involving structural, petrologic, and U-Pb
geochronologic data to evaluate the kinematics and evolution of this important
structural transition. Focus is on a well exposed transect across the structural
transition. Specifically, studies of the Black Canyon of the Gunnison and
adjacent areas within the Colorado Mineral Belt are characterizing the style,
extent, and P-T conditions of mylonite shear zones and emplacement of syn-
kinematic 1.4 Ga plutons above the transition. Work in the Wet Mountains and
Sangre de Cristo Range is characterizing pervasively ductile deformation and
fabric reactivation within and below the transition. The geochronology is
emphasizing both U/Pb zircon dating of critical syn-kinematic plutons in central
Colorado and microprobe monazite dating of high-grade metamorphism along the
transect.