* 0101468
* North Carolina Regional Center for Plastics Manufacturing
* EHR,DUE
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2006
* Robert Kimball, Wake Technical Community College
* Continuing Grant
* Herbert H. Richtol
* 07/31/2006
* USD 799,468.00

An unmet need exists for associate level technician education programs that
target rural and minority populations. In North Carolina, rapid growth in
emergent technology-intensive sectors is creating opportunities for skilled
technicians, even as the State's traditional economic powerhouses of textiles,
tobacco and agricultural continue their precipitous decline. A serious
disconnect exists between the skill sets that satisfied the traditional
industries and those required by new sectors. The Eastern North Carolina
Plastics Technology Consortium was created to address these impediments as they
affect the plastics industry. The three-year program is leveraging resources of
multiple community colleges to educate students for careers as technicians in
plastics manufacturing. Catalyzed by industry requests, the Consortium has
secured State funding for facility construction and approval from the North
Carolina Community College System to develop an AAS degree program in plastics
technology. Students complete the first year of courses at their respective home
institutions and a second year of technology-intensive, hands-on courses at a
shared centrally-located facility. Goals include curricular reform based on
industry standards, professional development for faculty including industrial
experiences, and recruitment and retention of students using an innovative
mentoring model that calls on faculty and industry partners.