* 0101044
* Doctoral Dissertation Research: Compensators and Coercion in Systems of Exchange
* NONE,NONE
* 04/01/2001,03/31/2003
* Shane Thye, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Joane Nagel
* 03/31/2003
* USD 6,853.00

This project examines the role of compensation and coercion in relationships
that involve exchange of social goods among actors. Whereas compensation is the
promise of a positive reward to be delivered in the future, coercion is the
promise of impending punishment. According to theories of the relationships
between religious leaders and followers, and theories of power in exchange
relationships, the ability of person A in a dyad to use compensation or coercion
in dealing with person B will increase the exchange payoff for person A. For
example, control over a generalized reward (such as Heaven) or a punishment
(such as Hell) gives power to one person over another. However, the two forms of
control may differ in the power they generate and the timing of the emergence of
that power. This project uses data from a laboratory experiment to compare the
effects of compensation and coercion for power differences in systems of
exchange. In the experiment, subjects in separate rooms negotiate through
connected PCs. In the negotiations, the subjects vary according to their
position in the exchange relationship, and their ability to use compensation or
coercion, which in turn affect the payoffs the subjects receive in the exchange.
In addition to contributing to the general understanding of how people interact
with one another in exchange relationships, the results offer insights into
relationships between religious leaders and followers.