* 0101311
* Cross-Training Technicians and Engineers for Semiconductor Manufacturing
* EHR,DUE
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2004
* Bassam Matar, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* R. Corby Hovis
* 06/30/2004
* USD 520,000.00

The project extends work begun under Award No. 9850310.

A consortium consisting of three universities (University of New Mexico, Arizona
State University, and University of Texas at Austin) and three community college
systems (Albuquerque Technical Vocational Institute, Maricopa County Community
College District, and Austin Community College) in three contiguous states, each
of which has semiconductor manufacturing as an economic backdrop, is
implementing "cross-training" of technicians and engineers.

Supported by a previous NSF grant, the consortium developed a suite of six
computer-based training (CBT) modules designed to be integrated into factory-
like labs and related courses for co-training of technicians and engineers. The
first six modules covered lithography, metalization, design of experiments,
etch, chemical vapor deposition, and statistical process control. In the current
project, the consortium is (1) developing three more modules covering oxidation
and diffusion, doping and annealing, and factory dynamics; (2) deploying the
modules in side-by-side training of engineering and technician students at the
partnering universities and community colleges; and (3) completing the
evaluation of the full suite of nine modules.

The project is built around the premise that "cross-training" technicians and
engineers, such that each group better understands the roles and skill sets of
the other, will enhance their effectiveness as team members in real factory
settings. The project's CBT modules cover basic semiconductor unit processes
(lithography, metalization, etch) and their facility demands, design of
experiments, and factory-level dynamics from both the technician's and the
engineer's perspectives. The modules include interactive, schematic-based
simulator panels for selected manufacturing machines, to support a need-based,
top-down learning paradigm. In addition, the modules have structured exercises
that require interactive roles between technicians and engineers. The "side-by-
side" presentation of text, graphics, animations, videos, simulations, and
exercises give technicians enhanced exposure to mathematics and science and give
engineers enhanced exposure to machine (tool) operation issues. The multimedia
modules are designed to operate stand-alone or coupled to a multi-level
manufacturing simulator package. They can serve training needs in real, mock, or
virtual factory-like labs.

