* 0101699
* Engineering Technology at a Distance: Information Systems Technology Articulation
* EDU,DUE
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2004
* Lucy Morse, The University of Central Florida Board of Trustees
* Standard Grant
* Elizabeth Teles
* 06/30/2004
* USD 150,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This project is delivering a baccalaureate degree in Information
Systems Technology (IST) to associate degree graduates at a distance within the
state of Florida. This involves the collaboration of a university, community
colleges, and industry. This partnership is developing, implementing, and
evaluating a model distance education program that enables students to make a
successful transition from an associate degree program to the IST degree
Bachelor of Science. The IST option is becoming an integral part of the
Engineering Technology at a Distance (ETD) program currently offered. Students
from the community colleges may complete these degree programs without having to
come to the University of Central Florida (UCF) campus. The initial target group
of associate degree students is comprised of graduates of the Southeast Center
for Networking and Information Technology Education at Daytona Beach Community
College (DBCC) and Seminole Community College (SCC). Also included are Valencia
Community College (VCC) students participating in their ATE funded Information
Technology System and students at the College University Center at St.
Petersburg Junior College. The Information Systems Technology Articulation
project is giving these students the final plus 2 years for their bachelor's
degree.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of the project include developing
Information Systems Technology courses for delivery at a distance and beginning
to offer these courses in the 2001-2002 academic year to partners; ensuring that
support services for distance learning are in place; and marketing the degree to
community colleges and industries within Florida.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;