* 0101872
* Field Dependent Penetration Depth in Unconventional Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2001,04/30/2005
* Russell Giannetta, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 04/30/2005
* USD 300,000.00

The temperature and magnetic field dependence of the London penetration depth of
a superconductor yields direct information about the underlying quantum state.
This individual investigator project will use high resolution penetration depth
measurements to explore Andreev bound states, a new quantum phenomena that
arises from the unconventional angular momentum state of the charged pairs in
high temperature superconductors. Andreev states modify the energy spectrum and
significantly influence the electromagnetism of these materials. These states
are greatly enhanced in superconductors containing defects of nanometer size
produced by heavy ion irradiation. The penetration depth in irradiated samples
will be studied in order to explore how high temperature superconductivity
changes when nanoscale structures are introduced into a crystal. If fully
successful, this project will add a new spectroscopy of the pairing state, a new
chapter in the electromagnetic properties of superconductors and a window into
the behavior of high temperature superconductivity at the nanoscale. The
students and postdoctoral researchers involved in this research will obtain
training and experience in modern electronic instrumentation, cryogenics,
graphical computer programming, electron microscopy, materials characterization
and research at national accelerator facilities. This will provide them with
skills useful in many scientific or technological careers. %%% The ability to
shield a magnetic field is a property shared by all superconductors. The degree
of shielding is determined by a quantity known as the London penetration depth.
This individual investigator project will use high resolution measurements of
the penetration depth to explore a new class of quantum phenomena called Andreev
bound states that arise in high temperature superconductors. Andreev states are
unique to these "unconventional" materials and can provide a new tool with which
to understand them. The question of how high temperature superconductivity is
modified in devices of nanometer size remains an outstanding problem. Andreev
states will be particularly important in this realm and experiments are proposed
to understand their role. Superconductors have a potentially huge technological
impact, largely by virtue of their unusual electromagnetic properties. This
project will lead to a deeper understanding of these properties and if fully
successful, to a hybridization of high temperature superconductivity and
nanoscience. The project will train students and postdoctoral researchers in
modern electronic instrumentation, cryogenics, graphical computer programming,
electron microscopy, materials characterization and research at national
accelerator facilities. These skills will be important for research in
industrial, academic, or government research. ***