* 0101199
* Formation Dynamics and Spectroscopy of Novel Rare-Gas Atom Containing Molecules
* MPS,CHE
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2006
* R. Benny Gerber, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* Raima Larter
* 06/30/2006
* USD 354,000.00

R. Benny Gerber of the University of California, Irvine, is supported by the
Theoretical and Computational Chemistry Program to explore the formation
mechanism of novel rare gas containing molecules using molecular dynamics
simulations, including "surface hopping" between the different potential energy
surfaces that may be involved. These rare gas molecules, such as HXeCl and
HXeOH, have recently been discovered experimentally, and have stable bonds of
typical chemical strength. The simulations will compute the formation yield of
these compounds and its dependence on radiation wavelength and temperature, both
for the rare gas clusters and for species in matrices. Another objective of the
calculations is to predict if new but still unknown rare gas containing
compounds can be made by evaporation of rare gas atoms from clusters species.
This research will pursue the formation of new argon-containing molecules, and
the possibility of preparing neon and helium containing molecules. Finally,
simulations will be used to test whether pure crystals of HRgX molecules can be
stable. In addition to the dynamics simulations, calculations of the vibrational
spectroscopy of the new molecules will be carried out using the Vibrational
Self-Consistent Field (VSCF) method, which includes effects of anharmonicities
and coupling between modes. The outcomes of this effort are expected to greatly
expand knowledge about a new and interesting class of molecules, enable
discovery of new species within this family, and encourage studies of analogous
compounds for non-rare gas chemically inert molecules.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Until recently, it was widely assumed that rare gas atoms
(helium, neon, argon, krypton, xenon, and radon) could not form chemical bonds
in the electronic ground state of neutral molecules, and chemical compounds
containing rare gas atoms have belonged to a limited class. The new family of
rare gas molecules that will be explored in this research could ultimately have
significant applications in various areas of science, including atmospheric
chemistry and materials chemistry.