* 0101192
* Doctoral Dissertation Research:  Transferring Juvenile Offenders to Adult Court
* SBE,SES
* 05/01/2001,12/31/2001
* Michael Schwartz, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Patricia White
* 12/31/2001
* USD 5,031.00

A 1994 Florida law that separates the state juvenile justice system from social
welfare agencies marked a change in the ideology behind juvenile justice. Once
focused on protection and rehabilitation of children, the juvenile justice
system, like the adult criminal justice system, now focuses more on punishment.
Where previous laws reflected beliefs that children are still unformed and not
fully responsible for their actions, and that they require guidance rather than
punishment, the new laws reject such beliefs. This project examines how the
shift in the law reflects changing attitudes toward the children it most
affects, particularly African-American children. It uses two major research
strategies to understand the sources and consequences of the reform of Florida's
juvenile justice system. First, analysis of quantitative data on a randomly
selected sample of all cases processed by Florida's juvenile courts reveals the
effects of the new statewide policy on the treatment of problem youth. Second, a
detailed legislative analysis of how the policy was developed and adopted into
law identifies the changes in values and ideologies of childhood that guided the
new policy. The results contribute to research literatures on the social
construction of childhood, the workings of the criminal justice system, and the
emergence of criminal justice policy.