* 0102307
* Selective Conversion of Carbohydrate/Derived Chemicals Over Supported Metal Catalyst
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2004
* James Dumesic, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Glenn L. Schrader
* 06/30/2004
* USD 256,002.00

Proposal Title: Selective Conversin of Carbohydrate-derived Chemicals over
Supported Metal Catalysts Proposal Number: CTS-0102307 Principal Investigator:
James Dumesic Institution: University of Wisconsin

The objective of this proposal is to convert carbohydrate-derived chemicals for
the production of commodity chemicals. Lactic acid produced from the
fermentation of carbohydrates may be further processed for the production of
commodity chemicals such as biodegradable polymers, 1,2-propanediol, ethyl
lactate, acrylic acid, and acrylates. The combination of fermentation processes
and selective catalytic processes provides a clean route for the production of
these commodity chemicals from renewable carbohydrate feedstocks instead of from
non-renewable petroleum sources. In previous work copper-based catalyst systems
exhibited 100% conversion of lactic acid with high selectivity to the desired
1,2 propanediol. Fundamental studies of the interactions of oxygenated
hydrocarbons (hydroxy acids, organic acids, alcohols, and aldehydes) over
copper-based materials and over transition-metal-based materials will be
conducted. The plan is to combine microcalorimetric measurements, reaction
kinetics studies, spectroscopic investigations, and density functional theory
calculations to elucidate pathways for reactions of light oxygenated compounds
over supported metal catalysts. Overall, this work has the potential to enhance
the commercialization of chemicals produced from renewable biological sources.