* 0102544
* NMITA (Phase II): Integrating Interactive Identification Keys, Distribution Maps, and Stratigraphic Columns with the Neogene Marine Biota of Tropical America WWW Database
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Ann Budd, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Judith Skog
* 07/31/2005
* USD 110,161.00

Integrating Interactive Identification Keys, Distribution Maps, and
Stratigraphic Columns with the Neogene Marine Biota of Tropical America WWW
Database&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will continue development of the
Neogene Marine Biota of Tropical America (NMITA) database, an online biotic
database &lt;http://nmita.geology.uiowa.edu&gt; containing high-quality images
and synoptic information on taxa collected as part of several associated
multidisciplinary fossil-collecting projects in the Caribbean, Central America,
and South America. They include the Panama Paleontology Project (coordinated by
Jackson and Coates of the Smithsonian Tropical Research Institute) and the
Neogene Paleontology of the Northern Dominican Republic Project (coordinated by
Jung of the Natural History Museum in Basel, Switzerland). NMITA provides basic
information on authorship, synonyms, and type specimens of individual taxa
identified in the collections, as well as diagnostic morphologic characters and
stratigraphic and geographic occurrences. The website offers online
identification keys and illustrated glossaries of morphologic terms, as well as
interactive maps and stratigraphic columns for examining occurrences and
interpreting distribution patterns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;During the original
first phase of the project, information was contributed by nine specialists at
different institutions in the U.S., U.K., Switzerland, and Panama. A total of
~1300 taxa (~3800 images) belonging to two kingdoms and five animal phyla were
included. The taxa consisted of: ~225 corals, ~330 bryozoans, ~350 mollusks,
~100 foraminifera, ~100 ostracodes, and ~230 fish; all except mollusks are at
the species level.&lt;br/&gt;During the second phase of the project (supported
by the present grant), data for ~1300 molluscan taxa and Oligo-Miocene corals
will be entered, ongoing data entry for foraminifera and ostracodes will be
completed, and remaining static pages for corals and bryozoans will be converted
to a new Oracle system. Additional identification keys and morphology/ecology-
based search routines will be implemented, and new dynamic maps and columns
showing occurrences for individual taxa will be developed. Pilot projects will
be performed sharing data with the NCEAS Paleobiology database, specimen
databases, and STATPOD. Proper documentation will be developed for the NMITA
database project, and made available online so that others could manage the
database or develop a similar database elsewhere.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When
complete, NMITA will provide an image-based inventory of the marine biodiversity
of tropical America over the past 25 million years. It will serve as a
paleontological databank, accounting for taxa in quantitative&lt;br/&gt;analyses
of diversity through geologic time. It will summarize ongoing systematic
research on the fossil marine biota of tropical America and be instrumental in
earmarking diverse clades in need of future systematic study. NMITA is unique
among paleontological databases in its specimen basis and its emphasis on
photographs and illustrations, and it serves as a model for future dissemination
of taxonomic data in paleontology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;