* 0102887
* Chemistry at the Spatial Limit
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2006
* Wilson Ho, University of California-Irvine
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 05/31/2006
* USD 895,000.00

The aim of this research is to obtain detailed descriptions of single atoms and
molecules. These experiments provide the basis for understanding chemical and
physical processes at surfaces and properties of nanostructured condensed matter
and molecular materials. Low temperature scanning tunneling microscopes (STM)
are used to image, manipulate, chemically modify, and spectroscopically identify
individual atoms and molecules. The development of the single molecule
vibrational probe by inelastic electron tunneling spectroscopy (STM-IETS)
provides a new analytical technique with unprecedented spatial resolution. It is
now possible to investigate chemistry at the spatial limit with the STM; the
results provide a view of chemistry not possible by studying an ensemble of
molecules. In particular, the fundamental motions in molecules (vibration,
rotation, translation), the coupling of tunneling electrons to nuclear motions
(charge and energy transfers), and electrical conductivity (as related to
molecular electronics) can be studied with single molecule sensitivity. The
tunnel junction forms a novel nanoreactor in which the tip and the substrate can
be used together to carry out unimolecular dissociation and bimolecular
reactions. The research covers selected chemical systems from the lightest
element (hydrogen atoms) to diatomic (carbon monoxide) and larger organic
molecules (thios) on metal surfaces. These studies will lead to the development
of a method to detect single electron spins in individual atoms and molecules by
the STM. A thin film of magnetic metal (iron, gadolinium) is evaporated on the
STM tip to provide a source of spin polarized electrons. The study of single and
small aggregates of Manganese, Cobalt, Nickel, and Iron atoms, nitric oxide and
nitric oxide dimers, 1,1-diphenyl-2-picryl-hydrazyl (DPPH), and other molecules
with unpaired spins provides a new way to understand magnetism at the atomic
scale and illuminates the role of the electron spins in chemistry. Overall,
these experiments are intended to illuminate general experimental procedures and
scientific understandings. The research on solid surfaces is fundamental in
nature and provides a foundation for a broader understanding of chemistry in the
gas phase, solution, and other condensed media.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;An
integral part of the proposed research involves the scientific training and
development of undergraduate and graduate students. Since the STMs (microscope,
electronics, and software) are homemade, the students have a unique opportunity
to be involved in the design and construction of new generations of STMs. In
addition, UC Irvine has established centers to reach out to local K-12 schools
which have large populations of underrepresented groups. The P.I. will teach a
special topics course on "Nanoscience" which will attract an interdisciplinary
group of students from physics, chemistry, biology, and engineering. While the
emphasis of the proposed research is to obtain a fundamental understanding, the
implications for futuristic technologies are apparent, and students trained in
these areas will be highly competitive in the job market. This project is being
co-funded by the Chemistry Division/Analytical and Surface Chemistry Program and
the Division of Materials Research/Solid State Chemistry Program.&lt;br/&gt;