* 0102886
* Ultrasensitive Calorimetry Enabled by Suspended Semiconductor Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 05/15/2001,04/30/2004
* John Worlock, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 04/30/2004
* USD 335,000.00

In mesoscopic systems at low temperatures, heat transport and thermal
equilibration occur in a very different manner from macroscopic systems at room
temperature. This is due to the small heat capacities involved, and very long
thermal relaxation times to reach equilibrium with a heat reservoir, the
environment. At the ultimate limit, thermal transport involves exchange of a
single energy channel between a system and the environment. During the preceding
phase of this project, investigators observed, for the first time, this
predicted quantization of thermal conductance. This places an important, hard
upper bound on the thermal conductance available through future molecular
electronic devices. The current project continues the investigation of heat
capacities of nanomachined mesoscopic systems: Suspended semiconductor
nanostructures that are thermally-isolated and have integral transducers that
permit the localized introduction of heat and local temperature measurements.
Heat capacity measurements on minute samples with unprecedented sensitivity
should be possible. This should provide data relevant to the engineering of
miniaturized thermal detectors, and will provide crucial information relating to
limits of power dissipation in molecular-scale and ultrasmall electronic
devices. With this level of sensitivity, calorimetry experiments that elucidate
processes involving individual atoms and molecules should also become possible
for the first time. The effort will introduce undergraduates, graduate students,
and postdoctoral researchers to advanced techniques in nanofabrication and in
techniques and principles of ultrasensitive
measurements.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Future electronics will likely be based
upon molecular scale devices. Active electronic devices, at any scale, require
power to operate and this must ultimately be dissipated to their surroundings.
However at the molecular scale the processes that govern power dissipation
become very weak; hence it can be problematic. This domain had remained largely
unexplored until 1999, when, in a previous NSF-funded research program,
investigators observed the quantization of thermal conductance -- a fundamental
limit to the rate at which power can be conducted from a small system to its
surroundings. In their current proposal, the authors propose to continue with
research in this realm, turning now to the heat capacity of very small systems,
i.e. their ability to "store" energy. Their approach involves suspended
semiconductor nanostructures, fabricated by new surface nanomachining processes
they have developed. These enable the construction of complex exploratory
devices at the nanometer-scale, with internal components allowing quantitative
and precise measurements on their properties to be carried out. In the proposed
research program these will be utilized to obtain a more complete understanding
of heat transport and the heat capacity of nanometer-scale structures. They
should also prove to be extremely useful for the engineering of miniaturized
thermal detectors, and will provide crucial information relating to limits of
power dissipation in molecular-scale and ultrasmall electronic devices. With
this level of sensitivity, experiments that elucidate processes involving heat
flow between individual atoms and molecules should also become possible for the
first time. The effort will introduce undergraduates, graduate students, and
postdoctoral researchers to advanced techniques in nanofabrication and in
techniques and principles of ultrasensitive measurements.&lt;br/&gt;