* 0102862
* Muonium in Wurtzite Structured Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Roger Lichti, Texas Tech University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 08/31/2005
* USD 274,521.00

The defect states formed by muonium (Mu) in wurtzite structured semiconductors
are investigated using a series of related techniques known as muon-spin
rotation, resonance, and relaxation, or mSR. Muonium is effectively a very light
isotope of hydrogen in which a positive muon replaces the proton. Results of
these studies provide crucial information on the behavior of isolated hydrogen
impurities in these materials. The focus will be on the group-III nitrides and
the II-VI compounds; in particular, the wide gap materials currently being
developed for short wavelength lasers and other electro-optical applications.
Hydrogen is an important impurity in these materials that reacts with other
impurities to modify the related electrical and optical properties, thus
understanding its effects is crucial to engineering these materials for specific
uses. The muonium studies will yield information on the isolated hydrogen
precursor to so-called passivation complexes that is very difficult to obtain by
any other means. The various sites and charge states for H (Mu) will be
obtained, the motion or diffusive characteristics of each state will be
examined, and various transitions between these states characterized. This
project follows very successful studies of Mu in the cubic semiconductors in
which a complete model of the dynamics of Mu states and transitions was
developed. The hexagonal wurtzite structure has twice as many sites for Mu as
diamond or zincblende structures making assignments of the observed sites and
transitions more difficult. Mu forms a shallow donor in some of the II-VI
compounds in addition to the usual deep-level states; thus the crossover from
deep to shallow behavior will be investigated in II-VI alloys. The ultimate goal
of this project is to provide sufficiently detailed characterization of the
observed Mu states that an accurate dynamic model of muonium in the wurtzite
materials can be realized. Experience with other semiconductors indicates that
the Mu results yield a semi-quantitative model for H impurities. This research
will be conducted with students who will receive training in preparation for
useful employment in the scientific/technical workforce of the 21st Century.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the role of hydrogen impurities in the
semiconductors being developed for blue and UV lasers and other optical
applications is crucial to engineering these materials for specific uses.
However, many aspects of the behavior of hydrogen impurities have been extremely
difficult to study directly. In this project, we investigate an artificially
produced impurity known as muonium that is formed by implanting a short lived
particle into these materials. Muonium mimics the behavior of hydrogen in
essentially all its important properties, but is far easier to study. The
materials we plan to investigate include gallium nitride, aluminum nitride and
other semiconductor compounds. These laser materials have a common structure
known as wurtzite and our main goal is to develop a complete model of the
behavior of muonium (hydrogen) impurities in materials with this structure. Our
previous very successful studies of muonium in more common semiconductors, such
as silicon and gallium arsenide which have a cubic structure, provided a
detailed picture of the properties of isolated hydrogen impurities in the cubic
semiconductors and serves as a guide for the current work. The results of this
project will provide the experimental data for comparison to the theoretical
calculations currently being used to predict the behavior of hydrogen within the
technologically important wurtzite semiconductors. Successful completion of this
work will allow a better model of the long term effects of hydrogen on the
electrical and optical properties of short wavelength laser materials, and how
these effects may be modified by various processing steps and aging under
typical device use conditions. This research will be conducted with students.
They will receive training in a forefront area of contemporary condensed matter
physics and materials science in preparation to enter the scientific/technical
workforce of the 21st Century.&lt;br/&gt;