* 0102422
* UMEB:  Ecology of Global Change
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,09/30/2006
* Evan DeLucia, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 09/30/2006
* USD 400,000.00

A mentored research program for undergraduates in environmental biology will be
created at the University of Illinois in Urbana-Champaign (UIUC). The scientific
theme of "The Ecology of Global Change" will draw upon a primary research focus
in a recently created interdepartmental Program in Ecology and Evolutionary
Biology (PEEB). The Undergraduate Mentoring in Environmental Biology (UMEB)
Program will add an entirely new undergraduate component to PEEB. Experience
gained in the administration of a successful (since 1992) HHMI-funded
undergraduate research program will be used to "jump-start" the UMEB efforts,
but the UMEB Program will be completely independent and have a strong focus on
improving the quality of faculty mentoring of underrepresented minorities.
Students (eight per year, recruited from the 200+ Black and Hispanic/Latino
undergraduate majors in the life sciences at UIUC, as well as from students in
other majors interested in environmental biology) will participate in a two-year
program (sophomore-junior academic years, plus summers) of mentored research,
career-development activities (including training in how to be a successful
mentee), a poster session, a research symposium, and social events. UMEB Fellows
also will take a course together (Illinois in the changing Earth System) and
share housing over the summer, activities that will further promote the
development of a sense of community. Faculty mentors will be drawn from the
PEEB. All mentors will participate in a "mentoring the mentors" workshop at the
start of each summer as well as in the research presentations. Both mentors and
mentees will be supported by a team consisting of a UMEB program administrator
(Evan DeLucia, director of PEEB), a faculty assistant (Susan Fahrbach, director
of UIUC's HHMI-sponsored programs), a mentoring assistant (Claudia Washburn,
manager of UIUC's HHMI-sponsored programs) and a graduate administrator. The
UMEB Program's goal is to identify, early in their academic careers, students
with an interest in environmental biology and then guide them through the maze
of UIUC's resources. The coordinated program of activities encompassing the
sophomore and junior years is intended to attract undergraduates, particularly
underrepresented minorities, to graduate training and careers in fields related
to the biology of a changing planet.