* 0102922
* Symplectic, Contact and Low-dimensional Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2007
* Robert Gompf, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2007
* USD 319,309.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0102922&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Robert E. Gompf&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on
constructing symplectic, contact and&lt;br/&gt;4-dimensional manifolds. The
Principal Investigator has defined&lt;br/&gt;a topological structure called a
"hyperpencil" on an&lt;br/&gt;even-dimensional closed manifold, generalizing a
linear system of&lt;br/&gt;curves on a complex algebraic manifold. He has shown
that any&lt;br/&gt;hyperpencil canonically determines a symplectic structure on
the&lt;br/&gt;manifold. In dimensions less than 8, this correspondence
maps&lt;br/&gt;the set of hyperpencils onto a dense subset of all
symplectic&lt;br/&gt;forms on the manifold (up to isotopy and scale). A
similar&lt;br/&gt;statement seems likely in higher dimensions, and would provide
a&lt;br/&gt;complete topological characterization of those
manifolds&lt;br/&gt;admitting symplectic structures. If the fibers of
this&lt;br/&gt;correspondence can be topologically specified, the result will
be&lt;br/&gt;a purely topological description of a dense subset of
all&lt;br/&gt;symplectic structures on all closed manifolds. In addition
to&lt;br/&gt;this investigation, Stein surfaces and their contact
3-manifold&lt;br/&gt;boundaries will be studied by methods such as Legendrian
Kirby&lt;br/&gt;calculus. The topology of exotic R^4's and other
smooth&lt;br/&gt;4-manifolds will also be investigated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
n-manifold is a space that in small regions looks just
like&lt;br/&gt;n-dimensional Euclidean space. Points, curves and surfaces
are&lt;br/&gt;manifolds of dimensions 0,1 and 2, respectively. The space
in&lt;br/&gt;which we live is a 3-manifold, and the universe (space-time) is
a&lt;br/&gt;4-manifold. Surprisingly, 3- and 4-manifolds are much less
well&lt;br/&gt;understood than their higher-dimensional counterparts,
although&lt;br/&gt;major progress has been made in recent years. Symplectic
and&lt;br/&gt;contact structures on manifolds were discovered through
classical&lt;br/&gt;physics (Hamiltonian mechanics and optics, respectively),
but&lt;br/&gt;they are now seen to be important in such diverse areas
as&lt;br/&gt;quantum physics, complex analysis, differential geometry
and&lt;br/&gt;topology. For example, a rigid pendulum swinging
in&lt;br/&gt;3-dimensional space determines a symplectic manifold. The
bob&lt;br/&gt;moves on a spherical surface, so its position is specified by
2&lt;br/&gt;variables (latitude and longitude on this sphere). To
completely&lt;br/&gt;specify the state of the system, one must also include
the&lt;br/&gt;momentum of the bob. At any position, its momentum is tangent
to&lt;br/&gt;the sphere and thus specified by two more variables. Hence,
the&lt;br/&gt;set of states of the system is a 4-manifold (locally specified
by&lt;br/&gt;4 variables). This 4-manifold has a special symplectic
structure&lt;br/&gt;whose role is to link each position variable to the
corresponding&lt;br/&gt;momentum variable. This linkage ultimately results in
Hamilton's&lt;br/&gt;equations describing the motion of the pendulum under
the&lt;br/&gt;influence of a specified force field. There are many
other&lt;br/&gt;situations in which manifolds and their symplectic and
contact&lt;br/&gt;structures arise. While our understanding of such structures
has&lt;br/&gt;advanced enormously in recent years, some of the most
basic&lt;br/&gt;questions remain to be answered. Which manifolds have
symplectic&lt;br/&gt;or contact structures, and how many such structures are
there on&lt;br/&gt;a given manifold? How many 4-manifolds (if any) are
there&lt;br/&gt;satisfying a given description? Questions such as these form
the&lt;br/&gt;basis of this project.&lt;br/&gt;