* 0102895
* RUI: Studies of Neotropical Myxomycetes
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2001,05/31/2004
* Steven Stephenson, Fairmont State University
* Standard Grant
* James Woolley
* 05/31/2004
* USD 180,109.00

STUDIES OF NEOTROPICAL PLASMODIAL SLIME MOLDS

The plasmodial slime molds are fungus-like organisms usually present and often
abundant in terrestrial ecosystems. Most of what is known about the assemblages
of slime molds associated with particular types of terrestrial ecosystems has
been derived from studies in temperate forests; relatively little information is
available on assemblages associated with tropical forests. This research project
seeks to characterize the assemblages of species associated with microhabitats
and vegetation types not yet investigated in the Neotropics. Particular emphasis
will be directed towards the assemblages of species associated with various
microhabitats in the canopy of tropical moist forests and microhabitats
potentially available to slime molds in tropical dry forests and other types of
vegetation characteristic of more arid areas of the Neotropics.

The research will be carried out in three primary study areas: the Luquillo
Experimental Forest in Puerto Rico, the Guanacaste Conservation Area in Costa
Rica, and a portion of the state of Tlaxcala in eastern central Mexico.
Specimens associated with specific microhabitats within each of these study
areas will be collected in the field and obtained from moist chamber cultures
prepared with samples of organic material from microhabitats being investigated.
Most of the microhabitats to be investigated are accessible from the ground.
However, gaining access to the canopy of a tropical forest is exceedingly
difficult. Consequently, studies associated with various canopy microhabitats
will be carried out in areas being subjected to active logging (i.e., samples
will be collected from individual trees as soon as possible after a tree has
fallen to the ground).

The data accumulated as a result of the research project funded by an earlier
NSF grant provided evidence for a number of ecological patterns not previously
reported for slime molds. The most important of these are that (1) species
richness and [especially] relative abundance increase with decreasing (and not
increasing, as might have been anticipated)with moisture conditions and (2) in
tropical forests, distinct assemblages of slime moldsare associated with
microhabitats that have no counterparts in temperate forests. The assemblages of
slime molds associated these "new" microhabitats are characterized by the
presence of significant numbers of species either new to science or previously
considered to be exceedingly rare. It is anticipated that the research to be
carried out during this project, which will include all of the major Neotropical
vegetation types not previously investigated, will yield the data necessary to
develop a fairly complete understanding of slime mold distribution patterns,
ecology, and diversity in this region of the world. The project will include
several undergraduates as active participants, and collaborations developed with
scientists in Mexico, Puerto Rico, Costa Rica, England, Spain, Russia, and
Germany will be continued.