* 0102639
* NER:  Development of a Nano-lithography Based Manufacturing Protocol for Polymer Nanofluidic Platforms
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* Chia-Hsiang Menq, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Julie Chen
* 07/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Nanoscale Science and Engineering (NER) grant is to develop a nano-
manufacturing protocol based on the combination of a novel nano-lithography
process and an ultra precision motion control technology. This instrument is
capable of economically producing well-defined pores or channels in the
nanometer scale (10~100 nm) on thin polymer layers. Exploratory research to
prove the design concept will be carried out in this project. If the concept is
successfully demonstrated, the investigators will write a follow-up proposal for
fabrication, characterization, and testing of a prototype manufacturing
instrument. The nano-scale transport phenomena (i.e. nanofluidics) using the
well-defined features generated by this instrument will also be
studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The application of nano-fabrication technology to
create precisely designed miniature devices represents an exciting research
challenge. Strategies that have been explored for fabricating patterned
nanostructures include lithography with photons (X-ray or EUV), particles
(electron or ion beams) and scanning probes. X-ray and electron beam lithography
(EBL) are expensive and high energy techniques. For large-throughput
manufacturing like microprocessors and memories in the IC industry, they may be
affordable. However, for markets with very broad product needs and relatively
short product lifetimes as in the bio-medical field, the development of cost-
effective methods that are capable of writing and replicating nanostructures in
a wide range of materials is essential. The scanning probe lithography (SPL) and
associated replication methods represent the most promising technology that may
have economics superior to those based on photons or particles. These emerging
lithography technologies are aimed at micro-electronic applications in which
only a low aspect ratio is needed and bio-compatibility is not an issue. For
many medical and chemical applications, there is an urgent need to develop new
manufacturing methods that can fabricate polymer and metal devices with a high
aspect ratio and nano-sized features.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;