* 0102153
* Artificial Atoms
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2004
* Marc Kastner, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 06/30/2004
* USD 300,000.00

Experiments are proposed to explore the physics of electrons confined to a small
region of space and coupled to nearby metallic leads. The particular system to
be studied is the single-electron transistor (SET). Experiments carried out in
the past few years have revealed the effects of strong coupling between the
confined electron droplet and the leads in an SET. In particular, they have
demonstrated that the Anderson Hamiltonian, together with scaling and
renormalization theories, provides a quantitative description of the equilibrium
(zero-bias) conductance as a function of temperature and gate voltage.
Specifically, the ground state of the coupled system is a Kondo singlet. The
publication of these results has stimulated a number of theoretical predictions,
and one goal of the proposed research is to test these predictions. The
differential conductance as a function of bias will be studied. In addition, the
effects of multiple levels on the Kondo effect will be examined. In a magnetic
field the peak in differential conductance associated with the Kondo singlet
splits in two. Predictions have been made of the splitting of these peaks and
the evolution of their line shape with magnetic field will be tested. A new
measurement facility has been constructed which will allow the measurement of
the Kondo effect to be extended to lower temperature. The system is equipped
with a 16T magnet and rotation stage, so that the field can be in the plane or
perpendicular to the plane of the droplet of electrons. This will allow the
measurement of the temperature dependence of the Kondo peak in differential
conductance precisely. A completely different phenomenon, recently discovered in
SETs, is Fano interference. For small SETs the single-electron line shapes are
asymmetric with the characteristic shape predicted by the Fano theory. The
latter requires a continuous transmission channel that interferes with a
resonant one. Experiments are planned to clarify the nature of this
interference. In particular, while the resonant channel appears to arise from
single electron addition, the origin of the continuous channel is a mystery.
Measurement of the temperature and magnetic field dependence of the line shapes
may clarify the microscopic physics. This research will be done with students
who will thereby receive training in a cutting edge area of nanoscience and
technology. %%% The most dramatic phenomenon of the last half of the twentieth
century is the technological revolution, driven by the decrease in cost and
increase in efficiency of semiconductor technology. We often describe this by
"Moore's Law", the exponential increase in the number of transistors on a
silicon chip. The latter number has been increasing by a factor two every
eighteen months for over forty years. This explosion was made possible by
discoveries in fundamental semiconductor physics. However, in order to sustain
it, scientists and engineers needed new technologies for making smaller and
smaller structures, so that it is now possible to make semiconductor structures
that are only nanometers in size. Whereas electrons in conventional transistors
behave like classical particles, electrons confined to small dimensions can only
be described by quantum mechanics. Thus, discoveries in physics led to new
technology, which now make it possible for us to study new physics. This
research will explore the physics of electrons confined to nanometer dimensions.
The structure focused on is called a single electron transistor (SET). A
transistor is a switch that turns on when electrons are added to it and turns
off when they are removed. The conventional transistor of today, in a cellular
telephone or personal computer, for example, requires about 1000 electrons to
turn on. The SET turns on and off again every time a single electron transistor
is added to it. The goal of this research is to understand how the electron is
distributed between the trap and the electrodes of the transistor and how this
distribution depends on the properties of the SET, the temperature and an
applied magnetic field. The physics is expected to be similar for a wide variety
of nano-electronic structures and so will be of broad application to nanoscience
and nanotechnology. Graduate and undergraduate students will participate in this
research. They will receive training in one of the forefront areas of
nanoscience and nanotechnology that will prepare them for employment in academe,
industry and government institutions. ***