* 0102457
* Renormalization and Phase Transitions of Excitons in 2D Nanostructures:  Photonics at the University of Pittsburgh
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2005
* David Snoke, University of Pittsburgh
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 05/31/2005
* USD 315,010.00

This project focuses on the nonlinear optical properties of excitons in GaAs and
InGaAs coupled quantum wells. When an electric field is applied normal to the
wells, the electrons and holes in excitons in these structures become spatially
separated, leading to several nonlinear effects. One specific project goal is to
create excitonic circuits by which excitons are manipulated by an electric field
just like free carriers. This involves modeling the effects of inhomogeneous
electric field and stress and developing ways to increase the mobility of
excitons in these structures. This task involves a collaboration with sample
fabricators. A second goal is to work toward an efficient, room-temperature
optical transistor based on this type of quantum well structure. In this scheme
one light beam switches another light beam on and off. This involves
understanding the many-body renormalization effects of the excitons in these
structures, a goal that will be pursued in collaboration with several theorists.
This project also includes a substantial commitment to undergraduate science
education. An undergraduate Certificate in Photonics program was begun at the
University of Pittsburgh under a previous NSF grant. The present project
includes efforts to expand that program by creating opportunities for several
undergraduates to do research in photonics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When
light is absorbed in a semiconductor, the photon particles can be changed into a
new type of energy particle known as an exciton. An exciton carries optical
energy like a photon but moves through the semiconductor crystal like an
electron. By fabricating special layered structures known as double quantum
wells, we can cause these exciton particles to move in response to stress and
electric field. &lt;br/&gt;In this project we study the properties of excitons
in double quantum wells, with the aim of creating circuits for these optical
particles similar to electronic circuits. The wavelength of the excitons in
&lt;br/&gt;these structures can also be very sensitive to the intensity of light
that hits them. We hope to use this effect to develop an optical transistor, in
which one light beam switches another light beam on and off, just as an
electronic transistor switches an electrical signal on and off. These effects
are part of the field of "photonics," in which devices are made which use
photons just as electronics uses electrons. This field is a growing sector of
our economy, as the increased need for fast communications pushes technology to
optical rather than electronic signals. This project involves not only research
in photonics, but also a substantial commitment to photonics education. An
undergraduate Certificate in Photonics program was begun at the University of
Pittsburgh under a previous NSF grant. The present project includes efforts to
expand that program. In particular, this project creates the opportunity for
several undergraduates to do research in photonics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;