* 0102139
* Substrata Surface Chemistry, Conformation of Contaminant Upon Adsorption, &amp;  Availability for Biodegradation
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2001,06/30/2004
* James Bryers, University of Connecticut Health Center
* Continuing Grant
* Patrick L. Brezonik
* 06/30/2004
* USD 267,161.00

0102139 Bryers The objective of this research is to quantify surface chemistry
effects on the conformation and subsequent availability of mixtures of adsorbed
contaminants for bacterial degradation. The added influence of ambient humic
acids on the adsorption conformations will also be determined. Three organic
wastes are considered: naphthalene, cyanuric acid and trichloroethylene. This
research has two major objectives. First, carry out degradation studies (both in
suspension and as biofilm culture) of the three selected organic wastes, in
prescribed mixtures, both with and without the presence of known amounts of
humic acids. The added influence of ambient humic acids on the adsorption
conformations and bacterial responses will be quantified. Second, develop model
substrata that mimic inorganic soil substrata. Also, determine the spatial
conformation and molecular distributions of various mixtures of the three
organic contaminants exposed to these different "mineral mimic" substrata. In
addition, quantify individual species' metabolic responses when mixed cultures
are exposed to these various substrata. This research is expected to provide
fundamental information that is critical to affecting efficient treatment
protocols for contaminated land and water. ***