* 0102537
* Robust Limited Memory Hybrid Sparse Solvers
* CSE,CCF
* 08/15/2001,09/30/2006
* Padma Raghavan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 09/30/2006
* USD 315,473.00

Robust Limited Memory Hybrid Sparse Solvers&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Sparse linear
solvers can be broadly classified as being either 'direct' or 'iterative.'
Direct solvers are based&lt;br/&gt;on a factorization of the associated sparse
matrix and are extremely robust. However, their memory requirements grow as a
non-linear function of the matrix dimension because original zeroes fill-in
during factorization.&lt;br/&gt;The Krylov subspace (KSP) family of iterative
methods are memory scalable, but their convergence&lt;br/&gt;can be slow or fail
altogether. This project concerns developing scalable hybrids than can be
parameterized&lt;br/&gt;to model the range from pure iterative to pure direct
methods. We propose to develop parallel algorithms&lt;br/&gt;and software
engineering methods aimed at providing robust, limited memory hybrid solvers
that satisfy the&lt;br/&gt;computational demands of a variety of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;On the algorithmic front, our focus is on hybrids
obtained by preconditioning KSP solvers using suitable&lt;br/&gt;incomplete
matrix factors. Such preconditioners are robust and widely applicable, but until
recently they&lt;br/&gt;were considered unsuitable for parallel computing. The
main reason is that the sparse triangular solves for&lt;br/&gt;applying the
preconditioner become a bottleneck due to the relatively high latency of
communication. We&lt;br/&gt;have recently developed a latency tolerant
'selective-inversion' scheme that overcomes this problem to yield&lt;br/&gt;an
efficient and scalable implementation. In this project, we propose developing
parallel sparse factorization&lt;br/&gt;techniques that are efficient for the
entire spectrum of fill-in. We will develop a new 'supernodal
diagonal&lt;br/&gt;row block' formulation for scalable incomplete factorization.
We will also consider innovative ways of&lt;br/&gt;combining symbolic (level of
fill) and numeric (threshold) strategies to specify fill-in to be either
retained&lt;br/&gt;or discarded. Additionally, our algorithmic framework enables
us to provide a single, unified, extensible&lt;br/&gt;implementation of hybrids
for symmetric positive definite, symmetric indefinite, and nonsymmetric
systems.&lt;br/&gt;On the software front, we define a new 'usage model' based
'reverse engineering' process to develop a high-performance domain specific
solver as a smart composite of several methods. Our premise is that the right
composite solver is domain specific; substantial performance gains can be
realized by selecting the right combination of underlying methods to match
linear system attributes. We will obtain a uniform interface to a variety of
parallel sparse solver software by developing an object-oriented sparse template
library that utilizes parameterized polymorphism. Composites will be
instantiated by using this template library and a scripting language that
supports parallel computing using MPI.&lt;br/&gt;Our design goals and
performance targets will be keyed to three large-scale computational science
applications. The first concerns computational methods for advanced
optimization; this application requires robust indefinite solvers. The second is
a structural mechanics application for modeling cracks and fractures. The third
application involves large sparse eigenvalue problems that arise in quantum
molecular dynamics.&lt;br/&gt;Our project represents a concerted effort to
resolve critical research issues in the area of parallel sparse&lt;br/&gt;matrix
computations. Our goal is to develop the next generation of sparse solvers by
combining research in&lt;br/&gt;parallel algorithms and software engineering.