* 0102786
* Particle Astrophysics with VERITAS
* MPS,PHY
* 08/15/2003,07/31/2005
* Simon Swordy, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Richard  N. Boyd
* 07/31/2005
* USD 259,999.00

Some of the most astounding recent discoveries about our universe have been made
by telescopes and instruments collecting forms of natural radiation from space,
that are invisible to the human eye. For example, the 2002 Nobel Prize in
Physics was awarded to scientists who worked in collecting astrophysical X-rays
and solar neutrinos. This proposal is to support groups at the University of
Chicago and the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA) for participation
in the exploration of the next frontier in astronomy, the observation of high-
energy gamma rays from space. The VERITAS (Very Energetic Radiation Imaging
Telescope Array System) telescope is an array of collectors that detect the
small light flashes produced by high-energy gamma rays interacting in the upper
atmosphere. Several sources of this high-energy radiation have been discovered
with earlier pathfinder telescopes. These sources apparently exist both within
our galaxy and in energetic extragalactic objects. VERITAS can detect much
fainter and more distant objects than existing telescopes, and is expected to
discover many new sources of high-energy gamma rays.&lt;br/&gt;VERITAS is a
collaboration of 10 institutions in the USA, Canada and Europe. The construction
of the project is managed by the Smithsonian Astrophysical Observatory, with the
project office located near Tucson, Arizona.&lt;br/&gt;Apart from an active
involvement in the development of the science of this new astronomy, Chicago and
UCLA have key roles in the construction of the VERITAS array hardware and
software supported by this proposal. These activities include building key
components of the camera at the focus of each VERITAS collector, and designing
the way in which the data will be collected and recorded. &lt;br/&gt;The VERITAS
array is at present under construction for completion in 2006. The first
scientific results are expected to appear in 2005.&lt;br/&gt;