* 0102759
* Radical Routes to New Copolymeric Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,02/28/2005
* Warren Ford, Oklahoma State University
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 02/28/2005
* USD 300,000.00

Two new types polymers will be synthesized and characterized in the laboratory
of the principal investigator, and some of their properties will be determined
in greater depth in the laboratories of collaborators. Thousands of polymer
colloids (also known as latexes) will be synthesized in parallel by emulsion
copolymerization of hydrophilic and hydrophobic monomers in search of copolymers
that exhibit new morphologies. Visual tests will be used to determine which
latexes form opalescent films, and which will separate into phases like those of
polymer blends. Copolymers formed by emulsion polymerization, which has been
used for the manufacture synthetic rubber latex and coatings for more than fifty
years, may provide a low cost alternative to block copolymers that are used now
to stabilize polymer blends. The chemical and physical bases for the
transformation of colloidal crystals of a styrene-hydroxyethyl methacrylate
latex to porous polymer nets will investigated. The polymer nets will be
explored as separation media for polymers and colloids, as solid supports for
catalysts, and as templates for preparation of photonic bandgap materials.
Optical properties of the materials will be studied in collaboration with Profs.
Ackerson and Tong in the Oklahoma State University (OSU) Department of Physics.
Model polymampholytes will be synthesized to enable testing of current theory of
their structures and properties in aqueous solutions. Polyampholytes are
synthetic synthetic analogues of proteins that contain (+) and (-) charged units
in a single polymer chain. They will be prepared by living radical
polymerization of uncharged monomers followed by functional group
transformations to create the charged units. The compositions, structures, and
molecular weights of the polymers will be determined at OSU. The model
polyampholytes will be provided to Prof. Colby of Pennsylvania State University
for measurements of viscosity of aqueous solutions, electrical charge on the
polymer chains, and dielectric response, and those results will be compared with
new theories of polyampholytes by Prof. Rubinstein of the University of North
Carolina.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This research is in the general areas of
nanoscience, bio-related polymers, and combinational chemistry. Students earning
graduate degrees from this research will gain experience at polymer synthesis
and characterization in the laboratory of the principal investigator, and in
properties of polymer solutions at Penn State or optical properties of colloidal
materials in physics at OSU. In addition to meeting degree requirements in
chemistry, the graduate students (and the postdoctoral scholar) will participate
in the interdisciplinary workshops and short courses of the Oklahoma Network for
Nanostructured materials (NanoNet), a newly formed group of faculty in
chemistry, physics, chemical engineering, and electrical engineering at OSU, the
University of Oklahoma, and the University of Tulsa. The broad scientific base
will prepare them for industrial research and development or university
teaching.&lt;br/&gt;