* 0102476
* Mathematical modeling, analysis and computation arising in continuum mechanical descriptions of DNA
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2005
* Oscar Gonzalez, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2005
* USD 102,000.00

Gonzalez&lt;br/&gt;0102476&lt;br/&gt; The investigator studies constitutive
relations for&lt;br/&gt;continuum rod models of DNA and develops new tools for
analyzing&lt;br/&gt;the supercoiling and packaging of DNA and other
material&lt;br/&gt;filaments. The main objectives of the project are to apply
the&lt;br/&gt;theories of statistical mechanics and stochastic
differential&lt;br/&gt;equations to develop constitutive relations for continuum
rod&lt;br/&gt;models of DNA that are provably consistent with
detailed,&lt;br/&gt;sequence-dependent structural information at the base-pair
level;&lt;br/&gt;to apply the new concept of global curvature to develop
a&lt;br/&gt;geometrically exact and computationally tractable formulation
of&lt;br/&gt;the self-contact constraint that plays a central role in
the&lt;br/&gt;supercoiling and packaging of DNA and other biological
filaments;&lt;br/&gt;and to develop efficient and provably accurate
computational&lt;br/&gt;methods for continuum rod models that faithfully respect
global&lt;br/&gt;geometric constraints as well as qualitative features of
the&lt;br/&gt;underlying system.&lt;br/&gt; Biologists and chemists now believe
that the linear sequence&lt;br/&gt;of base-pairs along a DNA molecule contains
not only a genetic&lt;br/&gt;code, but also a structural code that governs the
global&lt;br/&gt;organization of the molecule and its susceptibility
to&lt;br/&gt;interactions with other molecules. An understanding of
this&lt;br/&gt;structural code requires realistic mechanical models of DNA
over&lt;br/&gt;a wide range of length scales. The research project pursued
by&lt;br/&gt;the investigator is aimed at the further refinement of medium-
to&lt;br/&gt;long-scale continuum models. In particular, methods
are&lt;br/&gt;developed for estimating local, sequence-dependent
material&lt;br/&gt;parameters and for describing global, finite-thickness
effects.&lt;br/&gt;Results from this research will be useful in developing a
greater&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the physical and mechanical properties of
DNA,&lt;br/&gt;in modeling how DNA may twist, bend and supercoil upon
itself,&lt;br/&gt;and in studying how DNA and other material filaments may
be&lt;br/&gt;optimally packed in confined geometries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;