* 0102652
* Dynamics of Interface Instabilities and Nanostructure Formation on Si and SiGe Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2001,03/31/2005
* Robert Nemanich, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 03/31/2005
* USD 380,809.00

This project addresses dynamics of film growth and surface and interface
reactions on Si and SiGe; the approach encompasses interface chemistry, strain
effects and surface and interface energetics. The primary objective of the
research is to develop a fundamental understanding of the dynamics of interface
instabilities for nanostructure formation on Si and SiGe alloys. In situ
measurements will employ photo-electron emission microscopy (PEEM) with UV
excitation from a free electron laser (UV-FEL). The research goals include: (1)
Development of specific approaches to use the FEL PEEM system for in situ, real
time measurements of the dynamics at Si and SiGe surfaces. The major advantage
of the LTV-FEL PEEM system is that the high intensity FEL light can be
wavelength tuned to the appropriate photo threshold to obtain image contrast of
the desired surface. (2) Development of methods to prepare nanoscale silicide
islands on Si, and the characterization of the electrical properties of the
nanoscale islands using scanning probe techniques. The research will relate
coalescence and ripening processes and shape transitions of the epitaxial
islands. (3) Dynamics of liquid metal-Si (M-Si) micro-droplets on Si surfaces.
The metals of Pd, Pt, Ni and Au all exhibit a deep eutectic in the M-Si binary
phase diagram. Research will explore how interface chemical equilibrium affects
the evolution of the surface microstructure under various conditions of metal
deposition or evaporation, or Si deposition. (4) Dynamics and stability of
metallic interfaces on SiGe. This research will involve in situ PEEM
measurements of the dynamics of these instabilities. New approaches to avoid
segregation effects are based on models of the processes. (5) Dynamics of strain
relaxation and nanostructure formation in SiGe epitaxial layers on uniquely
oriented Si. For epitaxial SiGe layers on Si, strain is relaxed through the
formation of misfit dislocations and through the development of surface
corrugations. This project will explore whether the strain relaxation processes
are affected by the presence of substrate surfaces with different step and
terrace structures. The research will also explore the use of surface morphology
for nanostructure organization. %%% The project addresses basic research issues
in a topical area of materials science with high technological relevance. An
important feature of the program is the integration of research and education
through the training of students in a fundamentally and technologically
significant area. An integrated educational program has been developed that
includes scientific research techniques, interdisciplinary research approaches,
and laboratory safety, and involves graduate and undergraduate students from
diverse backgrounds. ***