* 0102848
* NER:  Toward Efficient Design Tools for Molecular Machines:  Theoretical Investigations of Nanosystems
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2003
* Karl Sohlberg, Drexel University
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 05/31/2003
* USD 98,177.00

0102848 Sohlberg This proposal was received in response to NSE, NSF-0019.
Nanotechnology promises engineered devices constructed from just one or a few
molecules. Applications are envisioned in medicine, molecular scale electronics,
and information gathering for defense, space science, and other extreme
environments. Molecular turbines pumping streams of gas one molecule at a time,
minuscule valves delivering drugs with unprecedented site and dose specificity,
pinhead scale computer disks storing libraries of information, and extremely
sensitive artificial olfaction for contraband detection, are all theoretically
possible, but first these devices must be designed. The ultimate goal of the
program is to develop design engineering tools - "recipes" for nano-devices by
design, while simultaneously training tomorrow's engineers and scientists in
their development and application. In the case of macroscopic machines, the
starting point for the development of engineering models is well known: the
Newtonian laws of mechanics and the Maxwellian laws of electricity and
magnetism. For molecular systems the starting point is quantum mechanics. Nano-
systems exist at the transition/interface between molecular systems, which are
dominated by quantum phenomena, and macroscopic systems where matter is
essentially continuous and classical physics provides the best description.
Modeling this hinterland between the classical and the quantum means
incorporating features of both classical and quantum mechanics. Here a program
of study is proposed combining semiclassical methods to accurately incorporate
classical-quantum correspondence into the description of molecular device
mechanics and dynamics, with semiempirical quantum mechanics for efficient
structure calculations on these systems. Undergraduate and postdoctoral research
assistants will carry out complementary components. Undergraduates will build
skills with commercial software for electronic structure calculations while
modeling molecular recognition and self-assembly. A postdoctoral research
assistant will be involved in the fusion of these methods with the methods of
semiclassical mechanics for nano-systems.