* 0102254
* Applications of Descriptive Set Theory to Ideals of Closed Sets and Indecomposable Continua
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,09/30/2003
* Slawomir Solecki, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 09/30/2003
* USD 78,000.00

Solecki studies possible applications of descriptive set theory to
indecomposable continua and to ideals of closed sets. The first part of the
project is concerned with studying the composant equivalence relation on
indecomposable continua using techniques and notions developed in the study of
Borel equivalence relations. Solecki builds on his prior work on indecomposable
continua. He primarily investigates the question whether on a comeager subset of
an indecomposable continuum the composant equivalence relation is Borel
isomorphic to one of two special Borel equivalence relations via an isomorphism
preserving meager sets. The affirmative answer to this question would solve an
old problem of Kuratowski and even partial results for special indecomposable
continua would sharpen several theorems from the literature. In the second part
of the project, Solecki studies ideals of closed subsets of a Polish space. He
investigates a certain very concrete representation of simply definable ideals
of compact sets. This is connected with several open problems in this area of
mathematics. Additionally, he continues his study of the ideal of Haar null
subsets of a Polish group. Particular aims here are to develop the theory for
all non-abelian Polish groups (the theory works fine for the class of Polish
groups with invariant metrics) and to fully understand the connection between
Haar null sets in infinite products of locally compact groups and amenability of
the factor groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the themes of Solecki's project
is the investigation of indecomposable continua. These are fascinating
geometrical objects whose intricate topological properties attracted interest of
mathematicians since the beginning of the (last) century. However, only quite
recently it was realized how ubiquitous such continua are and how important a
role they play in various contexts in dynamical systems and topology. There is
an old conjecture, due to Kuratowski, which is still unresolved and whose
confirmation would completely reveal the finer structure of indecomposable
continua. Solecki works on particularly important instances of this hypothesis
and other problems related to it. Another theme of Solecki's project is the
study of certain notions of smallness. These are important in various branches
of mathematics to measure the size of sets under consideration. The starting
point here is his observation that a vast class of such families of small sets
admit surprising and very concrete type of representations. The possibility of
representing a family of small sets in this fashion has deep implications for
the structure of such families and, if realized, answers some old questions
regarding this structure. Solecki studies the extent to which such
representations can be established, interconnections between these type of
representations and properties of notions of smallness, and other problems
related to notions of smallness. &lt;br/&gt;