* 0102097
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Microbial Biology for FY2001
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2003
* Brian Leander, Leander, Brian S
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 06/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Microbial Biology for
FY2001. The fellowship supports training and research on the basic biology of
protozoan, microalgal, fungal, archaeal, bacterial and viral species that are
not generally considered to be model organisms. Further, it provides
opportunities for a recent doctoral recipients to obtain additional training in
microbial biology, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden his/her scientific horizons beyond the
research experiences during the undergraduate and graduate training. These
fellowships are further designed to assist new scientists to direct their
research efforts across traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves
of unique research resources, sites, and facilities, including foreign
locations.

The research and training plan is entitled "The Origin and Early Evolution of
Apicomplexans." Apicomplexans are microbial parasites that appear to have
descended from phototrophic dinoflagellates. "Aseptate gregarines" are
apicomplexans that inhabit marine worms and possess many ancestral features.
Moreover, many taxa of uncertain phylogenetic position possess apicomplexan-like
characteristics. Morphological and molecular phylogenetics of these "enigmatic
taxa" are being investigated and are expected to throw light on apicomplexan
origins and the evolution of novel characters.