* 0102340
* Mixed Alkali Effect for Mitigation of Sodium-Accelerated Corrosion of Silicon Nitride Ceramics
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2001,11/30/2004
* Henry Du, Stevens Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 11/30/2004
* USD 240,000.00

0102340&lt;br/&gt;Du&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is proposed to study the
mixed alkali effect (MAE) in the corrosion behavior of Kyocera's SN282, a
turbine-grade Si3N4 ceramic, and chemically vapor deposited Si3N4 in oxygen
environments containing single alkali (sodium, cesium) and mixed alkali (sodium
and cesium) elements. It aims to reveal the potential and establish the
understanding of MAE in high-temperature corrosion retardation of Si3N4
ceramics. Questions that will be answered include: (1) Will the incorporation of
Na and Cs in the oxide layer on Si3N4 be mutually retarded compared to a single
alkali (Na or Cs) situation, and if so, what is the quantitative correlation?
(2) How will the corrosion kinetics (rate and activation energy) and oxide
characteristics (composition, phase, morphology, and structure) compare under
mixed alkali and single alkali conditions? (3) Is MAE in corrosion a function of
alkali ratio (e.g., [Na]/[Cs]) in the oxide and in the environment? (4) Do
corrosion minima exist at some alkali composition(s)? (5) How will MAE affect
the corrosion mechanism? And (6) What are the effects, if any, of the additive
and impurity cations in SN282 on (1)-(5)? The objectives of the project will be
achieved by evaluating the corrosion kinetics of Si3N4 in O2-NaNO3, O2-CsNO3,
and O2-NaNO3-CsNO3 gas mixtures of selected compositions over a broad
temperature range and by characterizing the oxide layers using various
analytical tools.&lt;br/&gt; %%%&lt;br/&gt;The susceptibility of silica-forming
ceramics to hot corrosion by sodium salts remains a severe roadblock to the
exploitation of ceramic benefits in advanced gas turbine engines and other
structural applications. A critical need exists to search for means to mitigate
the corrosion problem in order for the realization of their projected
applications. This project aims to explore the mixed alkali effect (MAE) in
silicate glasses for corrosion retardation of silicon nitride ceramics in
sodium-containing environments. MAE refers to the pronounced, non-linear changes
in many properties of a glass when a dissimilar alkali oxide is added. The
premise of the proposal rests on two known facts. First, sodium-accelerated
corrosion of silicon nitride results from the dissolution of the oxidation layer
through sodium incorporation. Second, MAE lowers the alkali activity and reduces
alkali diffusivity in silicates by 2 to 6 orders of magnitude. This project
represents the first known attempt to use the MAE concept to address sodium-
accelerated corrosion of silica-forming ceramics. It will yield rich kinetic and
analytical information on and insights into MAE in high-temperature corrosion of
Si3N4. The knowledge generated will provide the design and user communities with
the scientific basis for practical exploitation of MAE for corrosion retardation
and durability improvement of silica-forming ceramics for advanced turbine
engines and other demanding applications where they would otherwise be
unsuitable. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;