* 0102529
* Statistical Methods for Some Applied Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Yehuda Vardi, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Grace Yang
* 06/30/2005
* USD 172,207.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Abstract DMS 0102529
----------&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; STATISTICAL METHODS FOR SOME APPLIED
PROBLEMS&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stochastic models and methods for a number of
real-life problems will be developed together with appropriate statistical
inference tools. Results of the proposed research will be applicable and
directly relevant to important areas of applications. The first topic concerns
statistical methodology for problems originating by users' command streams in a
multi-users computer network. Statistical modeling of such data has important
applications in networks' intrusion-detection, in designing intelligent
computer/internet environments with learning capabilities, and more. The goal is
to develop a practical methodology for profiling individual users or, more
generally, random sequences of commands originating from a fixed given source.
Our methods allow the system to recognize 'statistical signature' of users, and
to flag out masqueraders who might assume the e-identity of a legitimate user.
The data pose huge practical challenges, because of its shear size and
complexion and our current method has very good operating
characteristics&lt;br/&gt;(false- and missing- alarms) on two publicly available
test data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second topic concerns the development of a
new concept of data-depth functions, based on multivariate medians. We provided
a new algorithm for calculating an important multivariate median function, and a
closed form formula for the associated data depth. The methodology will lead to
robust, practical tools for multivariate data analysis, inference, regression,
image processing, and more. The third topic concerns regression analysis and
nonparametric methods for the comparisons of growth curves under informative
heterogeneous censoring. In many tumor growth inhibition studies, tumor sizes
are recorded over a period of time, forming a growth curve for each experimental
subject. The usual noninformative-censoring model is often not applicable,
because subjects could be censored out of the study due to treatments toxicity
effects. We propose to develop statistical tests for the comparison of tumor
growth rates and estimates of regression &lt;br/&gt;coefficients, in the
presence of informative heterogeneous censoring. The proposed testing procedures
are expected to be widely used, since they naturally correct the censorship
bias, retain high efficiency and &lt;br/&gt;require no distributional assumption
of the growth curves or the censoring mechanism. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;