* 0102248
* Hidden Microbial Diversity Of The Sea: Testing A Novel Approach To Cultivating Presently Uncultivable Microbes
* NONE,NONE
* 12/01/2000,11/30/2001
* Slava Epstein, Northeastern University
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 11/30/2001
* USD 65,732.00

The objective of this project is to gain access to the bulk of microbial
biodiversity by developing approaches to cultivate presently uncultivable
microorganisms. Uncultivable microorganisms make up 99% of all species from most
environments sampled, and the riddle of uncultivable microorganisms has been
recently recognized as the main challenge for basic and applied research in
microbiology by the American Society for Microbiology.

We propose an approach that is radically different from those traditionally
employed for culturing microorganisms from environmental samples. We propose to
culture the microorganisms in their natural habitat. We have designed a growth
chamber that is separated from the environment by membranes that prevent cell
migration and thus maintain purity of the inner space and yet enable full
chemical contact between the inner space and the outside environment.
Microorganisms incubated in the natural environment as we propose will be
exposed to the complete suit of the outside environmental conditions and
components. Our simulation of the natural environment may result in cultivation
of a wider range of organisms, including those that have previously been
considered as "uncultivable".

Once we achieve microbial growth in the field-incubated growth chamber, we will
use an array of molecular techniques to identify and verify the previously
uncultivable component among the grown colonies. Even if our approach allows us
to grow just a few novel isolates, this project, by the virtue of proving our
concept, may become an important milestone toward solving one of the major
problems of microbial ecology.