* 0102620
* Program for Excellence in Science, Mathematics, and Computer Technology (PESMaCT)
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2001,01/31/2010
* Carl Johnson, Southern University New Orleans
* Cooperative Agreement
* Caesar R. Jackson
* 01/31/2010
* USD 2,730,321.00

This proposal is submitted to the National Science Foundation in response to the
Historically Black Colleges and Universities Undergraduate Program (HBCU-UP).
The purpose of this interdisciplinary proposal is to request funds to develop
and implement Southern University at New Orleans's (SUNO) ``Program of
Excellence in Science and Computer Technology (PESMaCT)''. The PESMaCT web
address is www.suno.edu/cs/pesmact/.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Studies have confirmed
that the shortage of manpower in the science and technical workforce is
particularly acute within the underrepresented minority population. Minorities
make up only 14.5% of the present enrollment in graduate science and engineering
programs, and 6% of the science and technical work force. Compared to the 28%
minority representation in the population as a whole, there is an untapped
minority resource for building the nation's scientific and technical workforce.
The origin of this problem can be traced to inadequacies in science education in
K-12 schools. It has also been documented that lack of achievement in science is
due to shortcomings in present instructional methods which lack emphasis on
gate-keeper and lab centered courses, hands-on training, and ineffective or non-
collaborative efforts to utilize local universities resources and
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SUNO is proposing a solution to this problem
through PESMaCT. The goals of this project are to: (1) increase the "pipeline"
flow of minorities from high schools and junior colleges to science,
mathematics, and computer technology (SMaCT) fields,(2) improve retention of
minorities in SMaCT, and (3) improve the quality of graduating SMaCT majors. The
overall objectives are to: (1)integrate technology into all gate-keeper courses,
(2) double the current retention rate of 30%, (3) graduate 300 quality SMaCT
majors within a 5 year period, and 4) get 15% to be accepted to graduate or
professional schools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These goals and objectives can be
achieved by: (1) engaging in aggressive recruitment, (2) implementing a
strategic retention plan, (3) enhancing undergraduate curricula, 4) utilizing
undergraduate research as a valuable teaching tool, and (5) establishing a
collaborative and synergistic relation with Louis Stokes Louisiana Alliance for
Minority Participation (LS-LAMP).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The important catalysts
for our plan are: (1) collaboration among departments in the College of Science
at SUNO and (2) collaboration between SUNO and the New Orleans Public Schools
(NOPS) which supply 74% our student population. Unlike other institutions in the
city of New Orleans, SUNO is an open-admission institution serving about 4,000
students with majors in liberal arts, sciences, business and education. Also,
the University has graduate programs in social work, criminal justice, computer
information systems, and education. NOPS district serves about 84,000 urban
students with 85% being African Americans. Compared to the rest of the state
with 59.2 % poverty level, 88% of NOPS students come from families with incomes
below the federal poverty level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PESMaCT is designed to
improve the educational experience of minority students in science, mathematics,
and computer technology from high school through college. Implementation of
PESMaCT in high schools will motivate students to pursue degrees in careers of
SMaCT fields. As a result, this will lead to an increase in the number of
minority graduates and serve as a crucial pipeline in increasing the number of
underrepresented minorities receiving graduate degrees and working in SMaCT
fields. Beyond the funding period, PESMaCT will be sustained by support from the
University, local industries/companies and funds acquired from other grants.
PESMact will support the University strategic plan to: (1) increase
opportunities for students' success, (2) ensure quality and accountability, and
(3) enhance services to the community and state. Most importantly, the project
outlined in this proposal will help PESMaCT to achieve the NSF HBCU-UP goal to
enhance the quality of undergraduate science, mathematics, engineering and
technology (SMET) at Historically Black Colleges and Universities as a means to
broaden participation in the SMET workforce. In addition, PESMaCT will
positively impact the largest urban public school system in the State of
Louisiana.