* 0102614
* UMEB: Environmental Biology in Changing Southern California Ecosystems
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2007
* Steven Murray, CSU Fullerton Auxiliary Services Corporation
* Standard Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2007
* USD 400,000.00

California State University, Fullerton (CSUF) will initiate a program of
Undergraduate Mentoring in Environmental Biology (UMEB) to provide a
multifaceted series of educational experiences for undergraduates, focused on
learning through discovery in environmental biology. The program will strive to
attract primarily students from underrepresented minority groups to
environmental biology early in their academic careers. Over the 4-year project
period, as many as 18 students will undertake a diversity of approaches to
environmental issues in three distinctly different ecosystems affected by human
encroachment in Southern California (desert, foothill, and coastal wetlands).
The program's goal is to prepare the UMEB Scholars to develop a realistic career
plan and strategies for entering graduate school in environmental biology and/or
entering the workforce in environmental industry or governmental agencies. The
program will (1) provide opportunities for students to become engaged in hands-
on research experience in a broad array of areas within environmental biology,
(2) promote the development of mentoring skills by faculty members, (3) foster a
collaborative enterprise between student and mentor in engaging in the science
of environmental biology, and (4) thus attempt to increase the number of
students from underrepresented groups engaging in environmental biology and
going on to advanced study and careers in the field.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
UMEB Scholars will be selected during the spring of their freshman year and will
participate in an intensive field-based course and complete a supervised
research project during that summer. The 4-week course will bring together
students, faculty members, and other professional environmental biologists for
in-depth study of the effects of human activities in the three targeted
ecosystems. Following this, each student will be matched with a faculty mentor
based on interests, mentoring needs, and available research opportunities, and
will become an integral member of the mentor's research group. At the end of
each summer, the UMEB Scholars will present their research findings at a student
poster session. As part of their Biology major, the UMEB students will complete
classes designed for their needs, including courses in experimental design and
research ethics. The cornerstone of the CSUF UMEB Program will be the completion
of a two-year independent research project done in collaboration with a faculty
mentor, culminating in a senior thesis. Students will present reports on their
research progress in a Proseminar designed to strengthen the community of
environmental biologists at CSUF and to provide information about research,
internship, graduate school, and career opportunities. The entire program will
prepare the UMEB Scholars for careers or graduate programs in environmental
biology.