* 0102345
* NER:  Fabrication of Fullerene Based Novel Molecular Electronic Devices Using Quantum Mechanical Simulations
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2003
* Madhu Menon, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2003
* USD 105,378.00

This proposal was received in response to NSE, NSF-0019. A novel approach for
the fabrication of atomistic electronic devices is proposed which, if realized,
will have important industrial applications. The theoretical methods involve
simulations using quantum tight-binding molecular dynamics scheme that can be
used to accurately treat interactions in carbon systems at the nanoscale level.
Large scale simulations will be performed using novel parallel computer
algorithms using a synergistic interdisciplinary collaboration. Simulation
results can be used as a guide in the experimental
investigations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although the present electronic technology
is dominated by silicon, it is becoming clear that Si based electronic devices
cannot be relied on to sustain the current pace of miniaturization. It
is&lt;br/&gt;becoming clear that a new class of molecularly perfect materials
are needed to make these new devices. Single-wall carbon nanotubes are one such
material that are expected to execute a ``quantum'' leap i the area of nanoscale
electronics, computers, and materials. A focussed effort to lay the foundation
for fullerene and nanotube based molecular electronics which will revolutionize
the electronics and computer industries is proposed. The emphasis is on the
modeling and simulations which will be used to guide experimental efforts to
realize these devices. The theoretical method for the treatment of these systems
contains many state-of-the-art features, making it ideally suited for studying
these systems.&lt;br/&gt;