* 0102628
* Geometric aspects of interior-point algorithms of optimization
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Leonid Faybusovich, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* Henry A. Warchall
* 07/31/2005
* USD 95,000.00

Proposal: DMS 0102628 Principal Investigator: Leonid FayBusovich, Department of
Mathematics, University of Notre Dame

Abstract.

PI analyzes geometric and algebraic structures arising in connection with
optimization problems. The major goal is to further expand the domain of
applications of interior-point algorithms. A method based on the theory of
random matrices is proposed to calculate characteristic functions of cones
generated by Chebyshev systems and thus self-concordant barriers for these
cones. This drastically expands the domain of applicability of interior-point
algorithms. In particular, possible applications to spline approximations are
outlined. A general approach to the construction of self-concordant barriers for
a broad class of infinite-dimensional domains is proposed. The technique of JB-
algebras is suggested to carry over the recent impressive applications of the
theory of Euclidean Jordan algebras to symmetric programming to the infinite-
dimensional situation. Possible control applications are outlined.

The theory of interior-point algorithms provides a general framework for the
analysis of a broad class of extremely efficient optimization algorithms. These
algorithms are used to solve problems aiming at finding the best possible
solutions under various constraints (e.g. time constraints , available resources
e.t.c ). The realization of the project will enable us to drastically expand a
class of problems that can be solved with the help of powerful modern computers.