* 0102755
* FRG: Origin of the Spin-Relaxation Lifetime on a Nanometer-Scale for Metal-Semiconductor Interfaces: A Combined Theoretical and Experimental Approach
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2001,04/30/2005
* Paul Thibado, University of Arkansas
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 04/30/2005
* USD 500,929.00

This FRG project explores local electronic spin injection and transmission in
semiconductor heterostructures and ferromagnetic metal films on semiconductors.
The approach is to fabricate a series of III-V heterostructures(e.g.,
AlGaAs/GaAs, InGaAs/InAlAs, InAs/InP, etc.) and hybrid
ferromagnetic/semiconductor systems, and to combine state-of-the-art surface
science instrumentation with first principles total energy calculations which
include electron spin. The local structural properties of the layers will be
determined during growth using an in situ scanning tunneling microscope (STM).
The fraction of spins able to traverse the interface will be determined using a
spin-polarized STM technique, which uses a single crystal Ni&lt;110&gt; STM tip
as a source of a 100% spin-polarized electron injection current. The structural
information obtained with the STM will be used as the input structure for the
first-principles total-energy calculations to provide a detailed picture of
local electronic and electromagnetic field properties of the surfaces. Comparing
this information with the experimentally measured local spin-injection
probability map will assist in identification of mechanisms responsible for
electron spin flip with near atomic resolution. Ferromagnetic metal films (e.g.,
elemental Co) on semiconductors will also be grown. Nucleation and growth of
submonolayer thick films will be studied using in situ STM. By counting the
number of Co islands formed for a set of 0.1 monolayer thick films each grown at
a different temperature fundamental parameters governing the nucleation and
growth are expected to be identified. To quantify this information, Monte Carlo
computer simulations that mimic the growth procedure and predict the
experimental outcome will be conducted. From these calculations, diffusion
coefficients and activation energies for diffusion are obtained. With only 0.1
monolayer of Co on the semiconductor surface, local spin-injection properties
will also be investigated. This allows local monitoring of the effects of
Schottky barrier formation on the spin injection process. First-principles
total-energy calculations will also be carried out for these surfaces and the
results compared to the experimentally measured local spin-injection map to
identify mechanisms for spin-flip scattering. After completion of one monolayer
of Co, either thicker elemental Co films or alternate monolayers of MnAl and Co
will be grown to form the Co 2MnAl Heusler alloy. Elemental Co films allow
systematic studies of structural and magnetic quality on a simple one-component
system, while the Heusler alloy provides a cubic structure, closely lattice
matched to InP, and is thought to be an ideal spin-injection contact, since only
one spin participates in electrical conduction. The magnetic quality of the
overlayers will be determined using SQUID magnetometry, and the structural
quality of the films will be determined using X-ray diffraction. Ferromagnetic
metal contacts will be fabricated in situ on the high-electron mobility
semiconductor quantum well structures, and transport properties evaluated. The
outcome will be modeled using transport theory which takes into account the
detailed structure of the interface. The theoretical component of these studies
will be conducted in a collaborative arrangement with the Theory Group at the
National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), allowing students to travel to the
NREL and gain additional research experiences and skills.&lt;br/&gt;%%%
&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of
materials science with high technological relevance. These studies will improve
fundamental understanding of factors important to the evolving field of
spintronics, which combines conventional electronics and spin transport. An
important feature of the program is the integration of research and education
through the training of students in a fundamentally and technologically
significant area. The interdisciplinary project strives to develop strong
technical, communication, and organizational/management skills in students
through unique educational experiences made possible by a forefront research
environment, and collaborative activities with a national facility.
&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;