* 0102134
* NER:  NanoScintillation Systems for Aqueous-Based Liquid Scintillation Counting
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2002
* Michael Jay, University of Kentucky Research Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 06/30/2002
* USD 80,000.00

This proposal was received in response to NSE, NSF-0019. Biomedical and chemical
researchers routinely employ liquid scintillation counting as a means of
quantifying the amount of radioactivity emitted by beta-particle emitting
isotopes (e.g., 3H and 14C) in samples generated during experiments. Frequently,
these samples are aqueous in nature and must be mixed with an organic solvent
containing dissolved fluor molecules (scintillators) to form an emulsion-based
"cocktail". Although efficient, the disposal of the large quantities of "mixed"
(radioactive and organic) waste generated by liquid scintillation counting
presents an economical and environmental challenge. To solve this problem, the
PI proposes to develop an aqueous-based scintillation system by applying
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of the 12-month project is
to develop an aqueous-based NanoScintillation system that may serve as an
alternative to organic solvent-based liquid scintillation cocktails. Two
specific aims proposed are: 1) to demonstrate that a primary fluor molecule can
be entrapped in an engineered aqueous-based NanoScintillation System meeting the
following criteria: system consists of &gt;98% water, no organic solvents, and
permanently suspended particles &lt;100 nm, and 2) to demonstrate that the
engineered NanoScintillation System has detection efficiencies for 3H and 14C
that are &gt;50% of those of commercial organic solvent-based liquid
scintillation cocktails. Two types of stable oil-in-water microemulsions as
nanotemplates for the curing of solid nanoparticles containing fluor molecules
will be engineered. Particle size, stability, and suspendability of the
engineered nanoparticles will be measured as a criteria for an optimal
NanoScintillation System. The detection efficiency of optimal systems for 3H and
14C will be determined and compared to those of commercially available organic-
solvent based cocktail systems.&lt;br/&gt;