* 0102923
* CONFERENCE:  New Perspectives in Transporter Biology to be held from July 21- July 26, 2001 at the Omni Tucson in Tucson, Arizona
* BIO,MCB
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2002
* Michael Quick, Federation of Amer Societies For Exper Biology
* Standard Grant
* nicole peterson
* 06/30/2002
* USD 5,000.00

This grant provides support for a conference to be held under the auspices of
the Federation of American Societies of Experimental Biology (FASEB) entitled
"New Perspectives in Transporter Biology." This meeting is the third bi-annual
conference on the subject and is scheduled to be held from July 21 - July 26,
2001 at the Omni Tucson, in Tucson Arizona. It is expected to be attended by
approximately 160 researchers. The conference will bring together biochemists,
biophysicists, physiologists, and molecular biologists to share information on
the molecular and physiological properties of the proteins responsible for
mediating the transport of amino acids, peptides, neurotransmitters, and other
ions across biological membranes. Recent work on the structure/function,
regulation, and physiological roles of these transporters have shown them to be
critical not only for normal function but as therapeutic targets in disease
states. The explosion of new information on these molecules makes this a timely
topic for interactions among the top transporter biologists. The conference
sessions will be devoted to recent findings in the field of membrane transport
and include the latest information on transporters for amino acids, amines,
peptides, glucose, as well as vesicular transporters and ion exchangers. Some
topics to be examined in depth include transporter physiology,
structure/function, trafficking and localization, regulation, model systems, and
diseases states.&lt;br/&gt;The conference will consist of nine oral scientific
session over five days (morning and evening), and three afternoon poster
sessions. Each oral session will be followed by a panel discussion of the topic.
In order to promote the advancement of junior faculty, the most exciting poster
submissions will be selected for short oral presentations during the regular
oral sessions. This conference should provide the top transporter investigators
with a forum for intimate discussions of the commonalities and differences among
this important class of molecules.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;