* 0102310
* Modeling and development of Gradient Based Smart Polymer Sensors and Actuators
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2001,02/28/2006
* Gregory Washington, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Shih-Chi Liu
* 02/28/2006
* USD 209,999.00

Modeling and Development of Gradient Based Smart Polymer Sensors and Actuators
Gregory Washington, PI Ohio State University Proposal # 0102310

Abstract The goal of this study is to develop a novel gradient-based sensor for
spatial measurement of distributed systems. The sensors and actuators in this
study are developed from polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF). Previous studies have
used spatial aperture shading techniques (spatially varying electrodes to
achieve a particular performance function) to measure a myriad of distributed
systems. A major limitation of the spatial aperture shading techniques was that
the apertures have a heavy dependence on 1-dimensional variation for most cases.
In this study spatial gradient polarization and aperture shading techniques are
used to develop the next generation of sensors. In spatial polarization the
material is polarized in a manner such that its piezoelectric constant is
allowed to vary in controlled manner. Specifically, the objectives of this
research are to: (1) Develop the analytical basis for spatial gradient
polarization. Inherent in this part of the study is the development of
techniques for analytically calculating weighting functions for various
structural configurations. (2) Develop the experimental hardware and facilities
necessary for making spatially polarized sensors and actuators. (3) Develop
control techniques necessary for the production of user defined film actuators
and sensors. (4) Develop a non-contact measurement technique for deflection
verification.

The research goals are accomplished by applying differential calculus, the
principles of mechanics, and piezoelectric polymer modeling to a given sensor
system. The experimental hardware that will be developed for polarizing the
films consist of a corona charging system with an appropriate stretch and drive
mechanism for correct placement and rastering of the film. A wide-angle stereo-
photogrammetry system similar to those used in particle tracking applications
will be modified to accurately measure the location of the distributed system
when actuated. The sensors market is an $18 billion market and growing. These
new sensors can be utilized in a host of applications including Automotive,
Biomedical sensors, Aerospace Structural, and Impact sensors in Military
applications, like sonar sensing equipment and so on. In addition, there is a
possibility that this novel technology can be applied directly to piezoceramic
actuators as well.

