* 0102325
* The Archaeometry Laboratory at MURR: Developing Tools for Archaeological Provenance
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2002,03/31/2006
* Hector Neff, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 03/31/2006
* USD 329,982.00

Dr. Glascock will continue to operate an archaeometric center at the University
of Missouri and employ the technique of neutron activation analysis to analyze
the elemental composition of archaeological materials. This multi-elemental
technique which allows the major, minor and trace elements of a material to be
determined simultaneously and with considerable accuracy and precision. Of
particular interest are potential analyses of ceramics, lithics, metal and bone.
Through elemental analysis of archaeological materials, a number of significant
kinds of questions can be addressed. NAA provides a taxonomic tool because it
allows materials of similar composition to be grouped together. In some
instances, it also permits the proveniencing of artifacts and thus may provide
information about procurement practices, routes of trade and political
boundaries. It may also improve understanding of ancient technologies and
(through analysis of skeletal remains) give insight into prehistoric diet and
nutrition. This project is particularly important because the Missouri
laboratory is one of the very few which provide NAA service to archaeologists.
It also plays an important role in training students and it maintains large data
bases and is working actively to facilitate scientific access to
them.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Under this current award, Dr. Glascock will
integrate high-resolution inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS)
with standard NAA procedures. He will develop calibration standards that will
facilitate the integration of NAA and ICP-MS data. It is likely that within the
coming years ICP-MS, because of its relative accessibility and more economic
operating costs, will play an increasingly important role in archaeometric
analysis and Dr. Glascock will work to provide standards for the archaeometric
community. He will also explore the potential of solid-sample analysis via laser
ablation and investigate new kinds of archaeometric studies such as slip and
pigment analysis by laser ablation ICP-MS.&lt;br/&gt;