* 0102495
* UMEB: Fostering Student Confidence and Capability in Environmental Science
* BIO,DBI
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2006
* Carlos Robles, California State L A University Auxiliary Services Inc.
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 09/30/2006
* USD 407,923.00

0102495&lt;br/&gt;Robles&lt;br/&gt;This project would establish a structured
undergraduate mentoring program in environmental biology at a minority serving
university - California State University, Los Angeles (CSLA). It would
strengthen collaboration among faculty, their supporting research institution,
and a network of off-campus partners devoted to environmental science education.
A unifying science theme, "acquisition and use of spatial information in field
studies," provides a focus for curricular and research activities. Student
programs may include special courses in Geographic Information Systems, field
instrumentation, computer modeling, molecular genetic population
differentiation, as well as more traditional environmental science offerings.
Students would gain research experience in interdisciplinary teams of mentors,
graduate students, and collaborating scientists. Students will rotate and adopt
one of three teams: (1) Molecular Genetics of Populations (2) Perturbations of
the Terrestrial Carbon Cycle, and (3) Models of Marine Benthic Populations.
Program activities are staged over two to three years in phases: (I) Orientation
- introduction to the environmental science community and encouragement in basic
scholarship, (II) In-Depth Training - emphasis on advanced research skills, and
(III) Culmination - presentation of scientific findings and preparation for
graduate school. Additional activities include internships with agency partners,
intensive "field immersion experiences," and mentoring by accomplished role
models. An ethics component will feature seminars and discussions with local and
national ethicists. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This mentoring program is based on the
fact that students' motivation is crucial to their success; therefore, all
activities seek to build student confidence and capability. Motivation will be
heightened by imparting awareness of scientists' social responsibilities and by
fostering an appreciation for the contribution students from underrepresented
groups can make. By promoting on and off campus educational partnerships, the
project will positively affect the future of environmental science education at
CSLA, and benefit students beyond the cohort of exemplary UMEB undergraduate
fellows. &lt;br/&gt;