* 0102152
* Inland Mesolithic Settlement in Southern Scandinavia
* SBE,BCS
* 08/01/2001,06/30/2004
* T. Douglas Price, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2004
* USD 117,128.00

This project involves two years of excavation at an extraordinary, waterlogged
late Mesolithic site in the interior of Denmark. The focus of these
investigations is the study of inland settlement of hunter-gatherers and its
role in the transition to farming around 4000 B.C. A good deal has been learned
in recent years about coastal settlement and subsistence in this region On the
other hand very little work has been done on inland settlements and their place
in late Mesolithic adaptations.

Several lines of evidence suggest that such sites may have been the initial
locus for the adoption of farming. Excavations will be conducted at a site where
organic preservation is exceptional and substantial quantities of plant and
animal material are available for the characterization of subsistence change. In
addition artifacts of stone, bone, wood, and other materials should be present
in large numbers providing a more complete view of the technology of these
inland groups The excavations should provide information on the subsistence
focus, season and duration of inland settlement, as well as connections with the
coast.

The presence and age of Early Neolithic materials at the inland site may allow
an assessment of the role and priority of farming activities in this region. The
research will evaluate the role of climate and resource deterioration in the
transition from hunting and gathering to farming in this region. Excavation
analysis and conservation of materials from waterlogged Stone Age sites is
expensive but the information gained from such well preserved contexts is well
worth the cost Permission has been granted for this work to proceed. All
materials recovered in the excavation will be the property of the Kalundborg og
Omegns Museum, Kalundborg, Denmark.