* 0102808
* High Piezoelectric Coefficient Ferroelectric Films for MEMS Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2001,01/31/2005
* Srinivas Tadigadapa, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 01/31/2005
* USD 151,021.00

Piezoelectric thin films are attractive elements in several MEMS applications
due to &lt;br/&gt;the large generated force, high electromechanical coupling
coefficients, and &lt;br/&gt;substantial charge output that can be generated.
This proposal focuses on two &lt;br/&gt;approaches to increasing the performance
in piezoelectric MEMS devices: (i) enhancing &lt;br/&gt;the effective
piezoelectric response in thin ferroelectric films utilizing in-plane
&lt;br/&gt;poled structures and (ii) developing miniaturized flextensional
transducers to amplify &lt;br/&gt;the piezoelectric effect. From the scientific
standpoint, the program will determine &lt;br/&gt;how the piezoelectric
properties of in-plane polarized lead zirconate titanate films
&lt;br/&gt;compare to through-the-thickness polarized transducers, as well as
any differences in &lt;br/&gt;the way piezoelectric and dielectric properties
age and fatigue relative to &lt;br/&gt;conventionally poled films. A processing
scheme to enable production of flextionsional &lt;br/&gt;MEMS transducers will
also be developed. In addition, a MEMS switch for RF applications
&lt;br/&gt;with large displacement (~2 microns) and high-speed
(&lt;1microsecond) will be &lt;br/&gt;demonstrated using the d33 coefficient and
a flextensional actuation mechanism. The &lt;br/&gt;educational aspects of this
program will concentrate on training graduate as well as
&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) are miniaturized
devices produced with the same &lt;br/&gt;techniques developed for integrated
circuits, and typically range from several microns &lt;br/&gt;to several
millimeters in size. Such devices are now widely used in ink jet printers
&lt;br/&gt;and automobile air bag deployment accelerometers. Many fields,
including miniaturized &lt;br/&gt;biomedical instrumentation for bedside
diagnosis, commercial electronics such as cell &lt;br/&gt;phones, and small
sensors to detect phenomena as diverse as toxic gases or the imminent
&lt;br/&gt;failure of a piece of industrial equipment would benefit from MEMS
devices with higher &lt;br/&gt;sensitivities or with the capability of doing
more work. This program is designed to &lt;br/&gt;increase the functionality of
MEMS systems by exploring the integration of high &lt;br/&gt;performance
ferroelectric thin films with motion amplification. This program will also
&lt;br/&gt;train and educate scientists in an interdisciplinary research
environment in a &lt;br/&gt;technologically-significant area of national
importance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;