* 0102500
* NER:  Decoherence and Quantum Computing in Nanoengineered Semiconductor Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* Vladimir Privman, Clarkson University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 07/31/2003
* USD 80,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was received in response to NSE, NSF-0019. The PI
propose to develop solid-state many-body modeling techniques for evaluation of
decoherence, relaxation, and interaction properties of nuclear and impurity-
bound electron spins in nanoengineered semiconductor materials. Modern layered
semiconductor heterostructures and quantum wells, involving strained alloys,
band-structure and g-factor engineering, have been utilized in recent designs
for realizations of quantum information processing (quantum computing). Quantum
bits (qubits) are the nuclear or bound-electron spins of precisely positioned,
isotopically selected impurity atoms. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recently, it has
been demonstrated that such structures can be actually made by advanced MBE and
lithography techniques. Consideration of polarized spins in semiconductor
materials has become also of central interest owing to new experimental
developments including optically pumped NMR detection of polarization and
coupling of spin-polarized electronic behavior to nuclear polarization. Several
experimental efforts are on the way to measure single spins and realize initial
few-qubit semiconductor spin-based quantum computation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There has been only limited advancement in theoretical
modeling and estimation of spin interactions, control, relaxation, and
decoherence. The consideration of decoherence, in particular, is a new dimension
in solid-state semiconductor research, not considered in earlier studies. The
field is widely open with the open questions being not only how, but what to
calculate, and with many conceptual issues remaining to be clarified, in
relation to coherent quantum dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PIs emphasis will
be on developing and applying theoretical techniques to study all the aspects of
quantum dynamics in such systems, from control to decoherence, by field-
theoretical many-body solid-state techniques. It is hoped that success of this
exploratory project will lead to new breakthroughs in an explosively growing
field of semiconductor research and technology
development.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;