* 0102228
* Lead Learners in Mathematics:  Cultivating Leadership to Support Mathematics Education Reform in Boston
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2008
* Linda Davenport, Boston Public Schools
* Continuing Grant
* John S. Bradley
* 08/31/2008
* USD 4,848,373.00

This 5-year Retention and Renewal proposal, targeting Boston Public Schools,
builds on the extensive professional development work of EDC and TERC.
The"Cultivating Leadership to Support Elementary Mathematics Education Reform in
Boston" project, targets approximately 400 teacher leaders who participate in
over 200 hours of professional development. Administrator leaders participate in
over 45 hours of professional development, and an additional 600 teachers
participate in at least 130 hours of professional development through the
leadership work in each school. The professional development designed to
strengthen participants' mathematics teaching practice will support schools in
the implementation of the Investigations in Number, Data and Space. All 87
elementary schools in Boston will be supported by this project.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition the project targets seven carefully selected
schools where teacher and administrator leadership is firmly in place and there
is a school-wide focus on mathematics teaching and learning. These "Learning
Site Schools" will serve as resources to other schools in the district,
providing opportunities to learn about how teacher and administrator leadership
is developed, how leadership is leveraged within a school, and how a school-wide
focus on mathematics teaching and learning is created and sustained. Two
additional schools, one without the infrastructure to support reform and one
with minimal infrastructure to support these efforts, will receive extensive
support. Research documenting the change process for schools at different stages
of reform will be conducted. &lt;br/&gt;