* 0102298
* Contact and Symplectic Structures and Holomorphic Curves
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2007
* Helmut Hofer, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2007
* USD 819,915.00

DMS-0102298 Helmut H. Hofer

The main tool for most of the proposed projects is a particularly adapted theory
of holomorphic curves, which has been developed by Dr. Hofer and his co-workers
in recent years. The fact, that there is such a close, but completely
unexpected, relationship between some important class of dynamical systems and a
suitable theory of holomorphic curves has deep implications. Immediately it
makes it, in principle, feasible to relate questions about large classes of
dynamical systems to recent mathematical theories like quantum cohomology,
Gromov-Witten invariants, and in low dimensions even to Seiberg-Witten
invariants. One of the main goals of this project will be the development of a
mathematical machinery for constructing global surfaces of section for three-
dimensional Reeb flows and generalizations thereof. In practice this means that
the study of certain three-dimensional dynamical system can effectively be
reduced to two dimensions. The other goal is the development of a symplectic
field theory. Particular cases of such a theory are Gromov-Witten invariants and
Floer Homology.

Many physical systems like the flow of an incompressible ideal fluid, the
movement of a satellite under the gravitational forces of celestial bodies, or
the movement of charged particles in a magnetic field, to name a few, are
examples of so called dynamical systems. The mathematical theory of dynamical
systems provides tools to understand their complex behavior and allows to make
predictions. The particular examples mentioned above are of so-called
Hamiltonian nature. For such systems, beginning with the work of Lagrange and
Hamilton, geometric tools have been developed leading to the modern theory of
contact and symplectic geometry. These geometries play a central role in
connecting mathematical areas like dynamical systems, algebraic geometry and
smooth topology. This makes it possible to employ powerful tools from different
mathematical areas in the study of important classes of dynamical systems and
also to use ideas from dynamical systems to study important intrinsic questions
in other fields by new methods.