* 0102727
* A Botanical Survey of Madagasar's Endangered Littoral Forest
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Porter Lowry, Missouri Botanical Garden
* Standard Grant
* Judith Skog
* 08/31/2005
* USD 224,992.00

A Botanical Survey of Madagascar's Endangered Littoral
Forests&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves a detailed botanical survey
of selected littoral forest areas along Madagascar's east coast in order to
compile a comprehensive checklist of the plant species that occur in this highly
threatened ecosystem. Littoral forests on sand were once widespread and
continuous along the coastline, but are now reduced to small, isolated patches
that cover less than 1% of this island nation and continue to be degraded by
intensive human exploitation. Despite their small size, however, these forests
probably contain well over 1,000 native plant species, or about 10% of the total
Malagasy flora, and many of them are restricted to this very specialized and
localized ecosystem, occurring nowhere else on Earth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
team of U.S. and Malagasy botanists will systematically visit six representative
littoral forest sites distributed along the ca. 1,500 km coastline, covering
nearly 12 degrees of latitude. The flora of the study sites will be fully
documented though the collection of dried herbarium specimens (ca. 1,400 per
site); digital color images will be taken of 30-40% of the species, and
information will be gathered on local uses and threats to the forest areas. The
herbarium material will be identified and compared with historical collections
made during the last 150+ years and stored in major institutions in St. Louis,
Madagascar, and Paris, France (which has the largest collection of Malagasy
plants). Critical specimen data (e.g., species name, geographic location, date
of collection, etc.) will be compiled and made available on the Internet as a
Survey of the Vascular Flora of the Humid Evergreen Littoral Forests of
Madagascar, with a summary list and statistics for each site, and an integrated
mapping capability for individual species, often accompanied by digitized
images.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The results of this study will greatly improve our
knowledge of Madagascar's highly threatened littoral forests. Many species new
to science will likely be discovered during the project, and hundreds more will
be documented for the first time in decades, including many now threatened with
extinction and therefore of critical conservation importance. Using data from
the study we will evaluate whether species composition changes from north to
south along the coastline. Preliminary data suggest that most species are
restricted to only a portion of the littoral forest ecosystem, with gradual
changes in species composition along a latitudinal gradient. If this hypothesis
is proven to be correct, we will identify specific areas where the establishment
of protected areas (parks or reserves) would collectively ensure the continued
survival of the unique plants that comprise Madagascar's littoral
forests.&lt;br/&gt;