* 0102480
* Conservation Laws for Multiphase Flow
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2006
* James Glimm, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2006
* USD 234,997.00

Multiphase flow is a branch of fluid dynamics of considerable difficulty,
importance, and interest. The defining equations result from averages of some
primitive equation, such as the Navier-Stokes or Euler equations. Nonlinear
terms in the primitive equations lead to new unknowns in the averaged equation
and the need for closure relations. These are difficult to determine, or even to
measure experimentally. Closure is nonunique, as different closures apply to
different flow regimes, and different closures may define competing equations to
describe the same flow regime. The different equations may be complementary in
that they describe the same situation in differing levels of detail. They also
may reflect unresolved differences of scientific opinion. For these multiple
reasons, the analysis of the equations is of considerable importance to science.
The proposal here is primarily concerned with methods of analysis that delimit
or shed light on the closures that are valid descriptions of fluid
flow.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Multiphase flow, and more generally the study of
turbulence, is one of the major unsolved problems of importance to physics and
to engineering. Flow of oil, gas, and water mixtures in a pipeline or in the
rocks of a petroleum reservoir provide examples of such flows. Thermal mixing
layers in meteorology leading to formation of thunderstorms provide another
example. The formation of salt domes in geological formations, the study of
controlled fusion to provide ample energy sources, and the study of late stage
supernovae, or stellar explosions are further examples. In all cases, the
phenomena is too complex, detailed and varied to be described usefully at a fine
level of detail. Just as with the process of addition of milk to coffee, the
initial swirls of milk in the coffee are artistic and complex, but the coffee-
milk mixture after stirring is better described by averages of coffee and milk.
Such a study of averages of mixtures, and the appropriate equations is the
purpose of this proposal. Because of the importance of the problem, many methods
are used for the study of mixtures: experiment, theory and numerical simulation.
The mathematical aspects of the equations describing the mixture also give an
important window into this subject and will be the primary focus of this
investigation. &lt;br/&gt;