* 0102612
* NIRT:  Design of Nanoporous Molecular Square Catalysts using Multiscale Modeling
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2006
* Joseph Hupp, Northwestern University
* Standard Grant
*  John R Regalbuto
* 06/30/2006
* USD 1,000,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: NIRT: Design of
Nanoporous Molecular Square Catalysts Using Multiscale
Modeling&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: CTS-0102612&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator:Randall Snurr&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Northwestern
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was submitted in response to the
solicitation "Nanoscale Science and Engineering" (NSF 00-119). New multi-scale
modeling approaches will be applied to novel nanoporous materials for selective
oxidation catalysts. Linkages will be developed to permit the modeling of both
physical processes and chemical interactions. State-of-the-art embedded cluster
quantum chemical methods will be interfaced with iterative quantum/classical
calculations. Continuum, atomistic, and quantum descriptions will be linked to
yield a general description of the behavior of the reactive system Electronic
information will be incorporated into the statistical mechanical simulations
through a novel development of the Fukui function. Enhancement of microkinetic
reaction modeling will be coupled with mass transfer effects. The multiscale
model will be applied to new mesoporous "artificial enzymes," resembling
molecular squares and composed of zinc porphyrin walls, rhenium corners, and a
manganese porphyrin catalyst. Stable, nanoscale cavity environments will be
synthesized and organized through self-assembly. Through the modeling effort new
catalysts, based on these materials, will be designed. Model reactions to be
studied are the epoxidations of olefins. This modeling work has the potential to
guide the design of catalysts capable of mimicking biological processes and
performing enantioselective syntheses.&lt;br/&gt;