* 0102263
* Conference: Participant Costs for the VIIth Cyanobacterial Workshop, being held in Pacific Grove, CA
* BIO,MCB
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2002
* Malcolm Potts, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Patrick P. Dennis
* 08/31/2002
* USD 10,000.00

Partial support for participant costs associated with the VIIth Cyanobacterial
Workshop,2001 is being provided. Funds are being used to cover: a portion of the
expenses for graduate students, postdoctoral researchers, assistant professors
who will run the program as speakers and session chairs; a foreign keynote
speaker; two invited speakers and up to four senior scientists in financial
need. The 2001 Workshop is being held at the Asilomar Conference Center in
Pacific Grove, CA with the title "A Signal Event" and the theme of signal
transduction. The Keynote Address will be given by Dr Nicole Tandeau de Marsac,
the Head of the Unite de Physiologie Microbienne, Institut Pasteur, Paris,
France. The address will focus on aspects of protein phosphorylation and its
role in signaling processes. The importance of signal transduction pathways -as
becoming realized through the complete genome analysis of more than five
different cyanobacteria -will be highlighted throughout the sessions. A session
on genomics will discuss data derived from recent completion of the genomes of
Nostoc punctiforme ATCC 29133 -the largest microbial genome sequenced to date
-and Anabaena sp.PCC 7120. Further sessions will emphasize recent developments
in nitrogen fixation, differentiation, photosynthesis and cyanobacterial
physiology and molecular ecology.