* 0102402
* Synthesis of Heterocyclic Natural Products
* MPS,CHE
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2004
* Steven Weinreb, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Kenneth M. Doxsee
* 05/31/2004
* USD 465,000.00

With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular Chemistry Program, Professor
Steven M. Weinreb, of the Department of Chemistry at Pennsylvania State
University, University Park, is carrying out the stereoselective total synthesis
of several complex naturally-occurring molecules of biological significance,
complemented by the development of new and practical methods for organic
synthesis. An approach to the total synthesis of the hepatotoxic alkaloid
cylindrospermopsin uses as a pivotal step Professor Weinreb's N-sulfinyl
dienophile Diels-Alder methodology. Several structurally unique polycyclic
marine bryozoan alkaloids of the chartelline/securamine class will also be
synthesized. The total synthesis of the recently isolated novel pentacyclic
indole alkaloid tronocarpine will utilize the unique chemistry of
1-hydroxyindoles. New methods of chemical synthesis will be investigated,
including a simple alternative to the Eschenmoser coupling reaction for
preparing vinylogous amides and carbamates, and the use of N-sulfinyl compounds
as reagents for the formation of glycosidic and N-glycosidic
bonds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Construction of the often-complex molecules which
display desirable biological or pharmaceutical activity requires the development
of new and sophisticated methods for the synthesis of organic molecules. As new
methods are developed, they ultimately must be tested and proven effective
through their application to real synthetic problems. Such testing also provides
training in the thought processes and practice of organic synthesis, vital to
the educational development of students who will become the next generation of
practicing organic chemists. With the support of the Organic and Macromolecular
Chemistry Program, Professor Steven M. Weinreb, of the Department of Chemistry
at Pennsylvania State University, University Park, is exploring the development
of new and practical methods for organic synthesis and applying them to the
total synthesis of several complex naturally-occurring molecules of biological
significance.