* 0102909
* Stochastic Models of Asset Valuation in Markets with Frictions
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Thaleia Zariphopoulou, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2005
* USD 180,001.00

DMS 0102909&lt;br/&gt;PI: Thaleia
Zariphopoulou&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In most market models, the
classical assumption of a perfect market &lt;br/&gt;is not satisfied. The PI
proposes to continue her research program &lt;br/&gt;to develop methods to study
valuation problems in incomplete &lt;br/&gt;markets, concetrated in the
following class of applications: &lt;br/&gt;i) optimal asset allocation under
market frictions the goal being &lt;br/&gt;to derive and analyze the optimal
risky demand and to represent the &lt;br/&gt;value function in terms of
distorted measures, ii) valuation of &lt;br/&gt;derivatives written on nontraded
assets with the goal to use &lt;br/&gt;utility-based pricing methodology to
specify the hedging strategies &lt;br/&gt;and to expole their role in risk
aggregation, iii) dynamic hedging &lt;br/&gt;of volatility risks the goal being
to specify the arbitrage-free &lt;br/&gt;components of the implied volatility
process and to study their &lt;br/&gt;implications to the dynamic management of
volatility risks, and&lt;br/&gt;iv) asset valuation under irreversible decisions
with the goals &lt;br/&gt;being to evaluate early exercise instruments under
constraints &lt;br/&gt;related to irreversible decisions and to analyze the
impact of &lt;br/&gt;irreversibilities to prices and optimal demand. The
technical &lt;br/&gt;tools come from stochastic analysis, stochastic control and
&lt;br/&gt;nonlinear partial differential equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
most market settings, the classical assumption of market &lt;br/&gt;completeness
is not satisfied and, therefore, the traditional &lt;br/&gt;approach of perfect
replication cannot be applied. It becomes &lt;br/&gt;hence necessary to review
the pricing and risk management concepts. &lt;br/&gt;The first step is the
development of a unified framework to &lt;br/&gt;analyze the inherent market
risks, and identify the components that &lt;br/&gt;can be hedged away and the
ones that cannot. The second step is the &lt;br/&gt;establishment of a coherent
method to price the unhedgeable risks &lt;br/&gt;in order to achieve effective
risk management. The PI proposes to &lt;br/&gt;continue her work in market
models with frictions along the &lt;br/&gt;aforementioned two general
directions. The proposed methodologies rely&lt;br/&gt;heavily on the classical
economic principles of utility theory which&lt;br/&gt;reflect the investors'
preferences towards the risks that cannot be&lt;br/&gt;eliminated. Among others,
the PI proposes to study models of asset&lt;br/&gt;allocation, derivative
pricing and risk management under various market&lt;br/&gt;frictions including
stochastic volatility, nontraded assets and&lt;br/&gt;irreversible management
policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;