* 0102912
* NER:  Molecular Controlled Electronic Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2001,09/30/2002
* David Beratan, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 09/30/2002
* USD 62,010.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was received in response to NSE, NSF-0019.
The proposed research explores a new approach for increasing the density of
logical operations in electronic circuits by using the polarization response of
organic molecules. A key element of this approach is to use a Molecular
Controlled SEmiconductor Resistor (MOCSER) to transduce the outcome of the
logical operation into a current. Positive attributes of this scheme are less
molecular decomposition, less severe statistical fluctuations and an ability to
interface with today's microelectronics. The MOCSER is a specially designed and
gateless metal-oxide semiconductor field effect transistor. In place of the
metal gate on the transistor, organic molecules will be chemically bonded to the
device's gate oxide. By polarizing these organic molecules the current flow
between the source and drain electrodes of the transistor can be modulated. The
work will begin by demonstrating the MOCSER's response to a voltage-controlled,
molecular polarization. With the success of this initial phase of work the
proposed effort will include two parts: nanolithography and demonstrating
olecular templating. To demonstrate the feasibility of a 'solid-state' device a
new generation of the MOCSER, in which the gate oxide region is connected to
metal pads through a molecule, will be fabricated and tested. The
nanolithography will be performed at the Cornell Nanofabrication Facility, in
collaboration with the expertise from the Weizmann group . In parallel, we will
use the templating of complementary DNA strands, one which is tethered to the
gate region of the MOCSER and the other to the AFM tip, to characterize the
self-assembly of molecules and voltage-controlled polarization response through
noncovalent contacts. Successful completion of this work should set the stage
for using molecular polarization to perform logic functions and transducing the
molecular polarization into current in a solid-state electronic
device.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;