* 0102964
* NIRT:  Nanoscale Metalic Photonic Crystals; Fabrication, Physical Properties, and Applications
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2001,12/31/2005
* Zeev Valy Vardeny, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 12/31/2005
* USD 1,007,999.00

This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science
and Engineering" (NSF 00-119). The goals of the project are the fabrication,
study of physical properties, theory and applications of nanoscale metallic
photonic crystals (NMPC). These are structures in which metals are periodically
embedded into dielectrics with nanometer size periods. NMPC may carry
substantial electrical current but at the same time have transmission bands in
the visible/infrared ranges. Some NMPC are also magnetic with important
collective spin properties, while others may be superconductors at low
temperature with non-linear transport properties. It is planned to fabricate
two- and three-dimensional (2D and 3D) NMPC structures, and study their linear
and nonlinear optical properties, as well as their transport properties. The
surface of low-defect molecular single crystals from the acenes family (such as
anthracene, pentacene, etc.) will be patterned into 2D structures, where carrier
injection from evaporated metal electrodes will control the resulting device
conductivity, metal-insulator transition, plasma frequency and superconductivity
properties at low temperature. Theoretical work will guide the experimental
research studies. The project is an interdisciplinary collaborative effort among
researchers in Physics, Electrical Engineering and Materials Science with
collaborators from Honeywell Inc.&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses
basic research issues in a topical area of materials science, physics, and
electrical engineering with high technological relevance. An important feature
of the program is the integration of research and education through the training
of students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area. The wide
range of fabrication, experimental and theoretical physics methods and
applications employed throughout the project will enhance the educational
opportunities for graduate and undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;***
&lt;br/&gt;