* 0102676
* HBCU-UP Planning Grant
* EDU,EES
* 06/15/2001,01/31/2002
* Juanita Scott, Benedict College
* Standard Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 01/31/2002
* USD 50,000.00

A majority of entering students begin their college careers with
inadequate&lt;br/&gt;mathematics background to pursue SMET careers. The purpose
of the proposed&lt;br/&gt;planning program is to design a comprehensive program
to overcome these&lt;br/&gt;entering deficiencies to improve the participation
and performance of minority&lt;br/&gt;students in SMET disciplines. The overall
goals of the planning program will be&lt;br/&gt;(a) to assess the strengths,
weaknesses and needs of mathematics instruction as&lt;br/&gt;well as other gate-
keeping courses in the SMET disciplines; and (b) to assess
&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate student research needs and opportunities in SMET
disciplines on &lt;br/&gt;and off campus.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Assessment
includes, student performances on many items such as the Sophomore
&lt;br/&gt;Proficiency Examination, Major Area Examinations, Graduate and
Professional&lt;br/&gt;School Entrance Examinations, success in advanced
programs, presentations of &lt;br/&gt;research papers at professional
conferences, professional publications, and the &lt;br/&gt;type of employment
and advancement in ranks.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Assessment of the quality of
faculty members in the SMET disciplines will be done&lt;br/&gt;by a review of
the credentials of faculty members as compared to the SMET faculty&lt;br/&gt;in
other institutions and the standards set by accrediting bodies and performance
&lt;br/&gt;portfolios. In assessing faculty development and recruitment needs,
the ratio of &lt;br/&gt;instructor/students in mathematics and other SMET
disciplines will be compared &lt;br/&gt;with other majors at Benedict, as well
as with other similar institutions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Visitation to other
institutions with SMET's curricula that have recently been &lt;br/&gt;reformed
due to NSF effort, self-study or otherwise, will help Benedict to
have&lt;br/&gt;a better assessment of the College's current SMET's curricula.
This is also the case&lt;br/&gt;when selected staff members of the Task Force
visit sites that they have recently &lt;br/&gt;reformed their SMET's
curricula.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The current and future technology needs for SMET
courses, in general, and SMET&lt;br/&gt;majors, in particular, will be
assessed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Consultants with expertise in SMET curricula will
be used in the overall process of&lt;br/&gt;assessing the current curricula and
potentially improving and/or redesigning them. &lt;br/&gt;It will be made
certain that high-level decision-making administrators (President,
&lt;br/&gt;his cabinet, and deans) review the comprehensive proposal and approve
its contents &lt;br/&gt;before submission to NSF .&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
internal advisory committee, (Task Force), will help to guide the work and to
&lt;br/&gt;assess the planing program. In particular, this committee will help
assess and analyze&lt;br/&gt; data and plan/design the curriculum for the
comprehensive program.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that the proposed
project will result in the development of a &lt;br/&gt;competitive proposal for
submission to the National Science Foundation for funding &lt;br/&gt;through the
HBCU-UP Program. The proposal will be based on an accurate assessment
of&lt;br/&gt;current and future needs in the SMET programs at Benedict College.
Results of these&lt;br/&gt;assessment activities will also provide information
needed by the College to improve &lt;br/&gt;other areas that bear on the
performance of students in the SMET disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;