* 0102267
* Adsorption of Charged Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2004
* Michael Rubinstein, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 06/30/2004
* USD 225,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;0102267&lt;br/&gt;Rubinstein&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical and computational research on charged polymer adsorption at surfaces
and interfaces. Research will focus on hydrophilic and hydrophobic
polyelectrolytes. The PI will develop an analytical model of adsorption of
hydrophilic polyelectrolytes in the presence of short-range and long-range
interactions between polymers and surfaces. De Gennes' self-similar carpet model
of short-range adsorption of uncharged polymers will be combined with a model of
long-range adsorption of polyelectrolytes to oppositely charged surfaces.
Another model will be developed to study hydrophobic polyelectrolyte adsorption
in the presence of both short-range and long-range interactions. The properties
of hydrophobic polyelectrolytes in solution will be studied in more detail to
enable the extension of adsorption models to hydrophobic polyelectrolytes. The
interplay of short-range attraction and long-range (electrostatic) repulsion
leads to a necklace conformation of hydrophobic polyelectrolytes. Computer
simulations and scattering experiments have recently confirmed the main features
of the necklace model of hydrophobic polyelectrolytes. The remaining open
questions important for the application of the model to the adsorption of
hydrophobic polyelectrolytes will be investigated using a combination of
analytical calculations and computer simulations. The resulting model of
hydrophobic polyelectrolyte solutions will be combined with the adsorption model
of hydrophilic polyelectrolytes into an adsorption model of hydrophobic
polyelectrolytes.&lt;br/&gt;The kinetic theory of polyelectrolyte adsorption at
charged surfaces will be developed using de Gennes' two-step approach in the
framework of Rouze-Zimm model for unentangled adsorbed layers and of tube models
for entangled layers. A wide range of educational activities spanning K-12
outreach to the education of postdoctoral research associates are supported by
this grant. This award also provides partial support of the preparation of a
polymer physics textbook.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award supports
theoretical and computational research that contributes toward the development
of a complete molecular picture of the adsorption of charged polymers on charged
surfaces. Adsorption of charged polymers is one of the least understood areas of
polymer physics. The technological importance of charged polymers as rheology
modifiers, dispersing aids, stabilizers, and binders is due to their unique
properties both in solutions and near surfaces. An application in the area of
nanoscale science and engineering is multilayer formation via layer-by-layer
deposition of oppositely charged polyelectrolytes, leading to novel methods of
nanodevice fabrication. A better understanding of charged polymers will also
impact molecular biophysics because many biopolymers, such as DNA and proteins,
are charged, and electrostatics plays a significant role in their properties and
function. The award will also support a wide range of educational activities
including K-12 outreach and education in polymer physics and chemistry at the
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral levels. Some of the research will be
included in the Polymer Physical Chemistry course sequence at UNC and in a
textbook that is in preparation.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;