* 0102279
* The Topology of Open Manifolds with Nonnegative Ricci Curvature
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2006
* Christina Sormani, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2006
* USD 85,714.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract for NSF Proposal DMS - 0102279&lt;br/&gt;The Topology of
Open Manifolds with Nonnegative Ricci Curvature&lt;br/&gt;Christina
Sormani&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr. Sormani proposes to study the topology of
complete manifolds with&lt;br/&gt;nonnegative Ricci curvature and their limit
spaces. In particular she&lt;br/&gt;plans to investigate various approaches to
Milnor's conjecture that&lt;br/&gt;the fundamental group of an open manifold
with nonnegative Ricci&lt;br/&gt;curvature is finitely generated. She also plans
to study the higher&lt;br/&gt;dimensional homology of these spaces. Techniques
which will be&lt;br/&gt;employed involve Gromov-Hausdorff limits, the almost
rigidity theory&lt;br/&gt;of Cheeger-Colding, and Busemann functions. In
particular, the&lt;br/&gt;properness of Busemann functions on these manifolds
will be&lt;br/&gt;investigated. It should be noted that there are direct
applications&lt;br/&gt;of this project to the theory of topological censorship
in general&lt;br/&gt;relativity. The condition of nonnegative Ricci curvature
on&lt;br/&gt;space-time is called the null energy condition and it arises in
the&lt;br/&gt;Einstein equation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Roughly
speaking, Dr. Sormani proposes to study the existence and&lt;br/&gt;prevalence
of holes in a space which has no boundary, extends to&lt;br/&gt;infinity and has
a condition imposed upon the way in which it can&lt;br/&gt;bend. The universe we
live in is such a space. Simpler examples are&lt;br/&gt;cylinders (i.e. tubes)
and paraboloids (i.e. bowls). The cylinder has&lt;br/&gt;a hole but the
paraboloid does not. The spaces studied in this&lt;br/&gt;project are of
arbitrary dimension and so the holes come in various&lt;br/&gt;dimensions as
well. The universe is one such higher dimensional space&lt;br/&gt;and its holes,
which may or may not exist, are often called wormholes.&lt;br/&gt;By furthering
our understanding of this geometric problem, it is hoped&lt;br/&gt;that we will
further our understanding of the universe.&lt;br/&gt;