* 0102677
* Charge-Density Waves: Novel X-ray Scattering Studies
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Joel Brock, Cornell University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 07/31/2005
* USD 370,000.00

This individual investigator award will provide funds for a project to measure
the dynamic atomic-scale structure of charge-density waves driven by an applied
electric field over randomly located impurity atoms. Charge density wave systems
are a good example of a driven periodic system in the presence of disorder. To
perform quantitative tests of some novel theories for such systems, several
important quantities need to be measured. These include measurements of the
steady-state (equilibrium) dynamics and measurements of the coupling between the
electronic and the lattice degrees of freedom. This project will (a) continue to
develop X-ray Photon Correlation Spectroscopy (at the Advanced Photon Source)
for measurements of the equilibrium dynamics and will (b) assess (at CHESS) the
feasibility of using resonant-elastic-scattering to separate the response of the
electrons from the response of the crystal lattice. The potential impact of
these measurements is large as the results relate directly to a diverse array of
systems including: magnetic-bubble lattices driven by a magnetic-field, Wigner
crystals, colloidal suspensions driven by an electric field, driven arrays of
Josephson-junctions, and the growth of crystals on substrates. The impact of
this project on advancing education and human resources development includes
continuing the research group's demonstrated practice of pro-actively searching
out, recruiting and supporting women and under-represented minorities at the
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral levels.

X-ray diffraction has historically been the technique of choice for measuring
the structure of matter on atomic length scales. The continuing development of
time-resolved x-ray techniques allows the atomic positions to be determined on
ever-faster time scales during chemical, physical, and biological processes.
Time-resolved x-ray measurements span length-scales from atomic to macroscopic
distances and time-scales from 1 millionth to 1000 seconds. This individual
investigator project will develop new x-ray techniques for studying a variety of
problems in condensed-matter physics. X-ray technique development will occur in
the process of studying of charge-density waves found in the quasi one-
dimensional metal NbSe3. This system is known to be a nearly ideal realization
of a physical system with a large number of internal degrees of freedom that can
be driven over disorder, thus it forms an. excellent one which to use new
improved techniques. This project will (a) continue to develop X-ray Photon
Correlation Spectroscopy (at the Advanced Photon Source) for measurements of the
equilibrium dynamics and will (b) assess (at CHESS) the feasibility of using
resonant-elastic-scattering to separate the response of the electrons from the
response of the crystal lattice. The potential impact of these measurements is
large as the results relate directly to a diverse array of other systems, some
of which have the potential for technological applications.. The impact of this
project on advancing education and human resources development includes
continuing the research group's demonstrated practice of pro-actively searching
out, recruiting and supporting women and under-represented minorities at the
undergraduate, graduate, and postdoctoral levels.