* 0102960
* NER:  Exploration of Phase Transformations at nm-length Scale
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2003
* Dragomir Davidovic, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 06/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This Nanoscale Exploratory Research (NER) project investigates liquid-to-solid
and vapor-to-solid transformations in nanometer scale clusters. In nanometer-
scale systems, phase transformations exhibit irregular variations of
characteristic parameters and magic numbers. Other systems exhibiting such
behavior are atomic nuclei, atoms, quantum dots, cluster beams and metallic
nanowires. The proposed studies are important in understanding the role of
clusters in biological systems, including identifying clusters that actuate
electron transport pathways in biomolecular systems, and the adaptation of
clusters as they connect to external objects, such as leads, DNA and proteins. A
series of electrical transport measurements as a function of pressure and
temperature are proposed to understand the electronic properties of these
clusters. Nanoelectrodes with atomic scale gaps are immersed into a medium that
is tuned sufficiently close to a bulk phase transformation. Then, by applying
electric fields strongly localized in space, a cluster of different phase is
nucleated locally between the electrodes. Electron transport investigates the
electronic properties and stability of the cluster. Graduate and undergraduate
students participating in the project receive training in nanofabrication
technology, including visits to national nanofabrication facility, combined with
fundamental experimental techniques in the laboratory. This experience makes
them competitive for a range of careers in academia, industry and government.
%%% This Nanoscale Exploratory Research (NER) project investigates liquid-to-
solid and vapor-to-solid transformations in nanometer scale objects. When the
size of the objects approaches one nanometer, the transformations are
significantly modified, and they acquire properties that are typically found in
atoms and nuclei. Consequently, the objects of study are referred to with a new
name: clusters. The properties of clusters as a function of size vary
irregularly, in analogy with the periodic variation inside the periodic table of
elements in atomic physics. Additionally, there are clusters that have very high
stability. These are known as magic-number configurations, and are analogous to
inert atoms. These clusters also occur naturally in biological systems, and they
play important role on electronic transfer and binding to bio-molecules such as
DNA and proteins. This project breaks new ground in combining nanotechnology on
silicon-chip and electron transport through individual clusters, to determine
their electronic and other properties, such as how clusters conduct electricity.
The students involved in the project are thoroughly trained in cutting edge
technologies important in further miniaturization of electronics. Additionally,
they acquire basic laboratory skills, and specialized skills in high-level
measurements. This experience will allow them to pursue careers in academia,
industry and government.