* 0102668
* Many-Body Computational Methods for Electronic Structure of Cluster and Molecular Nanosystems
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2005
* Lubos Mitas, North Carolina State University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 05/31/2005
* USD 150,000.00



0102668 Mitas This award supports research on many-body computational approaches
for electronic and atomic structures of real materials. Research focuses on
further developing quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) methods and on their applications
to nanoscale systems. One focus of the work is to expand the capabilities of QMC
for calculations of Born-Oppenheimer forces on ions, excited states and optical
absorption, the effects of zero point motion on excitations in systems with
light atoms. The PI will use QMC together with these enhancements, to
investigate molecular nanosystems and clusters with promising potential for
scientific discoveries and applications. Specific activities include:
determining the electronic structure of thiolate derivatives which are being
explored as prototypes for molecular devices, and determining optical and
structural properties, and excited states of SinHm and SinOlHm nanocrystals
which exhibit ultrabright luminescence effects. An important aspect of this
activity is the training of undergraduates and graduate students in advanced
electronic structure methods and in efficient use of parallel and distributed
computational platforms at national supercomputing facilities. %%% This grant
supports research and education in computational methods that can determine the
quantum states of electrons and their excitation energies in nanostructures to
high accuracy. The PI plans to develop extensions of existing methods to enable
the accurate determination of atomic positions, electronic excited states, and
optical absorption spectra. These enhanced quantum Monte Carlo-based tools will
be applied to specific nanoscale structures of atoms and molecules that are of
fundamental interest and may have direct impact on nanoelectronics and other
emerging technologies. ***