* 0102722
* SMET Research and Training Center
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2002
* Jean Grant, University of the District of Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Victor Santiago
* 05/31/2002
* USD 49,618.00

The University of the District of Columbia plans to establish a Science,
&lt;br/&gt;Mathematics, Engineering and Technology (SMET) Research and Training
Center&lt;br/&gt;to develop and implement strategies to teach and retain
students in SMET &lt;br/&gt;courses. Specific objectives for organizing the
Center are to: 1. Modify the&lt;br/&gt;content of entry level (gate-keeper)
science, mathematics and engineering courses&lt;br/&gt;for undergraduate
students to enable them to improve their performance and &lt;br/&gt;retention
rates in these programs, to improve performances on graduate and
&lt;br/&gt;professional school standardized tests,and increase their
competitiveness for&lt;br/&gt;employment opportunities; 2. Develop procedures
that will be used to improve&lt;br/&gt;science, mathematics, engineering, and
technology capabilities of faculty and&lt;br/&gt;students by identifying and
planning activities such as seminars, symposia,&lt;br/&gt;and workshops to
expose them to current trends in the various disciplines; and &lt;br/&gt;3.
Obtain information on the current status of teaching and research facilities
&lt;br/&gt;in the Biological and Environmental Sciences, Chemistry and Physics,
Mathematics&lt;br/&gt;, and Engineering programs in order that a strategy can be
developed to improve&lt;br/&gt;laboratory infrastructure which includes
obtaining equipment and adequate space &lt;br/&gt;that will enhance faculty and
undergraduate student research. The SMET Center is &lt;br/&gt;designed to
improve the academic performance and increase student retention.
&lt;br/&gt;Entry level (gate-keeper) science, mathematics and engineering
courses in the&lt;br/&gt;SMET curricula will be revised to add a research
component to the laboratory&lt;br/&gt;courses in order to emphasize reasoning
skills and stimulate logical thinking. &lt;br/&gt;This activity is designed to
develop a long-term dynamic curricula that can adapt &lt;br/&gt;to changing
technologies. One hundred freshman students will be randomly
selected&lt;br/&gt;to participate in the center. Fifty students will have
declared majors in one of the&lt;br/&gt;SMET disciplines and 50 will be
undeclared majors. The participants will be followed&lt;br/&gt;through
graduation to determine the impact of the SMET Center activities on
course&lt;br/&gt;attendance and completion rates, passing rates, research
activities, grade point &lt;br/&gt;averages, graduation rates, enrollment in
graduate and professional schools and&lt;br/&gt;employment. The Center
administrators will consist of the principal investigator&lt;br/&gt;, two co-
principal investigators and an administrative assistant. The
administrators&lt;br/&gt;will plan and implement Center activities with the
advice and support of the advisory &lt;br/&gt;committee. The principal
investigator will have the primary responsibility of &lt;br/&gt;supervising all
aspects of the program with the co-principal investigators assuming
&lt;br/&gt;the day-to-day operations of the Center, such as, organizing,
conducting and, &lt;br/&gt;implementing the activities. An advisory committee
consisting of scientists and&lt;br/&gt;administrators (7), as well as, two
consultants will complete the administrative&lt;br/&gt;core. All faculty in the
SMET disciplines will be invited to participate in the center.&lt;br/&gt;They
will participate in enrichment activities (research, workshops etc.),
&lt;br/&gt;implemented by the Center. These activities are expected to produce
energetic&lt;br/&gt;faculty, committed to teaching and research. They will
utilize improved teaching&lt;br/&gt;techniques and computer technology to make
courses interesting and stimulating. &lt;br/&gt;The status and availability of
research and teaching facilities in the SMET disciplines&lt;br/&gt;at UDC will
be assessed by consultants. The consultants (2), selected from UDC
faculty,&lt;br/&gt;will inventory current equipment and available space in the
University for teaching&lt;br/&gt;and research. Additionally, the consultants
will provide information concerning &lt;br/&gt;available research facilities in
government, industry, and research-intensive &lt;br/&gt;universities in
Washington.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&
lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;