* 0102765
* NER:  Molecular Diode and Molecular Nonvolatile Memory
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2001,10/31/2001
* Jaewu Choi, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 10/31/2001
* USD 99,998.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0102765&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Choi,
Jaewu&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION NAME: Louisiana State University &amp; Agricultural
and Mechanical College&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: NER: Molecular Diode and Molecular
Nonvolatile Memory&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research program addresses
the challenges and opportunities&lt;br/&gt;available with molecular diode and
molecular nonvolatile memory. The proposed&lt;br/&gt;molecular diode and
molecular nonvolatile memory can be achieved with carbon&lt;br/&gt;nanotubes
functionality and heterostructure of carbon nanotubes with a
ferroelectric&lt;br/&gt;linear polymer.&lt;br/&gt;The carbon nanotube, itself,
has many functional properties, such as quasi-one&lt;br/&gt;dimensionality,
metal-semiconductor, mechanical stiffness, capillarity, high aspect
ratio,&lt;br/&gt;large surface area, and chemical stability. In application of
these carbon nanotubes to the&lt;br/&gt;electronic devices, one serious obstacle
is handling the chiarlity, which plays an&lt;br/&gt;important role in
determining the metallic-semiconducting behavior of the
carbon&lt;br/&gt;nanotubes. The proposed research program allows us to overcome
these difficulties by&lt;br/&gt;utilizing the carbon nanotubes as a backbone for
a diode and a sensor for a nonvolatile&lt;br/&gt;memory.&lt;br/&gt;First of all,
the proposed molecular diode consists of the differentially
doped&lt;br/&gt;single carbon nanotube. This is based on our own research work
on the electronic&lt;br/&gt;structure study of the modified carbon nanotubes by
ion-bombardments, alkali metal&lt;br/&gt;doping, and atomic and molecular gas
adsorption. These recent studies show that the&lt;br/&gt;density of states near
Fermi level, work function, and band gap of the carbon nanotubes&lt;br/&gt;can
be tunable. Therefore, it does not require any junction of two carbon nanotubes
with&lt;br/&gt;different chirality to make a molecular diode, which has been
suggested in a theoretical&lt;br/&gt;calculation by growth of a single carbon
nanotube with different chiraity. To make a&lt;br/&gt;diode from a single carbon
nanotube in this proposed research program, the half of the&lt;br/&gt;tube will
be doped with p-type acceptor (like oxygen or fluorine) and the other half
will&lt;br/&gt;be doped with n-type donors (alkali metals) using screening
doping.&lt;br/&gt;Secondly, the proposed molecular nonvolatile memory is a
heterostructure of a&lt;br/&gt;carbon nanotube and a ferroelectric linear
polymer with a permanent dipole moment. The&lt;br/&gt;carbon nanotube has been
studied as a gas sensor and a gas-storage. Adsorption of gas on&lt;br/&gt;carbon
nanotube induces the conductivity change and band gap opening. In this
proposed&lt;br/&gt;carbon nanotube-ferroelectric polymer heterostructure, we are
going to detect the&lt;br/&gt;conductivity change of the carbon nanotube due to
the electric dipole reorientation of the&lt;br/&gt;ferrolectric polymer by
applying the normal TTL (transistor-tansistor logic)
voltage.&lt;br/&gt;Therefore, the carbon nanotube-ferroelectric polymer
heterostructure is the combination&lt;br/&gt;of the sensor and information
storage. The interface between the carbon nanotube and
the&lt;br/&gt;ferroelectric polymer, PVDF, of the proposed heterostructure
systems is changed from&lt;br/&gt;the hydrogen or fluorine rich to the hydrogen
and fluorine mixture across the&lt;br/&gt;conformational switching from all
trans to gauch-trans-gauch bar with variation of&lt;br/&gt;temperature or
applied voltage (a gate voltage). This is the working principle of
the&lt;br/&gt;proposed molecular nonvolatile memory.&lt;br/&gt;Through this
proposed program on molecular diode and molecular nonvolatile&lt;br/&gt;memory,
graduate and undergraduate students will be involved and trained in the
cutting-&lt;br/&gt;edge research area (an emerging area of nanoscale science and
technology, in special&lt;br/&gt;molecular electronics) of science and
technology with advanced synchrotron and&lt;br/&gt;microfabrication
facilities.&lt;br/&gt;