* 0102334
* NER:  Exploratory Research on Developing a Nanoscale Sensing Device for Measuring the Supply of Iron to Eukaryotic Phytoplankton in Natural Seawater
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Mark Wells, University of Maine
* Standard Grant
* Simone Metz
* 08/31/2003
* USD 99,330.00

This proposal was received in response to NSE, NSF-0019.

The long delay in recognizing the potentially key role of Fe in coastal marine
systems has been in large part because of the complexity of microbial:Fe
interactions in seawater. There still is no analytical method for determining
biologically available Fe for either prokaryotic or eukaryotic phytoplankton.
However, there is evidence that Fe availability to eukaryotic phytoplankton can
be regulated by additions of the fungal siderophore desferrioxamine B (DFB) to
coastal waters. The DFB-Fe complex not only is unavailable for uptake at
significant rates, but also outcompetes the natural organic ligand classes in
seawater for Fe. Measurement of DFB-Fe concentrations in a titration series
should therefore provide a first order measure of the Fe supply to
phytoplankton.

This project will investigate the feasibility of miniaturizing a current bulk
liquid membrane system that can actively isolate and concentrate 59Fe-DFB from
aqueous solutions by constructing liposomes with the needed transport
characteristics. The high surface area and optimal diffusional aspects of these
nanodevices will enable efficient 59Fe-DFB accumulations at the extremely low
dissolved Fe concentrations (<1 nM) encountered in coastal waters. The transport
characteristics of these nanodevices will be measured as a function of liposome
compositions and fabrication conditions to optimize the active transport of
59Fe-DFB from a seawater matrix. If progress permits, the relationship between
59Fe accumulated by these nanodevices and cellular 59Fe uptake and growth of
natural population cultures will be explored. The immediate goal of this
exploratory project is to demonstrate the feasibility of developing nanoscale
sensors for quantifying the supply of Fe to eukaryotic phytoplankton in coastal
seawaters. The broader goal is to establish the viability of nanotechnology for
sensing bioactive substrates in the marine realm.