* 0102411
* Developments on Quantile Regression
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2006
* Stephen Portnoy, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* Grace Yang
* 06/30/2006
* USD 274,257.00

Francis Galton, the progenitor of modern regression, chided those of his
statistical colleagues who "limit their inquiries to Averages and do not revel
in more comprehensive views". Arguing that any complete analysis of the full
variety of experience requires the entire distribution of a trait, not just a
measure of its central tendency, he introduced the empirical quantile function
as a convenient graphical device for this purpose. Unfortunately, the very
success of least squares methods throughout applied statistics has obscured the
need for a more complete analysis of the statistical relationship among
variables. The least squares regression limits its inquiries to the conditional
mean function and thus can fail to find when structural relationships in the
data may depend on the size of the response. For example, patients with long
survival times may respond to treatment differently from those with average
survival times; or persons with long periods of unemployment may respond to
training differently from those with shorter unemployment periods. Such
differences could not be seen in standard analyses that model only the mean
response. The investigators propose to extend conditional quantile functions to
more complex situations, specifically to parametric and semiparametric
regression quantiles for correlated or censored response variables (which are
common in both examples mentioned above). The computation of the conditional
quantile functions is facilitated by modern linear programming algorithms, and
appropriate statistical inference can be developed through traditional large
sample theory or Markov Chain Marginal Bootstrap being developed by the PI and
his colleagues.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conditional quantile functions help data
analysts understand general heterogeneity in the population. They are often of
direct interest in applications ranging from biomedical research, economic and
business analyses to infrastructure studies. The proposed research is to
establish a firm statistical theory for regression quantiles and provide a
complete toolkit for their applications in complex problems with correlated
and/or censored data.