* 0102830
* Integrated Research and Education in High-Performance Parallel Optimization Algorithms
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2001,05/31/2006
* Nihar Mahapatra, SUNY at Buffalo
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 05/31/2006
* USD 212,806.00

Abstract for 0102830 Mahapatra "Integrated Research and Education in High-
Performance Parallel Optimization Algorithms"

This project will perform integrated research and education activities in the
multidisciplinary area of parallel optimization. Given the enormous potential
role of parallel computing in solving large-scale optimization problems with
great societal implications, it is imperative that future scientists and
engineers learn its fundamentals. The education component of this project will
contribute towards bridging the current gap in knowledge of those professionals.
The research activities center around efficient parallelization of an important
optimization method called branch-and- bound (B&B), widely used for solving
real-world combinatorial optimization problems (COPs). B&B's applications run
the gamut of Science, Engineering, Mathematics, and Operations Research, with
significant new uses being discovered every year. Research in B&B is performed
by two groups of researchers: workers in parallel processing who use
sophisticated parallelization techniques in conjunction with simple B&B
algorithms, and hence are able to solve COPs of limited size; and workers in
operations research who develop and use sophisticated application-specific B&B
algorithms with little or no parallelism, to solve larger COPs. The overall
objective of the proposed research is to improve solution time and quality for
some important optimization problems by an order of magnitude, or to solve
previously intractable problems, by applying scalable, high-performance
parallelization techniques to application-specific B&B methods.

Technically, the specific goals of the proposed project are as follows. (1)
Adaptive Load Balancing: To develop load balancing schemes that adapt to
application and target-system characteristics to maximize processor utilization.
(2) Efficient Limited-Memory Search: To develop efficient search schemes that
enable large problems to be solved within the available memory of practical
parallel/distributed systems. (3) Specialized B&B Methods: To develop
specialized B&B methods for some important COPs like mixed-integer programming
and the traveling salesman problem, and use these to demonstrate solution time
and quality improvements for real-world instances of those problems. (4)
Parallel Optimization Course and Web Resource: To develop a model course on
parallel optimization for upper-level undergraduate and beginning graduate
students, as well as a comprehensive, searchable web resource on parallel
optimization useful for education. (5) Parallel B&B Software Environment: To
incorporate the parallelization techniques developed in this project in a
software system for use as an educational and research tool for fast, efficient
solution of optimization problems using parallel B&B.

