* 0102686
* Frames for Signal Processing, Wireless Communication and Transmission Losses
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Manuel Leon, University of Missouri-Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2005
* USD 150,919.00

0102686&lt;br/&gt;Casazza&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will concentrate on
several new applications of frame theory &lt;br/&gt;concerning the transmission
of information. First, for communication &lt;br/&gt;networks such as the
Internet, packets of data are often lost in transmission &lt;br/&gt;and are
retransmitted according to a protocol invisible to the user. In &lt;br/&gt;many
applications, the subsequent delay is unacceptable and best possible
&lt;br/&gt;reconstruction from what is initially received is necessary. Second,
it has &lt;br/&gt;been shown that wireless communication systems which employ
multiple &lt;br/&gt;antennas can have very high channel capacities. Until now,
constructive &lt;br/&gt;approaches to achieving this capacity have relied on the
assumption that &lt;br/&gt;the receiver knows the complex-valued Rayleigh fading
coefficients. This &lt;br/&gt;assumption is often unrealistic in practice and
recently new classes of &lt;br/&gt;unitary space-time signals have been proposed
where neither the sender &lt;br/&gt;nor the receiver knows the fading
coefficients. The investigators will &lt;br/&gt;facilitate the implementation of
both of these programs along with a host &lt;br/&gt;of related problems in
signal/image processing. This will require: (1) The &lt;br/&gt;construction of
totally new families of uniform tight frames with specific
&lt;br/&gt;optimization properties; (2) The development of algorithms for their
&lt;br/&gt;implementation; (3) The development of new (and computationally
&lt;br/&gt;efficient) methods for inverting the Gabor frame operator to allow a
much &lt;br/&gt;broader class of functions to be used for signal/image
processing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Is it possible to develop a cell phone which
will not fade under almost any &lt;br/&gt;circumstance? Is it possible to have
your computer receive an almost &lt;br/&gt;perfect message immediately after it
is sent? Is it possible to develop a &lt;br/&gt;hearing aid which not only
allows the wearer to hear what he/she wants, &lt;br/&gt;but also allows a person
to filter out sounds they do not want to hear? Is it &lt;br/&gt;possible to have
a breast x-ray which is so clear that cancer diagnoses are &lt;br/&gt;99%
accurate? The answer is that all of these (and a host of other
&lt;br/&gt;important questions) are ``theoretically possible''. What is needed
for the &lt;br/&gt;implementation of these important applications is the
development of a &lt;br/&gt;branch of mathematics called ``uniform tight
frames''. Working with a &lt;br/&gt;dozen research groups around the country,
the investigators are developing &lt;br/&gt;the mathematics needed for these
applications as well as developing the &lt;br/&gt;means to implement these
results in the specific cases listed above and a &lt;br/&gt;large number of
other areas of application.&lt;br/&gt;