* 0102094
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Microbial Biology for FY 2001
* BIO,DBI
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2003
* Patrick Abbot, Abbot, Douglas K
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 12/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Microbial Biology for
FY2001. The fellowship supports training and research on the basic biology of
protozoan, microalgal, fungal, archaeal, bacterial and viral species that are
not generally considered to be model organisms. Further, it provides
opportunities for a recent doctoral recipients to obtain additional training in
microbial biology, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden his/her scientific horizons beyond the
research experiences during the undergraduate and graduate training. These
fellowships are further designed to assist new scientists to direct their
research efforts across traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves
of unique research resources, sites, and facilities, including foreign
locations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research and training plan is entitled
"Evolutionary patterns and processes in symbiotic fungi associated with fungus-
growing ants." Many microbes form close associations ("symbioses") with plants
and animals. Symbiosis involves a dramatic change for microbial species,
permitting us to understand how differences in life styles and environments
shape microbial biodiversity and evolution. Fungus-growing ants in the
Neotropical tribe Attini (Formicidae) comprise a group of about 200 described
species which are all dependent on the cultivation of fungus for food. Some ants
repeatedly domesticated fungi from free-living stock, while other associations
are ancient and highly specialized. This study explores how symbiotic
associations have shaped the evolutionary processes and patterns in the fungal
symbionts of attine ants. It further seeks to determine if symbiosis with ants
involves a switch from sexual reproduction to reproductions without sex. The
proposed work will provide valuable insights into how intimate associations with
ants have shaped the patterns and processes of evolution in symbiotic
fungi.&lt;br/&gt;