* 0102950
* NIRT:  Dynamics of Structure and Charge at the Molecular Scale
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2006
* Ellen Williams, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 07/31/2006
* USD 1,200,000.00

This Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team (NIRT) will focus on the effects
of the discreteness of atomic structure and charge on the electronic properties
of nanoscale devices. New tools will be developed to examine the structure and
structure fluctuations of nanoscale devices while simultaneously measuring
electronic transport properties. Specifically, nanoscale metal wires will be
fabricated in situ in an ultra-high vacuum combined scanning-tunneling
microscope/atomic-force microscope. The atomic-scale structural fluctuations of
these wires will be studied during electromigration while simultaneously
acquiring electronic transport information. Small gap junctions will be also be
fabricated, and used to study simultaneously the atomic structure and electronic
transport properties of carbon nanotubes and novel molecular devices.
Concurrently, the sensitivity of nanoscale devices to fluctuating electrostatic
environments will also be studied. New charge sensors such as carbon nanotube-
based single-electron-transistors and semiconducting carbon nanotube field-
effect transistors will be investigated. Efforts to manipulate the charge
sensitivity of these devices through chemical modification will be explored.
Undergraduate and graduate students will be involved in the development and use
of cutting-edge research tools and will receive excellent training in
interdisciplinary research at the frontiers of
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This Nanoscale Interdisciplinary
Research Team (NIRT) is attacking two fundamental and intertwined problems,
which will increase in importance, as electronic device dimensions become
smaller. First, the discreteness of atomic matter becomes significant in
determining structural stability of devices. Will fundamental properties such as
the bonds between molecules remain stable during device operation. Second, the
discreteness of charge causes significant sensitivity of the device to
fluctuations in the electrostatic environment. How will local electric fields or
static charge affect the devices. The quantum nature of electronic transport in
nanoscale systems requires that the structure of molecular-scale devices - as
well as their interconnects - be controlled at the atomic level. Techniques will
be developed to simultaneously image the atomic structure of molecules,
nanotubes, nanoscale wires, and interconnects while measuring electronic
transport properties. Changes in the local electrostatic environment at the
level of motion of single charges will have pronounced effects on the electronic
transport through nanodevices. The proposed research will focus on the charge
sensitivity of nanostructures ranging from superconducting single-electron
transistors coupled to nanowires to semiconducting carbon nanotubes.
Undergraduate and graduate students will be involved in the development and use
of cutting-edge research tools and will receive excellent training in
interdisciplinary research at the frontiers of nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;