* 0102582
* High Quality Science, Mathematics, Engineering and Technology Education for All Learners
* EDU,DRL
* 06/01/2001,12/31/2007
* Patricia Morison, National Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Earle
* 12/31/2007
* USD 10,808,553.00

The project describes proposed work of the newly reconfigured Center for
Educaton of the National Research Council. In September, 2000, the Center was
expanded to include the Board on Testing and Assessment (BOTA), the Committee on
Educatonal Excellence and Testing Equity (CEETE), and the Board on International
Comparative Studies in Education (BISE). Other boards, e.g., the Mathematical
Sciences Education Board (MSEB), the Committee on Science Education K-12 (COSE
K-12), and the Committee on Undergarduate Science Education (CUSE) will
continue. The Center will expand its work at the nexus of education policy,
practice and research and will enable synergy among the various boards and
committees around key issues. Among the issues identified for study in the first
two years of this grant are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;o Relationships of classroom
assessments and high stakes tests;&lt;br/&gt;o Effects of NSF-supported
mathematics curricula;&lt;br/&gt;o Next steps in mathematics teacher
development;&lt;br/&gt;o Taking stock of the National Science Education
Standards;&lt;br/&gt;o Framing science teacher education as a
continuum;&lt;br/&gt;o Criteria and Benchmarks for evaluating undergraduate
SMETE program effectiveness;&lt;br/&gt;o Transitions from graduate learning to
undergraduate teaching in SMETE;&lt;br/&gt;o Promoting inquiry-based science
education for undergraduates;&lt;br/&gt;o Technical skills for
work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work over the subsequent three years will be
developed to take advantage of the most promising work of years one and two, and
to address current strategic issues in mathematics and science education
strategically.