* 0102662
* Application of Quantum Dots to Environmental and Cell Biology
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Ian Kennedy, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Gerald Selzer
* 08/31/2006
* USD 1,001,117.00

This award in the Nanoscale Science and Engineering Initiative (Nanoscale:
Interdisciplinary Research Teams) will support the application of materials
science and engineering to biosystems and environmental biology at the
nanoscale. This new approach can open up new and exciting possibilities for
researchers in many fields of biology. A multidisciplinary team has been
assembled to explore the potential for the application of semiconductor quantum
dots to two areas in particular, environmental immunoassays and cell biology.
The unique optical properties that are available via the quantum confinement
effect inherent to nanoscale clusters of semiconductor material offer unique
possibilities in biosystems research. The emission of light from quantum dots is
dependent on the size of the cluster. Hence, it is possible to design clusters
of various sizes to emit at a desired wavelength. The visible part of the
optical spectrum can be covered by a range of quantum dots whose emissions are
spectrally distinct, permitting their use in simultaneous bioassays for
environmental pollutants and hazards, as well as replacements of conventional
fluorophores in studies of peptide chemistry and binding to cell receptors. In
addition, the magnetic properties of quantum dots can be used for the
manipulation of biological molecules in magnetic fields. Quantum dots will be
synthesized initially by an established method that can produce CdSe clusters
capped by ZnS that permits bioconjugation to molecules of interest via a
carboxyl group. Reverse micelles will also be studied as an optional scheme;
this method may offer a better control on particle size. A major thrust of the
effort will be directed to the identification of quantum dot materials that
absorb in the visible spectrum and that can avoid the excitation of strong
background fluorescence that is typical of complex environmental samples. Metal
oxides will be given particular attention by using our established laser
ablation method to screen new materials that have a small bulk bandgap, such as
VO. Iron oxide will be studied because of its particularly interesting magnetic
properties, and the additional benefit that ferromagnetism may confer in terms
of manipulation in bioassays and cell migration studies. A new scheme for the
improvement of the laser ablation synthesis of quantum dot materials will be
investigated by selecting clusters on-the-fly, based on their functional
performance i.e., their optical or magnetic properties. The usefulness of the
quantum dots in environmental bioassays will be explored by applying them to
immunoassays that are designed to detect a class of molecules that are important
in agriculture, atrazines. Simultaneous assays will be designed using spectrally
distinct quantum dots as labels in assays using a class specific antibody for
atrazine, and using compound specific assays for members of the atrazine family.
Monodispersed quantum dots will also be evaluated in cell based systems.The
quantum dot surface will be coupled to peptide ligands via functional groups,
and used to probe intact lymphoma cells. Analysis will include flow cytometry,
tissue or cell staining, and peptide trafficking studies. The quantum dot
performance will be compared with that of a conventional fluorochrome such as
BODIPY. Initial experiments will involve quantum dots with only one defined
wavelength. Once the cellular techniques are perfected, and when monodispersed
quantum dots with a series of different sizes are available, multiplexed
analysis will be performed using a series of peptides that have different
binding affinities to the cell. Research in biology depends increasingly on the
development of rapid and sensitive measurement technologies. The use of
nanoscale materials in biology for labeling molecules, with the unique
properties that arise as a result of the very small scale of these materials,
will play a significant role in contributing to progress in this development.
The results of this work will lead to the development of improved, miniaturized
detection methods for pollutants in the environment and in human populations, as
well as providing a valuable new tool for studying fundamental processes at the
cellular level.

