* 0102459
* NSE/NIRT:  Single Molecule Functional Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Virgil Percec, University of Pennsylvania
* Continuing Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2005
* USD 1,450,000.00

This award is in response to the Nanoscience and Engineering (NSE)
solicitation(NSF-00-119) and involves a nanoscience Interdisciplinary Research
Team (NIRT) at the University of Pennsylvania with broad-ranging national and
international collaborations. It is being co-supported by the Polymers Program
of the Division of Materials Research (DMR), the Special Programs of the
Division of Chemistry (CHE), and the Interfacial, Transport and Thermodynamic
Processes Program of the Division of Chemical & Transport Systems (CTS). %%% The
ability to transition nanoscience and engineering (NSE) research to
nanotechnology will depend on the development of efficient new synthetic methods
to produce monodisperse nanoscale objects. To this end, the primary goal of this
Nanoscale Interdisciplinary research team (NIRT) is to enable a rational
approach to the design and synthesis of libraries of complex functional
monodisperse objects of well-defined shapes, dimensions up to the wavelength of
light, surface, and internal compartmentalized architecture. To accomplish this
goal, the NIRT combines synthetic methodologies from Materials and the Life
Sciences. The NIRT has assembled expertise in organic, macromolecular,
supramolecular, and peptide synthesis, along with theory and modeling, and
structural analysis by x-rays, TEM, and SFM. The team effort is amplified by
exploiting established links with partners in industry and in Europe. Success
will reveal the principles required for the construction of libraries of
monodisperse self-assembling dendritic building blocks, to enable the
hierarchical design of monodisperse single molecule functional nanostructures
(SMN) with shape, chirality, internal and external structure, and function
controlled at the level of precision currently available only in biological
systems. The NIRT will investigate the structure and properties of these
nanoscale objects at the level of the single molecule and in 2-D and 3-D
assemblies. Novel applications of SMNs are elaborated that have potential to
yield nanoscale devices for electronic, optical, chemical and medical
technologies.