* 0102215
* Search and Characterization of Noval Superhard Phases in the B-C-N System Under Extreme Conditions
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2001,12/31/2005
* Pavel Zinin, University of Hawaii
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 12/31/2005
* USD 387,563.00

0102215&lt;br/&gt;Ming&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the proposed research, formation
of the theoretically predicted new dense phases in the B-C-N composition
triangle will be systematically examined over a wide pressure and temperature
range using laser heated diamond anvil cell (up to 1x 106 atm or 14.7 x 106 psi
and 2500oC) as well as large-volume high P-T apparatus (up to 3x 105 atm or 44.1
x 105 psi and 2000oC). The structures and properties of quenched samples will be
analyzed by powder x-ray diffraction, electron microscopy, hardness
measurements, and optical and acoustical methods. The overall scientific goals
of the project are: (1) synthesis of novel superhard phases in the B-C-N system
at high pressures and high temperatures by direct conversion of layered B-C-N
phases, (2) investigation of physico-chemical and structural properties of the
end-products at ambient conditions, and (3) characterization of elastic and
vibrational properties of novel phase(s) at high pressures up to 1x 106 atm
(14.7 x 106 psi) and at room temperature. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
research will provide valuable data that will be used to identify main features
of the phase transformations observed in the B-C-N system at high pressures and
temperatures, and the factors responsible for formation of superhard B-C-N
phases. These results will enhance our understanding of the fundamental problem
in development of new superhard materials and will provide a sound basis of
developing and producing new super-abrasives that are thermally and chemically
more stable than diamond, and harder than cubic BN, enabling major advances in
the cutting and polishing industries. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;