* 0102870
* Adaptive Goodness-of-Fit Tests, Recurrent Event Models, and Models with Alternative Time-Scales
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Edsel Pena, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Continuing Grant
* Xuming He
* 07/31/2004
* USD 165,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;DMS 0102870&lt;br/&gt;Edsel
Pena&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will address statistical
research problems in hazard-based models in the face of incomplete data and
optimal adaptive tests for these models, by investigating conditions for their
existence, construction and application. Additionally, stochastic problems in
recurrent events applications will be considered. A new and general class of
recurrent events analyses that will encompass the special cases now in the
literature is proposed. This class features models that simultaneously
incorporate interventions as they occur and account for the effects of
concomitant variables. The major contributions of this project are expected to
enhance the theoretical understanding of inferences in a variety of hazard-based
models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hazard-based models have wide application. They are
used to understand reliability of many operations, including industrial,
biomedical and economic. The procedures to be developed under this grant are
primarily for the purpose of understanding the fundamental aspects of these
experiences and experiments. These models may model rare events such as flooding
and industrial accidents, but also be appropriate for modeling hospital
admissions and stock market cycles. Thus, these statistical methods very useful
for further research. The Principal Investigator will enable many disadvantaged
students from a large number of disciplines to participate in his
education/research efforts. &lt;br/&gt;