* 0102687
* Scalable Parallel Algorithms for Large-Scale Discrete Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Theodore Ralphs, Lehigh University
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2005
* USD 200,363.00

This project will develop scalable algorithms for solving discrete optimization
problems (DOPs) in distributed-memory computing environments. DOPs arise in many
important applications such as planning, scheduling, logistics,
telecommunications, bioengineering, and robotics. Most of these problems are NP-
complete, but in practice, intelligent search algorithms such as Branch, Cut,
and Price (BCP) have been successful at tackling them. This research will
develop parallel algorithms based on BCP that not only can use large numbers of
processors efficiently, but also can handle very large problem instances. A key
part of these algorithms is the data structure used for maintaining the
information for each node in the search tree. This can be implemented with a
memory-efficient differencing scheme relating the parent and child nodes.
However, these data structures do not allow the use of current techniques for
implementing scalable branch and bound search algorithms. This project will
overcome that difficulty.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will build on
previous work in which the PI developed an object-oriented, generic framework
called SYMPHONY (Single- or Multi-Process Optimization over Networks). Because
of its modular design, SYMPHONY is extremely flexible and can be used to solve a
wide variety of DOPs. Source code and documentation for SYMPHONY is currently
distributed for free to the research community. This project will develop data
structures and load balancing methods to decentralize SYMPHONY's current
centralized control and data storage model. These improvements will be added to
the web-based distribution to improve the impact of this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;