* 0102644
* FRG: Synthesis of Well-Defined Nanosize Particles and Their Role in the Formation of Simple and Composite Monodispersed Colloids
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Egon Matijevic, Clarkson University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 06/30/2005
* USD 750,000.00

This Focused Research Group project will address priority areas in the formation
of uniform particles of simple and composite monodispersed colloids. The focus
will be on the synthesis of nanosized particles, and modelling and
characterization of their unique properties which develop for dimensions smaller
than the typical submicron-sized colloid scales. Experimentral and theoretical
evidence that a great many monodispersed colloids of spherical and other shapes
are formed by aggregation of nanosized units will be developed to link the
nansize and micrometer size particles. Coatings produced by surface
precipitation and by adhesion of smaller particles on well-defined cores will be
investigated. Nucleation, growth of nanoparticles, and their aggregation, will
be kinetically controlled to identify different process stages which will be
modelled theoretically. Both the intermediate and final products will be
characterized in terms of shape, size and structure using techniques that
include combined dynamic and static light scattering.
&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The broader impacts on science and technology will span
areas involving both physical and biological disciplines. These include
catalysis, pigments, clays, magnetics, ferroelectrics, and several medical areas
such as sensors and localized drug release. This excellent team effort
integrates research and education in such a way as to have a significant impact
on areas of high interest to industry. Students trained in these areas of
nanoscience and technology will be very competitive in the job market. This
award is co-funded by the Chemistry Division and the Division of Materials
Research.&lt;br/&gt;