* 0102133
* Improving Middle-Level Mathematics Teaching and Learning:  A Statewide Initiative
* EHR,DRL
* 05/01/2001,04/30/2006
* Lynne Ipina, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Ron Tzur
* 04/30/2006
* USD 1,116,971.00

The three-year project will develop a coordinated set of six courses designed
specially to prepare teachers to teach mathematics in the middle grades, level
5-8. The courses will form the core of a Master's Degree program or can be taken
separately for certification. Two existing courses will be modified. The project
is a collaborative effort involving university mathematicians, statisticians,
mathematics educators, Presidential Awardees for Excellence in Mathematics
Teaching and other exemplary middle-level teachers. The objectives include:
increase the conceptual content knowledge of middle-level teachers, provide
exposure to exemplary materials and develop skills to use them, prepare teachers
to act as mentors, work with the state on certification, strengthen
infrastructure that supports preparation and professional development, enhance
teaching practices of middle-level teachers and college faculty, produce
knowledge about collaborative course and program development, produce research
results on developing and implementing a research-based and standards-based
program for in-service teachers, and contribute to the understanding of adult
education teaching strategies and distance delivery systems that can be
effective in under-served rural areas (due to very small schools and great
distances between them). This project addresses the fact that sixty-four percent
of the teachers teaching mathematics do not have a state credential in
mathematics.