* 0102776
* "Inverse Comparison Geometry"
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2006
* Frederick Wilhelm, University of California-Riverside
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2006
* USD 86,973.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract for DMS - 0102776&lt;br/&gt;Inverse Comparison Geometry:
&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Riemannian Comparison Theorems pertain to manifolds
&lt;br/&gt;whose curvatures are bounded in some way, and are proven by
&lt;br/&gt;comparing the geometry to that of a well known model space.
&lt;br/&gt;I propose the name Inverse Comparison Geometry for the
&lt;br/&gt;subject of constructing Riemannian manifolds with prescribed
&lt;br/&gt;curvature conditions. My proposal focuses on the problem of
&lt;br/&gt;constructing manifolds of positive and nonnegative curvature.
&lt;br/&gt;In it, I outline my plans to &lt;br/&gt;(a) find counterexammples to
the Uniform Pinching Conjecture &lt;br/&gt;among the 3-sphere bundles over the
4-sphere,&lt;br/&gt;(b) study two sided Cheeger perturbations of the metrics on
&lt;br/&gt;biquotients and homogeneous spaces&lt;br/&gt;(c) search for
nonnegative and positive curvature on certain &lt;br/&gt;homotopy 5 and 6
dimensional real projective spaces. &lt;br/&gt;(d) construct nonnegative
curvature on ``double soul manifolds'',&lt;br/&gt;(e) study a rigid version of
the ``double soul problem'', and&lt;br/&gt;(f) prove my conjecture---that the
dimension of the image of a &lt;br/&gt;Riemannian submersion of a complete,
positively curved manifold &lt;br/&gt;is strictly greater than half the
dimension of the domain.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These problems all
address the general question of how does &lt;br/&gt;the curvature of a space
effect its geometry and topology? &lt;br/&gt;Roughly speaking, curvature is what
determines the trigonometry &lt;br/&gt;of a space. For example one can prove
that the surface of the &lt;br/&gt;earth is curved with out looking at it from
outer space. To do &lt;br/&gt;this have two people start at the north pole and
travel in any &lt;br/&gt;two directions that are perpendicular to each other. If
they &lt;br/&gt;travel at the same speed, they will eventually meet again at the
&lt;br/&gt;south pole. On the other hand, if the same experiment were
&lt;br/&gt;conducted on a flat world, the two people would never meet. They
&lt;br/&gt;would keep getting further apart, even if they never reached the
&lt;br/&gt;"edge" of the world. The main justification for studying this
&lt;br/&gt;general question is that it seems intrinsically beautiful,
&lt;br/&gt;intriguing, and natural. It has a long history, that dates back to
&lt;br/&gt;the 1930's work of H. Hopf, Morse, Schoenberg, Meyers, and Synge.
&lt;br/&gt;