* 0102405
* Electrodynamics of Electron Liquids and Electron Glasses
* NONE,NONE
* 11/01/2001,10/31/2004
* George Gruner, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 10/31/2004
* USD 360,000.00

This individual investigator award will support an experimental project focusing
on the low energy electrodynamics of novel materials with strong electron-
electron interactions, disorder and reduced dimensionality. The materials to be
investigated include: a) metals such as NbSi where the interplay of interactions
and disorder leads to a metal-insulator transition and to a nonmetallic state,
where quantum effects and randomness is essential; b) molecular nanowires,
strictly one-dimensional chains of atoms such as Mo6Se6 where electron-electron
interactions and/or disorder lead to a Luttinger Liquid in case of interactions,
and an Anderson-Mott localized state in case of disorder; and c) metals such as
UPt3 where electron-electron interactions are strong, the so-called heavy
fermion systems. In the latter materials, magnetic correlations may place the
materials close to a magnetic instability, which could be viewed as a Quantum
Critical Point. In all cases the primary interest will be the so called quantum
limit where the energy associated with the electromagnetic field is larger that
the thermal energy, a region of the parameter space which has not been explored
by experiments to date. The graduate students and post docs working on this
project will receive excellent training that will prepare them for future
careers in academia, industry, or government laboratories. %%% Electrons in
materials can, just like atoms, assume an electron liquid, electron solid and
electron glass state. In contrast to atomic arrangements, such states are more
difficult to achieve and at the same time quantum effects play a more prominent
role in most of the properties of such collective electron states. Because of
the electronic charge, such states strongly interact with electromagnetic
radiation, thus optical studies lead to fundamental information about such
states. At the same time, development of such states lead to materials with
unique, novel optical and electromagnetic characteristics. Typically the
response to such radiation occurs at frequencies below the optical spectral
range, at microwave, millimeter and sub-millimeter wave frequencies. This
individual investigator award provides support to an experimental program that
will explore the various electron states of matter, by developing new
instrumentation and also by conducting novel type of experiments in the
frequency ranges mentioned above on materials where such electron states occur.
The graduate students and post docs working on this project will receive
excellent training that will prepare them for future careers in academia,
industry, or government laboratories.





