* 0102316
* Essential laminations and immersed essential surfaces in 3-manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,09/30/2001
* Tao Li, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 09/30/2001
* USD 83,781.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0102316&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Tao Li&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Essential laminations and immersed
essential surfaces are two&lt;br/&gt;important objects in 3-manifolds. They
generalize embedded&lt;br/&gt;incompressible surfaces, and are remarkably useful
in obtaining&lt;br/&gt;topological and geometric information of 3-manifolds. The
main&lt;br/&gt;goal of this project is to explore the relationships between
the&lt;br/&gt;topology of 3-manifolds and these two objects. The tools
that&lt;br/&gt;the investigator will use include branched surfaces and
immersed&lt;br/&gt;branched surfaces that have been proved to be extremely
useful in&lt;br/&gt;the investigator's previous work. The investigator intends
to&lt;br/&gt;continue his research on essential laminations and
immersed&lt;br/&gt;surfaces with the following goals. (1) To construct
essential&lt;br/&gt;laminations in 3-manifolds obtained from Dehn surgery
on&lt;br/&gt;hyperbolic knots. The techniques to be developed in
this&lt;br/&gt;research could potentially have great impact on some
famous&lt;br/&gt;conjectures in knot theory, e.g., Property P for knots and
the&lt;br/&gt;cabling conjecture. (2) To find an algorithm to decide whether
a&lt;br/&gt;3-manifold is a Seifert fiber space. The investigator intends
to&lt;br/&gt;use immersed branched surfaces and normal surface theory to
find&lt;br/&gt;a practical algorithm. (3) To show that two homotopy
equivalent&lt;br/&gt;3-manifolds, which contain essential laminations,
are&lt;br/&gt;homeomorphic. (4) To find an algorithm to decide whether
a&lt;br/&gt;3-manifold contains an essential
lamination.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three-manifolds are objects modeled on the
3-dimensional space&lt;br/&gt;that we are living in. These objects can be found
in many other&lt;br/&gt;sciences, such as physics, biology, and chemistry. A
geometric&lt;br/&gt;way of studying 3-manifolds, which is extremely fruitful, is
to&lt;br/&gt;view a 3-manifold as a collection of 3-dimensional pieces
glued&lt;br/&gt;together along 2-dimensional surfaces. The investigator plans
to&lt;br/&gt;study the structure of 3-manifolds using such
2-dimensional&lt;br/&gt;surfaces, which are called essential laminations and
immersed&lt;br/&gt;essential surfaces. The research in this project is related
to&lt;br/&gt;knot theory, which has helped to understand the structure of
DNA;&lt;br/&gt;it is also related to hyperbolic geometry, which has been used
by&lt;br/&gt;physicists to understand the universe.&lt;br/&gt;