* 0102234
* NER:  Dendrimer-Filled Mesoporous Membranes for Environmentally Relevant Separations
* ENG,CBET
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2002
* David Ford, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Douglas D. Frey
* 07/31/2002
* USD 100,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0102234&lt;br/&gt;David Ford, Texas A&amp;M
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project seeks to synthesize and
evaluate organic-inorganic hybrid membranes with a novel hierarchical
nanostructure. The basic frameworks are mesoporous inorganic membranes with
average pore sizes ranging from 2 to 20 nanometers. These membranes are
chemically modified with dendrimers, either as ultra-thin supported films or as
fillers that attach to the interior porous surfaces. Dendrimers are highly
branched, monodisperse polymers with dimensions ranging from one to a few dozen
nanometers; their high surface-group density and tunable chemistry allows one to
create membranes that are highly selective for various gas-phase species of
interest. Other design variables such as pore size, dendrimer size, and
dendrimer surface coverage allow further control of membrane performance. Thus,
these unique nano-architectures afford a degree of simultaneous control over
both the chemistry and free volume of the membrane that is difficult to achieve
with purely polymeric or purely inorganic materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to apply scientific and engineering concepts at the
nanometer scale to create membranes of novel composition and structure. Such
membranes can perform environmentally important separations, such as the removal
of volatile organic compounds from air, more efficiently than current
techniques. This will result in a cleaner environment at a lower cost.
Furthermore, the project provides an excellent opportunity for a collaboration
that crosses the boundaries between Colleges (Engineering and Science) and
disciplines (separations and synthetic organic chemistry).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;