* 0102753
* Investigation of Bandgap Engineering Techniques to Obtain Long Wavelength Emission from InGaNAs Fabry-Perot Heterojunctions
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2006
* Thomas Myers, West Virginia University Research Corporation
* Standard Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 05/31/2006
* USD 307,531.00

This project addresses materials science research on InGaNAs/GaAs, a
technologically relevant material to the telecommunications(1.3um) industry. The
performance(characteristic temperature, To) of InGaNAs lasers is considerably
higher than that of equivalent InP-based lasers, in part due to the increased
electron confinement resulting from the larger conduction band offsets in this
material compared to InGaAsP/InP. InGaNAs vertical-cavity surface-emitting
lasers (VCSELs) have been demonstrated, and the epitaxial structure of InGaNAs
VCSELs overcomes one of the largest problems in developing high-performance
VCSELs at a reasonable cost, since high quality AlGaAs/GaAs distributed Bragg
reflectors are easily incorporated with the InGaNAs active region. The two
primary materials issues that this project will address are the extension of the
emission region to longer wavelengths and the elimination of nonradiative
defects, which cause a high internal absorption coefficient and high current
threshold, through the incorporation of pseudomorphically strained InGaNAs
quantum wells in the laser epitaxial structure. Specifically, the bandgap of the
epitaxial material will be tailored through deliberate modification of growth
kinetics to optimise nitrogen incorporation and adjust lattice strain across the
InGaNAs active region. The approach is to alter the amount of nitrogen that can
be incorporated while two-dimensional (2D) growth is sustained by varying the
substrate orientation, growth temperature, and lattice strain. The effect of
bandgap tailoring will be evaluated by characterizing the epitaxial structures
via photoluminescence (PL) studies as well as by characterizing the optical and
electrical performance of InGaNAs Fabry-Perot laser diodes. The results from
both PL and device characterization studies will be coupled in order to achieve
a more complete understanding of the InGaNAs heterostructures. In particular,
the relationship between bandgap tailoring techniques and emission wavelength
and radiative and nonradiative properties will be determined. The application of
standard AlGaAs processing techniques, such as impurity-induced disordering and
native oxidation, to fabricate planar index-guided emitters will also be
explored. Following a materials characterization study to verify that these
processes have not degraded any material properties, an index-guided edge-
emitting laser will be fabricated. The basic goal of the proposed project is to
gain greater understanding of InGaNAs/GaAs growth and processing, and
achievement of significant enhancements in the performance of single-mode planar
InGaNAs laser diodes through improved growth and processing
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses basic research issues
in a topical area of materials science with high technological relevance. These
studies will improve fundamental understanding of basic materials properties
limiting the efficiency and performance of telecommunications light sources. An
important feature of the program is the integration of research and education
through the training of students in a fundamentally and technologically
significant area. The project is designed to develop strong technical,
communication, and organizational skills in students through unique educational
experiences made possible by a forefront research environment. &lt;br/&gt;***
&lt;br/&gt;