* 0102383
* The Amphibians and Reptiles and their Parasites of Mexico--A Megadiverse Country
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2001,02/28/2005
* John Campbell, University of Texas at Arlington
* Continuing Grant
* Judith Skog
* 02/28/2005
* USD 599,910.00

The Amphibians and Reptiles and Their Parasites of Mexico-A Megadiverse
Country&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project will inventory the diversity of
amphibians and reptiles of Mexico, the country with the largest numbers of
species of these two classes of vertebrates. In addition to the large number of
species, Mexico is of particular biogeographical interest because it includes
the transition zone between the two great faunal regions of the Western
Hemisphere, the Neartic and Neotropical. An analysis of previous collecting
localities revealed a large geographical collecting bias. The rugged relief of
Mexico has made access into many highland areas difficult, and this is reflected
in the small number of collections made in mountainous regions above 1500
meters. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As specimens of amphibians and reptiles are
collected, the parasites living on them also will be collected and preserved for
taxonomic identification. Based on previous information, it is anticipated that
parasites from at least seven different invertebrate phyla will be collected and
identified. The amphibians and reptiles and their parasites (protozoans and
metazoans, internal and external) will be surveyed over a three-year period,
emphasizing the most poorly known mountainous regions. These regions have been
selected because they are the most poorly known, and in several of them the
forests are rapidly disappearing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;About 1100 described
species of amphibians and reptiles are known from Mexico, and 62% of these
species are known only from Mexico. Approximately one hundred new species of
amphibians and reptiles have been described from Mexico since 1980 even without
an organized survey for the country. It is anticipated that 200+ species of
amphibians and reptiles, and a far larger number of parasites, remain to be
discovered in Mexico. In addition to describing new taxa, a web-accessible geo-
referenced database for Mexican amphibians and reptiles will be developed, and
checklists, distribution maps, and identification keys will be prepared. The
materials collected during this survey will be available to researchers in
systematics, ecology, and conservation. Graduate students from Mexico and the
U.S., and Mexican scientists will participate in all aspects of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;