* 0102415
* Electronic Properties of Transition Metal Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Carmen Almasan, Kent State University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 06/30/2005
* USD 270,000.00

This individual investigator award will fund research focused on studies of the
in-plane and out-of-plane normal-state electrical conduction of high quality
single crystals of selected copper-oxide superconductors and layered manganites.
The emphasis of the experimental project on the cuprates will be on the
transformation of their normal-state conduction across the phase diagram which
includes insulating, under-doped, and over-doped regimes. The electrical
transport and magnetization data obtained will be analyzed for information about
conduction mechanisms. Layered manganites have a rich phase diagram which
includes several phase transitions. These thermodynamic phase transitions have a
strong effect on the charge transport. The emphasis of the manganite research
will be on the effect of thermodynamic phase transitions on the electrical
conduction. The research is expected to significantly enhance our fundamental
understanding of the electrical behaviors of cuprates and manganites. More
broadly, the results from this basic investigation may provide insight into
appropriate doping schemes to facilitate applications of cuprates and manganites
for electronic sensors and devices such as magnetic field sensors or even
computer logic devices. This highly interdisciplinary project will contribute to
the education and training of doctoral and undergraduate students, as well as
postdoctoral researchers at the institutions which are part of the
collaboration. The diversity of expertise gained by the participants in this
research program is a substantial advantage in today's knowledge based,
technology driven economy, being beneficial to a future career in industry,
government, or academia. %%% This individual investigator award will fund an
experimental research project to study the unusual electrical properties of high
temperature superconductors and layered manganites. The high temperature
superconductors, even in the normal state, conduct electricity in ways that are
very different from typical electrical conductors such as copper and silicon.
Also, the conduction of electricity in manganites is strongly affected by
thermodynamic phase transitions. The proposed research is expected to
significantly enhance our fundamental understanding of the electrical behaviors
of cuprates and manganites. Clarifying these novel electrical behaviors may
contribute to eventual applications of these materials for electronic sensors
and devices such as magnetic field sensors or even computer logic devices. This
project offers excellent research and education opportunities for graduate
students within an interdisciplinary program. It involves minority-group
graduate students who pursue thesis research and receive excellent training
beneficial to a future career in industry, government, or academia. ***