* 0102798
* Strengthening Undergraduate Preparation in Science, Mathematics, Engineering, and Technology
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2001,04/30/2007
* Josephine Davis, Fort Valley State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Marilyn Suiter
* 04/30/2007
* USD 2,494,078.00

Fort Valley State University (FVSU) has sustained the commitment to its mission
&lt;br/&gt;and strategic plan of providing quality educational experiences for
under &lt;br/&gt;represented minority group individuals (who constitute 93% of
enrolled students), &lt;br/&gt;equipping them for productive and effective
citizenry in an increasingly&lt;br/&gt;competitive society. A recent
benchmarking, study conducted by the University &lt;br/&gt;System of Georgia,
hailed FVSU as one of the top four institutions in the State with &lt;br/&gt;a
competitive retention rate of 70% or better. Additionally, 88% or more of FVSU's
&lt;br/&gt;biological sciencesgraduates are placed in medical or graduate
school. We proposes&lt;br/&gt;to build upon this successful tradition of
minority group retention and graduation &lt;br/&gt;from general baccalaureate
degree programsby increasing more broadly the number &lt;br/&gt;of minority
group graduates who pursue advanced studies in Science,
Mathematics,&lt;br/&gt;Engineering, and Technology (SMET).
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Funding is requested to achieve the primary goals of
increasing the number of minority &lt;br/&gt;students graduating with a major in
Science, Mathematics, Engineering, and Technology &lt;br/&gt;(SMET) by 30%, and
achieving a 10% increase over a five- year period in the number of
&lt;br/&gt;SMET graduates pursuing master and doctoral degrees. There are three
strategic &lt;br/&gt;initiatives being proposed to achieve these goals namely:
i) enhancing the recruitment, &lt;br/&gt;and retention, of SMET major, ii)
enhancing the infrastructure for providing technology if&lt;br/&gt;used and
research-based SMET courses of instruction, and iii) providing career
&lt;br/&gt;awareness opportunities in SMET field of study. These goals will be
achieved via &lt;br/&gt;achievement of five interrelated objectives: 1)
Enriching the academic preparation of&lt;br/&gt;students in SMET disciplines by
focusing on developing course reform and enhancement,&lt;br/&gt;2) Broadening
and strengthening the research program for faculty development, &lt;br/&gt;3)
Strengthening the partnerships with academic institutions and industrial labs
to&lt;br/&gt;enhance quality research experiences for students, 4 ) Infusing
technology into teaching,&lt;br/&gt;research, and professional development, and
5) Enhancing critical transition activities &lt;br/&gt;to improve access and
retention of undergraduate students. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These objectives will
be accomplished in different phases: revising gateway courses and
&lt;br/&gt;improving the performance of students in SMET gate-keeping bottleneck
courses via&lt;br/&gt; including research/lab exercises and providing students
tutorial assistance. Faculty &lt;br/&gt;enrichment activities will improve their
research skills, collaborative research will &lt;br/&gt;provide wide exposure to
students to opportunities to become familiar with SMET &lt;br/&gt;programs.
Providing `hands-on experience'' to students using the state-of-the
art&lt;br/&gt;facilities and other enrichment activities will improve their
skills, and motivate them&lt;br/&gt;to pursue graduate studies. Student
participation will be promoted by financial &lt;br/&gt;assistance as work
study/stipend, and by summer internships at major research
&lt;br/&gt;institutions. Bridging initiative to address high school/
undergraduate-graduate-&lt;br/&gt;job market transitions in SMET fields will
also be established. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that this project
will: 1) substantially increase the number of &lt;br/&gt;minority graduates in
SMET disciplines and increase the proportion of those graduates&lt;br/&gt; who
pursue advanced degrees in these disciplines through bridging and career
awareness &lt;br/&gt;programs; 2) strengthen faculty expertise and capability to
mentor students as &lt;br/&gt;researchers, and overall commitment to continued
professional development as SMET&lt;br/&gt; scholars - a 10% increase in faculty
research projects, publications, linkages, and &lt;br/&gt;grantsmanship will be
attained; 3) promote gains in learning through the provision &lt;br/&gt;of a
revised SMET curriculum which builds on increased faculty interactions with the
&lt;br/&gt;incorporation of inquiry-based pedagogy; and 4) promote the greatest
potential for student&lt;br/&gt; enrollment and success in SMET disciplines by
enhancing the physical infrastructure (e.g.,&lt;br/&gt; teaching/ research
facilities) of the university. &lt;br/&gt;Dr. Sarwan Dhir, Assistant Professor,
having strong project management experience will&lt;br/&gt;direct the program
under the supervision of Dr. Josephine Davis, Vice President Academic
&lt;br/&gt;Affairs. A Leadership Team of the Chairs of the SMET departments and
an Advisory Committee &lt;br/&gt;of internal and external distinguished
scientists will conduct an annual review of the program &lt;br/&gt;outcomes as
well as formative evaluation as the program is developed. The results of this
&lt;br/&gt;project will be disseminated widely in the professional community
through presentations &lt;br/&gt;at regional and national/scientific meetings
and publications in scientific journals. &lt;br/&gt;The general public will have
access to the successful efforts of this project through FVSU &lt;br/&gt;web
site. The commitment of Fort Valley State University is evidenced from the
supporting &lt;br/&gt;letter from Dr. Oscar L. Prater, President, FVSU, and
overall supervision of Vice President&lt;br/&gt;for Academic Affairs and
participation of Dean's, on the Advisory Committee, release &lt;br/&gt;time for
faculty, matching cost of the equipment, and allocation of physical facilities
&lt;br/&gt;for the teaching and research laboratories and use of other
facilities and resources. &lt;br/&gt;This project will advance the mission of
the University through its provision of high &lt;br/&gt;quality degree programs
that increase the participation of minority group graduates&lt;br/&gt;in higher
education. &lt;br/&gt;