* 0102892
* The Living and Learning Science Retention Program(LALSRP)
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2007
* Kim Luckes, Saint Augustine's College
* Cooperative Agreement
* Marilyn Suiter
* 05/31/2007
* USD 2,573,421.00

The Living and Learning Science Retention Program (LALSRP) at Saint
&lt;br/&gt;Augustine's College is designed to facilitate entry into the junior
year by providing a &lt;br/&gt;support system for entering freshmen and
sophomore science, mathematics and computer &lt;br/&gt;science (SMC) majors. A
comprehensive approach to provide a support system will be
&lt;br/&gt;accomplished by implementing the following objectives: &lt;br/&gt;1.
To revise and update curriculum to incorporate cooperative learning which will
&lt;br/&gt;enhance study skills and generate independent learners; &lt;br/&gt;2.
To provide participants with intramural research experiences which will increase
&lt;br/&gt;their analytical reasoning skills and provide hands-on laboratory
experiences; &lt;br/&gt;3. To build students' confidence so that they can
successfully pursue an &lt;br/&gt;undergraduate degree in science and technology
by providing positive role &lt;br/&gt;models, mentors and a strong academic
support system; &lt;br/&gt;4. To assist participants in the understanding of the
process involved in pursuing a &lt;br/&gt;degree in science and technology by
offering seminars, workshops and field trips; &lt;br/&gt;and &lt;br/&gt;5. To
enhance and develop faculty participants by providing research and curriculum
&lt;br/&gt;development opportunities. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to
accomplish the stated objectives, the program will consist of five components:
&lt;br/&gt;(1) Curriculum Enrichment which will include a Pre-freshman Summer
Bridge Program, &lt;br/&gt;Enrichment Center and a Village of Science and
Technology (VOSAT); (2) &lt;br/&gt;Undergraduate Research Experience; (3)
Seminars and Workshops; (4) Scholarships and &lt;br/&gt;(5) Faculty Development.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This program will enhance the living and learning
community on the campus of &lt;br/&gt;Saint Augustine's College. It will serve
as a model that can be replicated across the &lt;br/&gt;campus and can also be
applied to other disciplines. It is anticipated that by the end of
&lt;br/&gt;the 5-year funding period, the number of SMC graduates at Saint
Augustine's College &lt;br/&gt;will increase 2 fold. In five years the campus
will have an established infrastructure to &lt;br/&gt;support the transition of
freshmen into the junior year. The dormitory VOSAT in &lt;br/&gt;particular,
will stimulate scientific and technological discussions among majors and
&lt;br/&gt;nonmajors on the campus. This proposed Living and Learning Science
Retention &lt;br/&gt;Program will support 30-50 students each year and impact
approximately 1,400 &lt;br/&gt;undergraduate students who reside on the campus
of Saint Augustine's College. This &lt;br/&gt;program will serve as a model that
can be replicated on any campus that has a minority &lt;br/&gt;based population.
&lt;br/&gt;