* 0102699
* Raman, Brillouin, Infrared and Modulation Spectroscopy of Collective and Localized Excitations in Tetrahedrally Coordinated Semiconductors and Their Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Sergio Rodriguez, Purdue Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 08/31/2004
* USD 400,000.00

This project is devoted to the investigation of collective and localized
excitations in tetrahedrally coordinated semiconductors and their
heterostructures by means of a variety of optical techniques. The research will
focus on the collective and localized excitations in isotopically controlled
semiconductors composed composed of light atoms (diamond, SiC, BN and BP).
Attention will be given to electronic states of donor-bound electrons and
acceptor-bound holes in isotopically controlled diamond, Si, silicon carbide
polytypes, as well as II-VI and III-V compound semiconductors. In addition,
localized vibrations and gap modes of isoelectronic and compensated impurities
will be explored and delineated in the chalcopyrites genealogically derived from
the II-VI and III-V semiconductors. Collective excitations subjected to the
constraints of the reduced dimensionality of nanostructures fabricated with
molecular beam epitaxy will be investigated. Raman, Brillouin, Infrared ,
photoluminescence and modulated reflectivity/transmission spectroscopic
techniques supplemented by piezo- and magneto-spectroscopy will be employed to
address the above problems. Students will participate in this research. They
will receive training in one of the forefront areas of current semiconductors
physics and will thereby be prepared to enter the scientific/technical workforce
of the 21st Century. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research deals with the
application of several experimental optical techniques to problems posed by
advanced semiconductor materials. These materials play a great role in current
technology but a basic understanding of their behaviors is still lacking. This
research will provide information that will be useful for the synthesis and use
of ultrahard materials, such as diamond, silicon carbide, boron nitride and
others that have found applications as superhard thin film coatings. The
behavior of these materials can be changed by the deliberate, controlled
introduction of specific impurities or by manipulating their isotopic
composition. The changed behaviors hold the promise of improved performance of
the materials in applications of high temperature/high power electronic devices.
This project offers many opportunities for the participation by students.
Participants in the program will be exposed to the excitement and intellectual
challenges of an area that is important in contemporary basic science and
significant for potential applications. The expertise thus developed will
prepare them for a future in academia and government as well as a career in
research and development in the high tech optoelectronic industry.&lt;br/&gt;