* 0102752
* Superconductivity and Magnetism of Strongly Correlated Electron Systems Studied by MuSR
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Yasutomo Uemura, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 07/31/2005
* USD 360,000.00

This individual investigator award funds research that aims to apply the muon
spin relaxation (MuSR) technique to the study of superconductivity and magnetism
in a variety of systems including; high-Tc cuprate, intercalated HfNCl, other
superconductors, and low-dimensional and/or geometrically frustrated spin
systems. The MuSR method will allow accurate determination of the magnetic field
penetration depth in type-II superconductors, and of spontaneous magnetic fields
and spin fluctuations in magnetic materials. This project will also include
attempts of charge doping via the formation of field effect transistors (FET).
The MuSR and FET results will elucidate the evolution from insulators to
superconductors to simple metals in superconductors, and from spin singlet
states to frozen spin states in magnetic systems. Emerging pictures will be
considered from a unified point of view regarding crossover from gapped to
ungapped states near quantum phase transitions. The project will also support
highly motivated graduate students at Columbia, give them the unique experience
of international collaboration, and promote a greater role of female PhD
students / researchers in experimental physics. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;During
the recent 15 years, several novel superconductors with very high transition
temperatures have been discovered. They include high-Tc copper oxides and
intercalated HfNCl. Muon spin relaxation (MuSR) is a new and powerful
experimental method for studying superconducting and magnetic properties of
solids by using a beam of sub-atomic particles (Mu-meson) produced by high-
intensity proton accelerators. This individual investigator award will support
research in which the Columbia University group will apply the MuSR technique to
studies of several high-Tc superconductors and relevant magnetic materials to
elucidate how charges and spins are correlated to exhibit a variety of novel
phenomena in solids. This project will provide information crucial for
increasing transition temperatures, which would help in the application of high-
Tc superconductors to commercial electronic devices and power cables. The
project will also support highly motivated graduate students at Columbia, give
them the unique experience of international collaboration, and promote a greater
role of female PhD students / researchers in experimental
physics.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;