* 0102320
* Determination of Activation Energies and Modeling of Low Temperature  Creep of Alpha, Alpha-Beta and Beta Titanium Alloys
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Sreeramamurthy Ankem, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 07/31/2005
* USD 308,489.00

0102320&lt;br/&gt;Ankem&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed at new
understanding into low temperature creep of two-phase titanium alloys that find
applications in various technologies including energy, aerospace, marine,
chemical industries, consumer goods and bio-medical implants. Recent
observations on the creep behavior of alpha titanium at ambient temperature by
twinning led to the need for a more complete and fundamental modeling for
predicting the integrity of these structures. The main goals of this study are:
(1) to determine the activation energies for creep mechanisms in alpha, alpha-
beta and beta titanium alloys in the low temperature range of 298- 458K, (2) to
model the creep behavior of these alloys including Finite Element Modeling
(FEM), (3) to compare FEM predicted creep curves and strain distributions with
experimental values, and (4) to recommend optimal chemistry and microstructures
of Ti alloys for improved low temperature creep resistance. To reach these
goals, two different alloy classes (Ti-Mn and Ti-V) are selected for deformation
tests at low temperatures combined with SEM and TEM for electron lithography,
surface deformation studies and microstructure characterization such as
dislocation densities and crystal structure analyses. Activation energies are
determined and the creep processes are modeled from the creep tests data. The
creep constants of the alpha and beta phases are used to model the creep
behavior of two-phase alpha-beta Ti alloys by FEM using ANSYS computer program.
The FEM modeling of creep of alpha-beta alloys gives a predictive capability in
terms of the alpha and beta phases present and their morphologies. The results
of the study are directly applicable for other similar systems such as zirconium
and magnesium alloys that find application in energy and transportation sectors.
In addition, the results related to the FEM modeling are applicable to any two-
phase or composite materials. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The research develops new
understanding of the low temperature creep mechanisms and the results are
applicable for designing new titanium alloys and in optimizing the
microstructures of existing alloys for improved creep performance. The research
will also help in predicting component performance.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Titanium alloys have attractive engineering properties
including high strength to weight ratio, high fracture toughness, good high
temperature strength, excellent corrosion resistance and bio- compatibility. Due
to these properties, they find applications in various areas including energy,
aerospace, marine, chemical industries, consumer goods and bio-medical implants.
In some of these applications at low temperatures such as ambient temperature,
loads are applied on the components for extended periods of time where creep
becomes an important property. In this regard, it was recently shown that
titanium alloys can creep at 95% yield stress at ambient temperature, but the
activation energies for creep which can explain why and how creep occurs are not
known. In addition, there are no simple models available to predict the creep
behavior of two-phase materials from the knowledge of the creep behavior of
individual phases, their morphology and volume fractions. The main objectives of
this investigation are: (1) Determine the activation energies of creep
mechanisms in alpha, alpha-beta and beta titanium alloys in the low temperature
range of 298- 458K, (2) Model the creep behavior of a, a-b and b Ti alloys
including Finite Element Modeling of a-b Ti alloys, (3) Compare FEM predicted
creep curves and strain distributions with experimental values, and (4)
Recommend optimal chemistry and microstructures of Ti alloys for improved low
temperature creep resistance. For these studies, three Ti-Mn alloys and three
Ti-V alloys will be used as the model systems. Tensile tests will be conducted
in the temperature range 298 -458 K and creep tests will be conducted in the
temperature range 298 - 458 K and in the stress level ranging from 85 -100% YS.
SEM and TEM will be employed for electron lithography, surface deformation
studies and microstructure characterization such as dislocation densities and
crystal structure analyses. From the creep tests data, activation energies will
be determined and the creep processes will be modelled. The creep constants of
the a and b phases will be used to model the creep behaviour of two-phase a-b Ti
alloys by Finite Element Modelling using ANSYS computer program. It is expected
that the proposal work can be completed in three years. A successful completion
of this work will be of great technological importance, as it will have a
significant effect in designing new titanium alloys and in optimizing the
microstructures of existing alloys for improved creep performance. For example,
determination of activation energies gives a clue as to which species, i.e.
elements, present in the material are responsible for low temperature creep and,
accordingly, new alloys can be designed for improved performance. The FEM
modeling of creep of alpha-beta alloys gives a predictive capability in terms of
the alpha and beta phases present and their morphologies. This will also help in
designing and in predicting component performance. Even though this
investigation uses titanium alloys as the model system, the outcomes of the
studies related to activation energies are directly applicable for any other
similar systems such as Zirconium alloys. Furthermore, in general, the results
related to the FEM modeling would be applicable to any two-phase or composite
materials. This work will be carried out by the PI, Prof. S. Ankem and two
graduate students. The PI has extensive experience in physical and mechanical
behavior of Ti alloys and FEM Modeling. The graduate students will be trained in
the state of the art experimental techniques such as electron lithography for
drawing fiducial lines, SEM and TEM techniques and application of computers in
predicting material behavior.&lt;br/&gt;