* 0102095
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Microbial Biology for FY2001
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2003
* Charles Wolgemuth, Wolgemuth, Charles W
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 06/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Microbial Biology for
FY2001. The fellowship supports training and research on the basic biology of
protozoan, microalgal, fungal, archaeal, bacterial and viral species that are
not generally considered to be model organisms. Further, it provides
opportunities for a recent doctoral recipients to obtain additional training in
microbial biology, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden his/her scientific horizons beyond the
research experiences during the undergraduate and graduate training. These
fellowships are further designed to assist new scientists to direct their
research efforts across traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves
of unique research resources, sites, and facilities, including foreign
locations.

The research and training plan is entitled "Can Bacteria Move by Slime
Extrusion? The physics of A-type motility in Mxyococcus xanthus." Myxococcus
xanthus moves by gliding utilizing two distinct genetic mechanisms: Social(S)
and Adventurous(A) motility. This is a study of A-type motility using a slime
extrusion model based on a nozzle-like organelle discovered in cyanobacteria. A
theoretical model is being explored and experiments performed to determine if
this type of mechanism can drive A-motility.