* 0102427
* Growth and Properties of III-VI Heterostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2001,03/31/2005
* Marjorie Olmstead, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 03/31/2005
* USD 559,667.00

This project focuses on heteroepitaxial growth of III-VI based semiconductors
and on interrelated structural, electronic, and optical properties of this class
of materials. The research seeks to elucidate mechanisms of III-VI thin film
growth, and to develop III-VI growth technology and materials characterization
to the stage where these materials may be utilized for optoelectronic
applications. Interface compounds based on III-VI materials will be used to
control heteroepitaxy of both III-VI and more standard electronic materials,
including their use to promote both laminar and islanded nanostructure
formation. Problems associated with bulk III-VI materials, poor mechanical and
thermal properties, are being addressed through use of thin films on substrates
such as Si, GaAs and CaF2 . Development of this new generation of materials
requires new, basic knowledge about the interacting constraints that control
their electronic, optical and structural properties. This project strives to
elucidate the role of these constraints through studies of heterointerface
formation between common electronic materials and III-VI based materials.
Primary goals are: to establish an experimental and theoretical framework based
on nanoscale heteroepitaxial growth processes to optimize structural, electronic
and optical properties of III-VI heterostructures; to exploit III-VI interface
compounds to control semiconductor nanostructure formation; to evaluate
structural, electronic, and optical properties of III-VI-based heterostructures
for feasibility in novel optoelectronic applications. The approach is to
concentrate in two areas: (i ) nucleation, growth and properties of GaxSey,
AlxSey , and their alloys on Si(111), Si(100), GaAs(100), and CaF2 (111), and
(ii) use of the resultant thin films as substrates for a) laminar and islanded
growth of GaAs and ZnSe and b) GaxSey - Alx Sey superlattices. Growth kinetics,
morphologies and quantum dot properties will be studied with nanoscale
resolution using in situ scanning probe microscopy, UHV-transfer photoelectron
spectroscopy and near-edge x-ray absorption, and ex situ high resolution
transmission electron microscopy and energy loss spectroscopy. Area-averaged
properties will be probed using photoelectron spectroscopy and diffraction,
electron diffraction, ion scattering spectroscopy, and optical spectroscopies
(photothermal, reflection-transmission, photoluminescence, and Raman
scattering).&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses basic research issues
in a topical area of materials science having high potential technological
relevance. The research will contribute basic materials science knowledge at a
fundamental level to new aspects of electronic/photonic devices. The basic
knowledge and understanding gained from the research is expected to contribute
to improving the perform-ance and stability of advanced devices and circuits by
providing a fundamental understanding and a basis for designing and producing
improved materials, and materials combinations. An important feature of the
program is the integration of research and education through the training of
students in a fundamentally and technologically significant
area.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;