* 0102878
* Workshop on Preservation of Stability Under Discretization
* MPS,DMS
* 05/15/2001,04/30/2002
* Donald Estep, Colorado State University
* Standard Grant
* Catherine Mavriplis
* 04/30/2002
* USD 12,600.00

Stability is a term used to describe a wide variety of issues revolving around
the physical observability of a solution of a differential equation. Stability
lies at the very heart of the ability to make predictions about physical
situations from mathematics and are particularly relevant when numerical
approximation is involved, since discretization causes perturbation of both the
model and the data. Numerical stability issues are typically complex because
addressing such questions often requires a wide range of mathematical
techniques, involving not only standard methods of numerical analysis, but ideas
from dynamical systems, geometry, functional analysis, and the theory of
differential equations. This raises barriers both to young researchers trying to
learn about numerical stability and to communication between researchers working
in different areas yet facing similar stability problems. The goal of the
Workshop on the Preservation of Stability under Discretization is twofold: (1)
to increase the accessibility of numerical stability issues for young
researchers and (2) provide an opportunity for the exchange of information and
ideas between specialists in different application areas. The Workshop will host
a series of lectures by leading experts, each of whom will each address a
separate aspect of stability under discretization. The lectures will be aimed
towards an audience of advanced graduate students and non-specialists and will
be collected into a permanent archive. In addition, the invited speakers will
host a series of discussion and analysis sessions for students and young
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Stability is the term used to describe the
situation in which a physical quantity is affected by small disturbances taking
place at remote distances and times. The "butterfly" effect in chaos is one
well-known stability issue, but stability issues arise in nearly every kind of
physical situation from the flow of fluids and gases to computing rocket
trajectories to other planets. Stability is particular relevant to numerical
modeling of physical situations on computers because the modeling itself induces
widespread error/disturbances. Accounting for the effects of these
discretization errors is difficult because it typically requires mathematical
ideas from many areas, raising barriers both to learning about how deal with
stability and to communication between different areas of specialization. The
goal of the Workshop on the Preservation of Stability under Discretization is
twofold: (1) to increase the accessibility of numerical stability issues for
young researchers and (2) provide an opportunity for the exchange of information
and ideas between specialists in different application areas. The Workshop will
host a series of lectures by leading experts, each of whom will each address a
separate aspect of stability under discretization. The lectures will be aimed
towards an audience of advanced graduate students and non-specialists and will
be collected into a permanent archive. In addition, the invited speakers will
host a series of discussion and analysis sessions for students and young
researchers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;