* 0102955
* NER:  Carbon Nanotube Devices and Integrated Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2001,11/30/2002
* Chongwu Zhou, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 11/30/2002
* USD 100,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;PROPOSAL NO.: 0102955&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Zhou,
Chongwu&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION NAME: University of Southern
California&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: NER: Carbon Nanotube Devices and Integrated
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a proposal to design, build and
evaluate various novel nanotube devices and&lt;br/&gt;integrated systems.
Specifically I propose to make n type field effect transistors
(FET),&lt;br/&gt;nanotube p-n junctions, and an integrated single-molecule CMOS
inverter. This research&lt;br/&gt;is exploratory in nature; however, if
successful, will advance our understanding of the&lt;br/&gt;fundamental
properties of nanotubes and produce practical nanoscale devices for the
real&lt;br/&gt;world.&lt;br/&gt;There has been a great deal of research into
carbon nanotubes in the past few years. P&lt;br/&gt;type field effect
transistors have been demonstrated consisting of
semiconductive&lt;br/&gt;nanotubes with a silicon substrate backgate separated
from the tube by a layer of SiO2.&lt;br/&gt;Despite the utmost interest in
developing n type FETs to enable nanoscale CMOS&lt;br/&gt;circuits, the research
effort has been hampered by lack of an effective doping method
for&lt;br/&gt;nanotubes. I propose to demonstrate a simple, effective and
reliable method to&lt;br/&gt;electrostatically dope nanotubes into n type, thus
paving the way for n type FETs, p-n&lt;br/&gt;junctions and integrated systems.
This new method will employ TiO2 instead of SiO2 as&lt;br/&gt;the gate
dielectric. With a dielectric constant of 30 for TiO2, as compared to 3.8 for
SiO2,&lt;br/&gt;the gate utilizing TiO2 will be seven times more effective than
previously reported, and&lt;br/&gt;our preliminary analysis confirms that with a
reasonable gate bias (~ 10 V), a nanotube&lt;br/&gt;can be electrostatically
doped into n type, thereby producing an n type FETs.&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore,
carbon nanotube p-n junctions will be demonstrated with a split-
gate&lt;br/&gt;technique, by depositing TiO2 onto a semiconductive nanotube
contacted with source and&lt;br/&gt;drain electrodes, and patterning two gate
electrodes atop the TiO2, each covering half of&lt;br/&gt;the tube. By
controlling these two gate biases independently, one can tune the left
half&lt;br/&gt;tube into p type and the right half into n type, thus creating a
p-n junction in between,&lt;br/&gt;which provides an ideal system for studying
the depletion and screening in one&lt;br/&gt;dimension.&lt;br/&gt;Finally, a
simple integrated system will be demonstrated by attaching an electrode to
the&lt;br/&gt;center of a semiconductive nanotube in addition to the source and
drain electrodes. This&lt;br/&gt;center electrode divides the nanotube into two
segments and serves as the output of the&lt;br/&gt;circuit. The silicon
substrate backgate with TiO2 dielectric layer will serve as the
circuit&lt;br/&gt;input and be used to tune one tube segment to function as an n
type FET and the other&lt;br/&gt;segment as a p type FET, thereby forming the
worlds first single molecule inverter.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&g
t;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;