* 0102525
* Cycles, Differential Characters and Global Problems in Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2004
* H. Blaine Lawson, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Alexandre Freire
* 05/31/2004
* USD 329,748.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract for DMS - 0102525 (Blaine Lawson)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project is concerned with global problems in geometry and
in&lt;br/&gt;particular with the study of cycles residues and differential
characters.&lt;br/&gt;It focuses on the relationship between certain important
families of cycles&lt;br/&gt;in a space and the geometry of the space itself. Of
particular interest&lt;br/&gt;are algebraic cycles and the cycles associated to
singularities of mappings&lt;br/&gt;or the higher order contact of geometric
structures. These objects -- of&lt;br/&gt;importance in themselves -- have been
shown to have ties to other areas of&lt;br/&gt;mathematics. A major aim here is
the discovery and development of such&lt;br/&gt;ties. The proposal has several
interrelated parts. The first concerns groups&lt;br/&gt;of algebraic cycles and
cocycles on a projective variety. A theory of&lt;br/&gt;homology-type based on
cycles has been developed by the proposer and&lt;br/&gt;others. It will be used
to study concrete questions about algebraic&lt;br/&gt;spaces. In a variant of
the theory involving real algebraic cycles,&lt;br/&gt;surprizing connections to
equivariant homotopy theory have been found. &lt;br/&gt;The implications for
real algebraic geometry will be explored, and the&lt;br/&gt;quaternionic
analogues will be studied. A second part of the proposal concerns differential
&lt;br/&gt;characters, objects which mediate between cycles and smooth data, and
lead to important&lt;br/&gt;geometric invariants. Recent discoveries have been
made concerning them --&lt;br/&gt;for example, the existence of a fundamental
duality theorem. Further&lt;br/&gt;development of the theory is proposed.
Geometric results will be sought by&lt;br/&gt;bringing the calculus of
variations to bear in this domain. A third area of the proposal
&lt;br/&gt;concerns the study of singularities and characteristic forms. The
subject includes &lt;br/&gt;a generalization of Chern-Weil theory which gives
canonical homologies between singularities &lt;br/&gt;of bundle maps and
characteristic forms. Many applications concerning the global&lt;br/&gt;geometry
of singularities, and its relation to characteristic classes
and&lt;br/&gt;differential characters, will be investigated. A forth area is
concerned with special &lt;br/&gt;cycles in geometry: Special Lagrangian cycles
in Calabi-Yau manifolds, and associative &lt;br/&gt;and Cayley cycles in G(2)
and Spin(7) spaces. These latter subjects relate to gauge&lt;br/&gt;field theory
and gravity in Physics as well as many areas of geometry
and&lt;br/&gt;algebra.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;A concept of central
importance in geometry is that of a ``cycle''.&lt;br/&gt;In algebraic geometry a
cycle corresponds to the simultaneous solution of a&lt;br/&gt;system of
polynomial equations. In differential geometry cycles arise in&lt;br/&gt;many
ways: as the large scale solutions of certain differential
equations,&lt;br/&gt;and as the level sets and singularity sets of
differentiable mappings.&lt;br/&gt;Curves and surfaces in space are simple
examples. This proposal is&lt;br/&gt;concerned with the study of certain
important classes of cycles which arise&lt;br/&gt;in geometry. Part of the study
aims at relating them to fundamental&lt;br/&gt;large-scale geometry of the
surrounding space. In the algebraic case this&lt;br/&gt;has led to the
establishment of surprizing and important relationships&lt;br/&gt;between spaces
of algebraic cycles and fundamental constructions in&lt;br/&gt;algebraic
topology that have led to new insights in both fields. This work&lt;br/&gt;will
be continued with the intent of obtaining further
concrete&lt;br/&gt;applications. A second part of the proposal concerns
differential characters,&lt;br/&gt;objects which mediate between cycles and
smooth data. They lead to&lt;br/&gt;important geometric invariants and have
appeared in discussions of the&lt;br/&gt;``Mirror Symmetry Conjecture'' from
modern physics. The proposer has made&lt;br/&gt;some recent discoveries about
characters, including a basic Duality&lt;br/&gt;Theorem. Further development of
the theory and its applications is&lt;br/&gt;proposed. Another area of
investigation is concerned with relations&lt;br/&gt;between cycles and geometry
which arise from connections. Connections are&lt;br/&gt;fundamental in
mathematics, where they constitute differentiation laws, and&lt;br/&gt;in
physics, where they represent the fundamental forces of nature at
the&lt;br/&gt;classical level. The investigator has developed a theory of
singular connections which&lt;br/&gt;encompasses much previously unrelated
phenomena and has applications to&lt;br/&gt;many areas of geometry. The proposal
will continue this work with&lt;br/&gt;emphasis on applications. Yet another
area of the proposal is concerned&lt;br/&gt;with very special cycles in geometry
which relate to gauge field theory and&lt;br/&gt;gravity in Physics as well as
many areas of geometry and algebra. &lt;br/&gt;This project will also be
concerned with graduate student development.&lt;br/&gt;Students will be part of
the research team. There will also be an&lt;br/&gt;undergraduate educational
effort aimed at fostering mathematical&lt;br/&gt;independence and developing
interactive environments.&lt;br/&gt;