* 0102828
* Teams Enhancing Access for Minorities in Science (TEAMS)
* EDU,EES
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2007
* Robert Mania, Kentucky State University
* Cooperative Agreement
* Marilyn Suiter
* 05/31/2007
* USD 2,429,792.00

Nationwide statistics show marked under-representation of minority students
attending &lt;br/&gt;graduate schools or pursuing careers in the areas of
Science, Engineering, and Mathematics&lt;br/&gt;(SEM). HBCU's are in the most
ideal situation to provide solutions to this problem. &lt;br/&gt;Universities
like Kentucky State University must make every effort to recruit,
retain,&lt;br/&gt;and graduate minoritySEM students and subsequently enable them
to attend graduate &lt;br/&gt;school. Unfortunately, enrollmentin SEM
disciplines is declining rather than growing. &lt;br/&gt;Therefore, Kentucky
State University is submitting a proposal to the NSF HBCU-UP
&lt;br/&gt;initiative designed to increase enrollment of minoritystudents in SEM
areas and &lt;br/&gt;enhance their preparedness for graduate school success.
Teams Enhancing Access for &lt;br/&gt;Minorities in Science (TEAMS) is a
comprehensive program designed to prepare young &lt;br/&gt;minority students for
entry into careers in Science, Engineering, and Mathematics &lt;br/&gt;(SEM)
fields. The first phase of the program is a summer Undergraduate
Bridge&lt;br/&gt;Program for rising high school seniors and graduates. Once
students matriculate at &lt;br/&gt;Kentucky State University, they will proceed
as TEAMS through several phases of &lt;br/&gt;their undergraduate academic
program culminating with an intensive Graduate Bridge&lt;br/&gt;Program in
preparation for graduate school. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall goal of TEAMS
is to increase the number of qualified minority students &lt;br/&gt;entering
graduate schools in Science, Engineering, and Mathematics and to
provide&lt;br/&gt;them with academic experiences and research opportunities
which will increase &lt;br/&gt;their participation in graduate schools and their
degree of successful completion&lt;br/&gt; of graduate endeavors.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The benefits of the TEAMS Program will include:
&lt;br/&gt;- Providing a conduit that will facilitate the entry of high
potential minority high &lt;br/&gt;school students into Kentucky State
University through an Undergraduate Bridge&lt;br/&gt;Program that will support
andprepare high school students to reach above average &lt;br/&gt;achievement in
undergraduate studies in SEM courses. &lt;br/&gt;-Providing students with a
curriculum that will challenge them in a manner that is&lt;br/&gt; appropriate
for developing the content and skills in subject areas pertinent to
&lt;br/&gt;graduatestudies in SEM. &lt;br/&gt;-Establishing Excel Study/Research
Teams that will prepare students in content,&lt;br/&gt; problem-solving skills,
and cooperative and investigative approaches to learning.
&lt;br/&gt;-Establishing a Graduate Bridge Program that will promote readiness
for and an &lt;br/&gt;awareness of the expectations of graduate studies by
providing students with first&lt;br/&gt;hand experiences in various aspects of
research. &lt;br/&gt;-Providing faculty development activities, such as
workshops, seminars, institutes,&lt;br/&gt;and conferences on innovative
teaching strategies, including inquiry-based teaching &lt;br/&gt;and learning,
collaborative learning, and interdisciplinary approaches. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;