* 0102463
* Automorphisms of 3-manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* Darryl McCullough, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2003
* USD 62,725.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0102463&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Darryl McCullough&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work advances
a number of research projects in the&lt;br/&gt;area of low-dimensional topology.
Their unifying theme is the&lt;br/&gt;automorphisms of 3-dimensional manifolds,
including homotopy&lt;br/&gt;equivalences, diffeomorphisms, and isometries.
Specific projects&lt;br/&gt;include: the Generalized Smale Conjecture for
elliptic&lt;br/&gt;3-manifolds, the isomorphism problem for diffeomorphism
groups of&lt;br/&gt;elliptic 3-manifolds, generalization of the Abikoff-
Maskit&lt;br/&gt;structure theory for Kleinian groups using topological
methods,&lt;br/&gt;investigation of free actions of finite groups on
orientable&lt;br/&gt;handlebodies using Nielsen equivalence classes of
generating&lt;br/&gt;sets, and fibration theorems for spaces of fiber-
preserving&lt;br/&gt;diffeomorphisms of manifolds having fiberings and
singular&lt;br/&gt;fiberings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary mathematical
constructs that will be investigated are&lt;br/&gt;3-manifolds, which are
geometric objects locally modeled on the&lt;br/&gt;3-dimensional spatial
structure of the physical universe, and&lt;br/&gt;groups, which are algebraic
systems with an operation akin to the&lt;br/&gt;addition of ordinary numbers.
Some of the ongoing work has&lt;br/&gt;already been applied in the theoretical
physics of gravitation,&lt;br/&gt;but most of its applications are entirely
within pure&lt;br/&gt;mathematics. The guiding philosophy of most of the
research is to&lt;br/&gt;use topological and geometric structure of 3-manifolds
to&lt;br/&gt;understand groups of symmetries and other kinds
of&lt;br/&gt;automorphisms. Groups of automorphisms of a mathematical
object&lt;br/&gt;often exhibit their own interesting structure. A classic
example&lt;br/&gt;of this is the finite-dimensional vector spaces. They are
rather&lt;br/&gt;simple objects, but their automorphism groups, the general
linear&lt;br/&gt;groups, have a rich structure and find wide-ranging uses
in&lt;br/&gt;mathematics and physics. Within the proposed work, an example
is&lt;br/&gt;the 3-manifolds called handlebodies. These are among the
simplest&lt;br/&gt;3-manifolds to describe topologically, but their groups
of&lt;br/&gt;symmetries are subtle and varied. In fact, any finite group
can&lt;br/&gt;be a group of symmetries of some handlebody, and the number
of&lt;br/&gt;distinct ways that a group can act as symmetries on a
given&lt;br/&gt;handlebody can be quite large. A different use of the
philosophy&lt;br/&gt;involves Kleinian groups, which are discrete groups of
symmetries&lt;br/&gt;of 3-dimensional hyperbolic space. Each Kleinian group
produces a&lt;br/&gt;quotient 3-manifold, and one of the projects uses the
topological&lt;br/&gt;structure of these quotient 3-manifolds to give an
algebraic&lt;br/&gt;classification of Kleinian groups.&lt;br/&gt;