* 0102692
* Dynamic Transitions in Magnetic Vortex Lattices
* MPS,DMR
* 05/01/2001,04/30/2005
* Eva Andrei, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 04/30/2005
* USD 395,000.00

This individual investigator award will fund a project that will employ a new
pinning-force microscope in conjunction with fast transport measurements, to
address key questions on vortex dynamics. These include: a) the mechanism of
current driven metastable to stable transitions; b) the nature of moving vortex
phases and the transitions between them; c) effects of boundaries on dynamics
and phase segregation in the peak effect region; d) the mechanism of frequency
memory in vortex states. The planned pinning force microscope will image not the
vortices themselves but the contrast between regions with different pinning
forces. It will be capable of distinguishing between a strongly pinned
disordered vortex state and a weakly pinned ordered one with spatial resolution
of about 1micro-m, and its operation will not be limited to low fields. By
taking advantage of the fact that the vortex motion can be frozen in place and
that the imaging is non-invasive, the microscope will be capable of resolving
vortex motion with excellent temporal resolution (about 1ms). This method will
allow access to regimes of vortex dynamics not possible by existing vortex
imaging techniques. The students and young researchers involved in this work
will gain skill in applying newly developed new techniques to questions of
interest. The knowledge and skills that they will learn will be of use to them
in future research and development careers.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;A limiting
factor to the use of Type-II superconductors in technology is that at a
particular magnetic field strength, magnetic vortices form. These vortices can
become "de-pinned" which then cause the superconductor to loose its zero
resistance state. Because most properties of Type-II superconductors are
governed by the physics of vortices, it is of fundamental and technological
interest to study the physics of the motion these vortices. Several newly
discovered phenomena have made it clear that our present understanding of vortex
dynamics (or motion) is flawed. It appears that, due to the presence of a random
pinning force, the phase transitions and the onset of vortex motion are very
interesting and more complex than originally thought. This individual
investigator award will fund a program to address these issues by imaging the
pinning force distribution in the vortex phases with a novel high resolution
microscope that we propose to build in our laboratory. A strong educational
component will be an integral part of the project. Students at both graduate and
undergraduate levels as well as a post doctoral fellow will actively participate
in all research and development aspects of the program. The knowledge and skills
that they will learn will be of use to them in future research and development
careers.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;