* 0102253
* New Modeling Procedure for Indoor/Outdoor Propagation Environments in Micro- and Pico-Cell Wireless Communication Systems
* ENG,ECCS
* 05/01/2001,04/30/2002
* Magdy Iskander, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* James W. Mink
* 04/30/2002
* USD 250,743.00

0102253&lt;br/&gt;Iskander&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With this proposal the PI's
respectfully request NSF support to develop a detailed, accurate,
and&lt;br/&gt;computationally efficient propagation model for wireless
communications in micro- and pico-cell systems.&lt;br/&gt;A new 3D model [or
alternatively a 2D model with advanced calculation capabilities such as the
vertical-plane-launch (VPL) technique] will be developed based on integrating
three new and innovative&lt;br/&gt;approaches to improve calculation accuracy
and increase the computational efficiency. This includes the&lt;br/&gt;use of
the following:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. A new unstructured triangular grid ray
tracing method (TGRM) to provide significant savings in&lt;br/&gt;computational
time when modeling outdoor regions. Preliminary results show that CPU time for
the&lt;br/&gt;TGRM method is approximately 30% of that of the visibility ray
tracing.&lt;br/&gt;2. A space division procedure based on a uniform rectangular
grid method (URGM) for indoor regions&lt;br/&gt;and assuming that the
reflection/transmission surfaces coincide with the grid lines.
Preliminary&lt;br/&gt;results show that the CPU time for the proposed uniform
grid method for indoor propagation regions&lt;br/&gt;is approximately 14% of
that of the visibility ray tracing method.&lt;br/&gt;3. An FDTD approach to
calculate reflection (F ) and transmission (F ) coefficients of composite
walls&lt;br/&gt;and incorporate these coefficients in the overall ray tracing
code. This is important for short range&lt;br/&gt;signal prediction where
average or effective values of materials properties of walls may
provide&lt;br/&gt;inaccurate predictions. The multigrid Finite Difference Time
Domain (multigrid FDTD) code will&lt;br/&gt;also be used to calculate
diffraction coefficients from indoor and outdoor objects that are difficult
to&lt;br/&gt;model analytically. Diffraction coefficient results will be
incorporated with a 3D ray tracing code that&lt;br/&gt;implements the proposed
procedures described above. Diffraction coefficients will be included as
part&lt;br/&gt;of the program in the form of a database and look-up
tables.&lt;br/&gt;4. The development of the 3D version of the proposed ray
tracing code will be based on using pyramidal&lt;br/&gt;or tetrahedral cells in
the TGRM procedure, and solid rectangular cells in the URGM method.
The&lt;br/&gt;proposed methods do not involve search algorithms and hence
significant improvement in the&lt;br/&gt;computational efficiency is
expected.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;The overall results from the developed new
propagation model will be validated experimentally on scaled&lt;br/&gt;models in
the 60'x40'x23' indoor antenna range available at the University of Utah. Scaled
models will be&lt;br/&gt;carefully selected so as to present physical structures
of interest, on the one hand, and an object that can be&lt;br/&gt;used as a
building block towards the development of a fully understandable and physics-
based propagation&lt;br/&gt;model, on the other. With the available experimental
facilities (HP8510 up to 40 GHz), it will be possible&lt;br/&gt;to use scale
factors as large as 20 to model realistic structures at the higher frequencies
(2GHz) presently&lt;br/&gt;being used in terrestrial wireless communication
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the development of the
deterministic EM-based propagation model, the PI's propose to use the calculated
EM power distribution pattern to determine statistical parameters that may be
used in the&lt;br/&gt;simulation of wireless communications systems. This
includes calculations of coverage, delay spread, bit&lt;br/&gt;error rate, and
angle of arrival. The project will involve two graduate students to work on the
simulation&lt;br/&gt;part of the project, and one additional graduate student
together with a team of undergraduate senior&lt;br/&gt;students to work on
building the scaled models and conducting the experimental verification part of
the&lt;br/&gt;project.&lt;br/&gt;