* 0102773
* UMEB:  Undergraduate Career Enhancement and Training in Ecological Studies in New Mexico
* BIO,DBI
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2007
* William Gannon, University of New Mexico
* Continuing Grant
* Sally O'Connor
* 08/31/2007
* USD 413,000.00

0102773 Parmenter

The Undergraduate Mentorships in Environmental Biology (UMEB) Program at the
University of New Mexico will provide research training experiences across a
range of ecological studies involving biology, ecology, and meteorology in the
Rio Grande Basin of New Mexico. The UMEB Program will collaborate with faculty
researchers in the Sevilleta Long Term Ecological Research Program (LTER) and
the Museum of Southwestern Biology (MSB). The goals of the UMEB program are: (1)
instruct undergraduates in the principles of scientific research, (2) expose the
students to a wide variety of ecological research techniques and career
opportunities, (3) facilitate individual student research projects, and (4)
encourage students to continue their scientific education in upper-division
courses and graduate school. Emphasis in student recruitment will ensure high
participation by students from underrepresented ethnic groups. These activities
will provide training in theoretical and technical aspects of ecological
research, and promote a holistic approach to large-scale ecological studies.

The UMEB program will contribute to four significant areas of research training
in the United States: (1) Assist in counteracting current and anticipated
shortages of Ph.D.'s for teaching at colleges and universities and conducting
research in the national interest; (2) increase the ethnic diversity of students
entering the ranks of professional scientists in the field of Environmental
Biology; (3) provide students with essential information regarding graduate
school program selection and enrollment; and (4) facilitate hands-on research
experiences for undergraduate minority students, so as to prepare these students
for the demands of graduate school and professional scientific careers.

