* 0102539
* NGS: Collaborative Research:  Adaptive Performance and Power Management for Real-Time Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Yann-Hang Lee, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 08/31/2005
* USD 214,939.00

EIA-0102539&lt;br/&gt;Yann-Hang Lee&lt;br/&gt;Arizona State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Adaptive Performance and Power Management for
Real-Time Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will enable real-time
computer systems to monitor and automatically adapt their power usage to
specified fault-tolerance and performance requirements, prevailing workload, and
current and projected energy/power constraints.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many
systems, which are power-constrained, do not always have a strict limit on their
power consumption. Instead, they have periods of time during which energy supply
is very limited, and should be used sparingly, while at other times, the power
available is adequate and the system is allowed to exploit all its resources to
deliver maximum performability. While there has been a great deal of research in
developing circuits and design techniques to build low-power devices, there is
very little reported on techniques to adjust power consumption on-the-fly to
adapt to changing levels of workload and energy/power availability. There is the
need for an integrated approach, ranging from the hardware operation (using
voltage-clock scaling or a sleep mode) to the application level. Our preliminary
investigations have shown that such an integrated approach, exploiting the
synergy between these various layers, is far more effective than single-layer
approaches adopted incrementally.&lt;br/&gt;