* 0102235
* A Study of the Magnetic Properties of Some Strongly Correlated Electron Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2006
* Saul Oseroff, San Diego State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 06/30/2006
* USD 210,475.00

The recent discovery of high-Tc weak ferromagnetism, WF, in lightly doped
hexaborides, A1-xLaxB6 (A = Ca, Sr, or Ba), has stimulated theoretical and
experimental efforts to understand the this phenomenon. While several models
have been proposed, an explanation is still elusive. In order to gain a better
understanding of the origin of the WF, measurements by Electron Paramagnetic
Resonance, EPR, uniaxial stress, microwave-absorption, and magnetization, M, in
controlled samples will be conducted between 2 K - 1100 K. Also, systems known
as multiferroics, MF, will be studied. They are simultaneously ferroelectric,
FE, and ferromagnetic, FM. It has been suggested that BiMnO3 is MF. The
experimental data on BiMnO3 is incomplete. Its magnetic, electrical and
structural properties will be measured by EPR, M, specific heat, Raman, X-rays,
and electric polarization. This work should help understand the nature of the
interactions present and stimulate future work in these compounds. Several
undergraduates and master's students will be involved in this program. They will
be trained in cutting-edge research techniques, which provided the students
excellent preparation for Ph.D. programs or for careers in industry. %%% The
recent discovery of ferromagnetism in doped CaB6 is one of the great surprises
in the modern study of magnetism for which there is still no explanation.
Selected experiments will be carried out to provide new insight into the physics
of these systems, which could lead to the correct theoretical model. Also,
studies of compounds that are simultaneously ferroelectric, FE, and
ferromagnetic, FM, will be carried out. Despite little work having been
performed in these systems, a number of important new applications can be
imagined. Examples are multiple state memory elements, electric field controlled
FM resonance devices, and variable transducers. Several undergraduates and
master's students will be involved in this program. They will be trained in
cutting-edge research techniques. These provide excellent preparation for Ph.D.
programs or for careers in industry. High school students and teachers will also
participate in this program. This will continue the successful outreach program
conducted by the PI's group in order to improve the quality of science education
in K-12. ***