* 0102623
* NER:  Synthesis and Theory of Nanoscale Self-assembled Photoelectrochemical  Cells
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* Daniel Neuhauser, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Brian M. Tissue
* 07/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

Divisions of Chemistry, and Bioengineering and Environmental Systems support
this multidivisional award to University of California Los Angeles, and this
award is part of the Nanoscale Exploratory Research in the Nanoscale Science and
Engineering program. Under this project, Jeffrey Zink will synthesize nano-
engineered photo-electrochemical cells by self assembly process using solution-
based sol-gel process, which will replace time consuming step-by-step serial
assembly process. This materials synthesis method will provide flexibility in
the spatial configuration and the chemical environment of the photoelectron
donors and acceptors. Theoretical studies will be performed to determine the
charge separation and electron transport in the nanostructured materials. The
research program will provide education and training opportunities in material
chemistry to underrepresented groups in undergraduate education through the
Student Research Participation and Center for Academic Excellence programs at
University of California at Los Angeles.

Under the award, nano-engineered photo-electrochemical cells will be fabricated
using a solution-based sol-gel self-assembly process. The process will yield
ordered and oriented nanostructures of relatively large sizes for the
development of photoelectrochemical devices. In addition, the research program
will provide multidisciplinary education and training opportunities in materials
chemistry to underrepresented groups in undergraduate education.