* 0102428
* Application of Luminescence Dating in North American Archaeology
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2001,09/30/2004
* James Feathers, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 09/30/2004
* USD 136,625.00

&lt;br/&gt;Perhaps the most important task of archaeology is providing a
chronology for the material remains that are recovered. Any statements about how
and why cultures have changed in the past are predicated on an accurate and
precise chronology. Archaeologists have utilized an array of physical methods
for determining age, most commonly radiocarbon dating. Luminescence dating,
which is widely used in Europe, has seen less use in American Archaeology. The
National Science Foundation is supporting research by the University of
Washington's Luminescence Dating Laboratory, directed by Dr. James Feathers, in
expanding the application of this dating method in American archaeology. This
research involves addressing some chronological problems that have not been
resolved by other dating methods but which are particularly suitable for
luminescence dating.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Luminescence can be used to date
buried sediments, pottery and burned lithics. Primarily pottery dating, with
some lithic dating, is being addressed in this project. Luminescence dates
pottery to the last time it was heated, usually when it was made or used. Since
the manufacture or use is the event that archaeologists are interested in,
luminescence has the principle advantage of providing direct dates for pottery
and does not rely, as do other dating methods, on association of the pottery
with some other event that is dated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This has some
particular advantages for some chronological problems, which are being addressed
by this research:&lt;br/&gt; 1) Archaeologists are interested in regional
settlement dynamics, but small sites, particularly those which contain mainly
surface material, are difficult to date and thus place in a settlement
chronology. Are these sites the same age or different age than larger sites and
what does this mean for how the population was dispersed across the landscape?
Undiagnostic pottery sherds are often the only artifacts found at these sites.
Luminescence is the only method that can date them.&lt;br/&gt; 2) A particularly
vexing problem in archaeology is the mixing in one deposit of materials of
different age. This confounds interpretations of cultural history and blurs
evidence on the tempo of change. By directly dating artifacts (in this case
pottery sherds), as luminescence can, one can begin to tease apart the different
occupations.&lt;br/&gt; 3) Duration of occupation in one location is an
important variable for understanding population trends and their impact on
environment, economy and political complexity. Determining duration has long
been problematic in archaeology. By directly dating a number of pottery sherds,
luminescence can provide a measure of duration that is statistically
quantifiable. Pottery tends to have a relatively short use-life, and emphasis on
sherds that have the most fragile fabrics will minimize problems of artifacts
that may last longer than the occupations.&lt;br/&gt; 4) Dating pre-ceramic
sites can also be difficult. Luminescence is able to date heat-treated stone
tools as well as pottery and offers a solution to improving the earliest
chronologies in America. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These problems are being
addressed in this research through work in the Mississippi Valley, the Tennessee
Valley, eastern Mississippi, central Alabama, and other localities in the
Midwest and Southeast. Research into improving the accuracy and precision of
luminescence dating of pottery is also being undertaken.&lt;br/&gt;