* 0102356
* Computation of Nearly Singular Integrals with Applications to Fluid Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,01/31/2005
* J. Thomas Beale, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 01/31/2005
* USD 165,499.00

0102356&lt;br/&gt;Beale&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work is concerned with
the development of improved &lt;br/&gt;methods for computing singular or nearly
singular integrals, and with &lt;br/&gt;applications to numerical methods for
simulating fluid flow with moving &lt;br/&gt;boundaries. In many scientific
problems, quantities of interest can be &lt;br/&gt;written in terms of integrals
such as a double layer potential on a &lt;br/&gt;boundary. When such an integral
is evaluated near the boundary, usual &lt;br/&gt;quadrature rules are inaccurate
because of large derivatives in the &lt;br/&gt;integrand. It is desirable to
calculate such values in a way that is simple &lt;br/&gt;and efficient, without
requiring a special choice of quadrature points. The &lt;br/&gt;present approach
uses regularization of the singularity and a standard &lt;br/&gt;quadrature
rule, followed by local corrections derived from asymptotic &lt;br/&gt;analysis.
This technique will be used to design an alternate version of the
&lt;br/&gt;immersed boundary method of C. Peskin, a computational method which
&lt;br/&gt;has been used to model various biological processes. In this method
&lt;br/&gt;viscous, incompressible fluid is influenced by a membrane or
interface &lt;br/&gt;which exerts a force on the fluid. In two dimensions, the
force can be &lt;br/&gt;expressed in terms of nearly singular integrals to which
the proposed &lt;br/&gt;approach can be applied. It is hoped that this
modification will extend the &lt;br/&gt;usefulness of the immersed boundary
method in realistic applications. &lt;br/&gt;Application may also be made to
methods for computing flow with &lt;br/&gt;moving boundaries separating
different fluids. The technique for nearly &lt;br/&gt;singular integrals will be
extended to surface integrals in three-space, &lt;br/&gt;generalizing work
already done for marker points on surfaces. Related &lt;br/&gt;work will concern
interfaces in inviscid, potential flow using improved &lt;br/&gt;regularizations
of boundary integrals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many scientific processes involve
moving boundaries, for example, the &lt;br/&gt;boundary of a drop of one fluid
moving through another, or a membrane in &lt;br/&gt;living tissue. Numerical
models of such processes encounter special &lt;br/&gt;difficulties, since it is
simplest to compute quantities at a set of points &lt;br/&gt;which are regularly
spaced and unchanging. There are presently several &lt;br/&gt;numerical
approaches which avoid changing fundamentally the way the &lt;br/&gt;region is
approximated at each new time. In some cases important &lt;br/&gt;quantities can
be written as integrals over boundaries. These integrals &lt;br/&gt;arise as
solutions of differential equations and are usually singular, or
&lt;br/&gt;nearly singular; that is, large values appear, representing the
strong &lt;br/&gt;interaction of nearby points, as in the inverse square law of
gravity. &lt;br/&gt;Special techniques are needed to calculate such integrals
accurately and &lt;br/&gt;efficiently. This proposal is concerned with the
development and &lt;br/&gt;application of methods of this type. The use of
integral representations to &lt;br/&gt;modify the design of existing methods for
computing fluid motion with &lt;br/&gt;moving boundaries might improve the
ability of these numerical methods &lt;br/&gt;to make reliable
predictions.&lt;br/&gt;