* 0102622
* NER:  Tunable Radiofrequency Electromagnetic Absorption In Ferrite Nanoparticles
* ENG,ECCS
* 10/01/2001,03/31/2003
* Hariharan Srikanth, University of South Florida
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 03/31/2003
* USD 60,000.00

Tunable Radio-Frequency Electromagnetic Absorption In Ferrite Nanoparticles&lt;b
r/&gt;______________________________________________________________________&lt;
br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was
received in response to NSE, NSF-0019. Nanostructured materials display a wide
variety of novel physical properties that can be used in producing tailored
materials for device applications. Specifically, the RF and microwave response
in these materials is of great interest as there exists the potential for
achieving tunability and tailored electromagnetic response useful for specific
applications. Demonstration of improved RF characteristics or discovery of new
electromagnetic properties in nanomaterials would have a major impact on future
development of a large class of devices like filters, phase shifters,
circulators, isolators etc. that are commonly used in wireless and communication
applications. &lt;br/&gt;The overall objective of this Nanoscale Exploratory
Research project is to study the radio-frequency (RF) electromagnetic absorption
properties in ferrite nanoparticles. The PI will focus on g-Fe2O3 and the Ni-
doped soft ferrites synthesized in collaboration with industry and would attempt
to correlate the high frequency response with the underlying important
parameters in ferrite nanoparticles like the particle size, nanostructure and
magnetic behavior. In addition to magnetic susceptibility, hysteresis loops and
frequency-dependent (up to 1 GHz) complex permeability measurements, a novel RF
resonant technique developed by the PI will be employed to probe the magnetic
anisotropy. &lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute to education and student
training at the University of South Florida in a technologically challenging and
important field. It further provides the opportunity for an Applied Physics
graduate student to interact with materials engineers in industry and travel to
the company site and participate in synthesis of ferrite nanopowders.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;