* 0102114
* Postdoctoral Research Fellowship in Microbial Biology for FY2001
* BIO,DBI
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2003
* Cindy DeLoney-Marino, DeLoney, Cindy R
* Fellowship Award
* Carter Kimsey
* 06/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This action funds an NSF Postdoctoral Fellowship in Microbial Biology for
FY2001. The fellowship supports training and research on the basic biology of
protozoan, microalgal, fungal, archaeal, bacterial and viral species that are
not generally considered to be model organisms. Further, it provides
opportunities for a recent doctoral recipients to obtain additional training in
microbial biology, to gain research experience under the sponsorship of
established scientists, and to broaden his/her scientific horizons beyond the
research experiences during the undergraduate and graduate training. These
fellowships are further designed to assist new scientists to direct their
research efforts across traditional disciplinary lines and to avail themselves
of unique research resources, sites, and facilities, including foreign
locations.

The research and training plan is entitled "Conversations between bacterium and
squid: Studying the genetics behind V. fischeri's response to its symbiotic
host, E. scolopes. Colonization of the squid E. scolopes by its bacterial
symbiont, V. fischeri, requires the bacterial sensor kinase RscS. This research
tests the hypothesis that RscS regulates other genes essential to the symbiosis
by identifying these genes using a variety of molecular methods. Further, laser-
scanning confocal microscopy is being used to identify where in the symbiosis
process RscS is required.