* 0102468
* Synthesis and Study of Covalently Bonded Self-Assembled Polymer Gel Nanoparticles
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2005
* Zhibing Hu, University of North Texas
* Continuing grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 05/31/2005
* USD 278,000.00

The search for novel macromolecular structures is at the core of innovation in
macromolecular science and engineering and is the long-term goal of our
research. Polymer gels are a unique class of macromolecular networks that
contain a large fraction of solvent such as water within their structure. Most
current research on structures of polymer gels has focused on either bulk gels
or microgels. The objective of this work is to create nanostructured bulk
polymer gels and correlate such structures to their physical properties. The
central idea is to first synthesize monodispersed polymer gel nanoparticles,
then self-assemble them into 3D networks, and eventually covalently bond them.
The covalent bonding contributes to the structural stability, while self-
assembly provides the with crystal structures that diffract light, resulting in
colors. The self-assembled structure of the PI's systems are further enriched by
their two-level structural hierarchy: the primary network consists of
crosslinked polymer chains inside each nanoparticle, while the secondary network
is a crosslinked system of the nanoparticles. As a feasibility study, the PI's
synthesized such a material that contains 97 wt% water, displays a striking
iridescence but is soft and flexible. The PI's approach consists of four
components. First, several representative polymer gel nanoparticles such as
N-isopropylacrylamide and hydroxypropyl cellulose will be synthesized and
characterized by light scattering methods as model building blocks. Second, the
nanoparticles will be self-assembled into various structures. Third, various
reaction schemes will be used to covalently bond these assemblies. Fourth, the
physical properties of the networks, including covalent bonding, mesh size, two-
level structural hierarchy, periodic structures, and elasticity, will be
investigated using Fourier transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy,
chromatography, UV-visible spectroscopy, and light scattering methods. %%% This
work, if successful, will provide a framework to generate stable periodic 3D
structures with varying feature sizes in macromolecular materials. It allows us
to obtain useful functionality not only from the constituent building blocks but
also from the long-range ordering that characterizes these structures. Creating
such nanostructured material may also be of importance in technological
applications including controlled drug delivery, biomaterials, sensors, devices,
chromatography, bio-adhesives, and displays. Both undergraduate and graduate
students will participate in this research. They will gain valuable skills in
interdisciplinary research and development in macromolecular science and
nanotechnology.