* 0102173
* Galois Representations and Arithmetic Questions
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Ravi Ramakrishna, Cornell University
* Continuing grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2005
* USD 105,915.00

The investigator will study questions in the deformation theory of global Galois
representations. Let a two dimensional mod p Galois representation be given.
Serre has conjectured this representation "comes from" a modular form. His
conjecture necessarily implies the mod p Galois representation is the mod p
reduction of some p-adic Galois representation. The author plans to continue his
study of whether such deformations exist independently of Serre's Conjecture,
and if they can be arranged to be potentially semistable in the sense of
Fontaine. Such constructions, especially combined with recent work of Taylor,
could be regarded as providing evidence for Serre's Conjecture. There are
interesting cases that are still open, such as reducible residual
representations and representations of the absolute Galois group of totally real
fields.

The proposed research falls under the general area of Number Theory, which has
its roots in the study of whole numbers and their various properties. Natural
questions that arise in this field, such as properties of prime numbers and how
frequently they occur, can have applications to coding theory and cryptography.
The proposed research is also related to Galois Theory, the study of symmetries
of solutions to equations. Studying these symmetries can shed light on the
understanding their solutions, a basic mathematical question.