* 0102266
* Robust Feedback Control and Analysis of Queueing Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Martin Day, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2005
* USD 109,980.00

This project develops mathematical techniques for the analysis of optimal robust
control (service) strategies for queuing systems. Fluid models (deterministic,
continuous state and time variables) are considered which describe queuing
network configurations motivated by applications in manufacturing,
communications and vehicular traffic control. Optimal control problems are
formulated using the general approach of nonlinear robust control, resulting in
an appropriate Hamilton-Jacobi-Isaacs (HJI) partial differential equation which
determines the value function of a dynamic game. Solutions to this HJI are
constructed by methods similar to classical techniques involving
(bi)characteristics or a field of extremals. While this approach is well
understood in general, it has had little development in applications to queuing
networks. One reason for this is that the precise mathematical description of
queuing systems often involves a Skorokhod problem formulation to account for
the changes to systems dynamics when some of the queues become empty. A major
goal of the project is to develop this approach for a variety of examples (e.g.
different network structures and cost criteria) in order to discern the
mathematical structure of solutions to the HJI, the form of the optimal policies
themselves, and how the unique features of the Skorokhod problem formulation can
be treated in this approach. Using the understanding of solutions to the HJI
gained through these case studies, numerical methods are developed to analyze
larger and more complex examples. The mathematical tools produced will
contribute to the theory of robust control in general, to problems involving
Skorokhod dynamics in particular, and will introduce robust control techniques
to the area of traffic control.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The flow of "traffic"
through a network, whether vehicles on a system of intersecting roads, products
in a multistage manufacturing process, or "packets" of information in an
electronic network, is an increasingly important aspect of our commercial and
public services infrastructure. In the familiar example of vehicles on a system
of roads the network consists of several intersections connected by roads of
various sizes. The different streams of traffic that meet at an intersection
must take turns or share the limited capacity of the intersection. The
efficiency of the network depends on the strategy which controls the traffic
streams that are allowed to use the various intersections at each moment of
time. (In the most familiar vehicular setting this simply means the scheme which
governs the sequence and timing of traffic lights.) Now that sensors are
available to detect the number of vehicles waiting or traveling on each of the
roads in a network, the design intelligent signal light control strategies to
manage the network with optimal efficiency is a natural goal. The same general
issue of service allocation strategy is present in manufacturing or
communication systems, although the terminology and specific features of the
networks are different in those settings. Traffic and network engineers have
developed various ways to study the performance of network service control
strategies "experimentally" and to adjust those strategies to current network
conditions in an adaptive way. However, with only a few exceptions, past
research has not developed systematic tools to identify service control
strategies whose performance is optimal in a precise mathematical sense. This
project develops mathematical ideas and tools for this purpose. The new
understanding and mathematical techniques which result should be a valuable
contribution to the management and design of high performance networks.