* 0103562
* Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Teams (NIRT):  NanoTurf: Nano-engineered Low Flow Friction Surfaces
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2005
* Fred Wudl, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Kevin Lyons
* 07/31/2005
* USD 1,000,000.00

This Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Teams (NIRT) project will address the
common problem of large pressure drops in microfluidics by nano-engineering
novel channel surfaces and controlling their surface properties. The
consequences are expected to be both dramatic and far-reaching. The research
project is to develop a nano-engineered surface to drastically reduce viscous
drag. Despite the explosive growth in microfluidics, as represented by such
high-profile applications as biochips and lab-on-a-chip, this fundamental
problem associated with miniaturization remains unsolved: the disproportional
increase in the relative pressure drop and the power consumption as devices are
reduced in size. Due to the severe retardation of velocity at the surface,
transport of liquids through long, nano/microscale channels encounter to high
losses to be practical. Fabrication of these surfaces will be developed by
integrating the rich arsenal of MEMS and Nano-technologies with the extensive
knowledge of surface and biomaterial sciences, based upon the specialized
expertise of the four principal investigators. Following development and
characterization of the novel surfaces, an electrically re-configurable
bioreactor chip will be developed as a capstone device, which further promotes
synergistic integration among the team members as well as public awareness.

Fusion of the traditionally disjoint areas in this research - mechanical
engineering and chemistry - start from students, who will take a set of formal
courses developed and cross-offered between two schools for nanoscale science
and engineering. The students continue to develop their interdisciplinary mind
from monthly team meetings and weekly task meetings for research.