* 0103944
* Applications of Moving Frames
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Peter Olver, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2005
* USD 160,400.00

0103944&lt;br/&gt;Olver&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will focus on the
applications of the proposer's new &lt;br/&gt;equivariant theory of moving
frames for general Lie group actions. &lt;br/&gt;Particular emphasis will be in
three key applied directions: analysis and &lt;br/&gt;applications of invariant
variational problems and invariant partial &lt;br/&gt;differential equations in
geometry and physics, the design of symmetry-&lt;br/&gt;preserving numerical
algorithms for approximating differential invariants &lt;br/&gt;and integrating
invariant differential equations, and object recognition and &lt;br/&gt;symmetry
detection in computer vision based on differential invariant and
&lt;br/&gt;noise-resistant joint invariant signatures. The project will include
further &lt;br/&gt;development of the underlying moving frame theory,
particularly in the &lt;br/&gt;case of infinite-dimensional Lie pseudo-groups,
and the formulation of a &lt;br/&gt;proper geometrical foundation for
multivariate numerical approximation &lt;br/&gt;and
interpolation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recognition and exploitation symmetry is
an essential tool in modern &lt;br/&gt;mathematics and its applications. This
project will continue to develop a &lt;br/&gt;new, powerful geometric approach,
known as moving frames, to systems &lt;br/&gt;that have continuous symmetry. The
modern moving frame theory &lt;br/&gt;developed by the PI has already witnessed
a remarkable range of new &lt;br/&gt;applications, including computer vision,
for object recognition and &lt;br/&gt;symmetry detection, a geometric approach
to classical algebra and &lt;br/&gt;invariant theory, as well as the design of
numerical integration schemes &lt;br/&gt;that preserve the underlying symmetry
of the problem to be solved. The &lt;br/&gt;combination of analytical,
geometrical, and numerical advances, coupled &lt;br/&gt;with practical
applications has proved to be a particularly potent blend of &lt;br/&gt;theory
and practical tools. This research project will continue the rapid
&lt;br/&gt;development and application of the moving frame method, concentrating
&lt;br/&gt;on theoretical developments tied to applications in computer vision,
in &lt;br/&gt;geometry and physics, and in symmetry-based numerical integration
&lt;br/&gt;methods&lt;br/&gt;