* 0103302
* NIRT:  Collaborative Research: Spin Transport and Dynamics in Nanoscale Hybrid-Structures
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* Jia Lu, Washington University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 07/31/2003
* USD 600,000.00

This Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team brings together expertise in
state-of-the-art spin-tunneling science with proven success in fabrication and
characterization of single-electron transistors. The goal here is to understand
science in spin-based nano-fabricated structures by probing the quantum states
and dynamics of spins on nano-sized islands, laying the foundation for a new
generation of ultra-fast and non-volatile electronics. This program begins with
the fabrication of simple nanostructures based on proven single-electron
transistor architecture and processing, with ferromagnetic electrode(s) to
inject polarized spins. These new nanoscale hybrid structures will be used to
test various theoretically predicted phenomena such as enhanced
magnetoresistance, single-electron charging effects, conductance oscillations,
and spin diffusion. One of the novel features of this effort is to inject fully
polarized spins into nonmagnetic materials such as carbon nanotubes, nonmagnetic
metals, and superconductors, by spin filtering through the use of a magnetic
semiconductor. Ultimately, the localization of a single-electron of controlled
spin in a highly sensitive nanostructure will enable novel and more versatile
spin-based devices, which so far is being pursued based on the behavior of large
numbers of spin-polarized electrons. This program represents an excellent
opportunity for the students (of all levels) involved being educated in the
nanoscience; participate in a true team effort with complementary and collective
goals. The students will work in multidisciplinary areas - physics, materials
science, and nano-devices, getting trained and educated in the spin-based
research laying the foundation for future technology, which is already in short
supply in the U.S. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The recognition of electron spin as
a binary variable analogous to its charge as currently used in semiconductors,
opened new fields of science and technology that have already led to commercial
devices, called spin electronics. This interdisciplinary team will address the
underlying fundamental science and engineering research issues that are critical
to the emerging field of nanoscale spin electronics (also called as
spintronics). In spite of the recent progress and potentially promising for
applications, the field of spintronics just beginning to unravel, (remains
largely unexplored) and requires extensive research efforts. The proposed
research (elucidating spin transport including spin tunneling and injection from
a ferromagnet into a nonmagnetic metal, superconductor or a semiconductor) holds
great promise for nanoscale science and future information technology. This aim
is supported by the investigation of promising new materials combinations for
spin transport and the development of powerful, innovative probes of spin
dynamics in nanostructures. This team, with complementary knowledge and
expertise - of physicists, material scientists and electrical engineers, will
efficiently address all the issues from the conceptual level to the near-device
stage. The proposed program will ultimately lead to novel spin electronic
devices that meet the criteria for low power, broadband, and ultra high density
including extremely powerful computers. Many PhD students, and importantly
undergraduates and high school students will take part in this program under the
guidance of the PIs and postdoctoral fellows. The training will generate future
scientists and engineers in high demands in the area of nano-science and spin-
based information technology to maintain the future technological prowess of the
country, critically necessary for the national security.
&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;