* 0103476
* NER:  Chemically Modified Nanotube Tips for Selective Imaging with Scanning Tunneling Microscopy
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2001,11/30/2002
* Philippe Buhlmann, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 11/30/2002
* USD 97,715.00

0103476&lt;br/&gt;Buhlmann&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was submitted in response to
the solicitation "Nanoscale Science and Engineering " (NSF 00-119)&lt;br/&gt;One
of the great challenges of nanotechnology is the development of techniques for
imaging of nanoobjects. This research develops the methodology to observe
surfaces at the molecular and atomic level with chemical selectivity. It is
based on the use of scanning tunneling microscope (STM) tips that chemically
interact with the sample surfaces of interest. STM has revolutionized surface
analysis because it allowsimaging with atomic resolution even in air and
liquids, where many other analysis methods fail. However, the limited ability
for chemical recognition, i. e., for discrimination between different types of
atoms or functional groups, is a weakness ofconventional scanning tunneling
microscopy. This problem can be solved by allowing an STM tip to interact
chemically with a sample.&lt;br/&gt;Recently, it has been shown that the
modification of gold tips with self-assembled monolayers or polypyrrole can be
used to selectively recognize functional groups that form hydrogen bonds.
Preliminary results have shown that this method is also able to distinguish
between functional groups that have different spatial orientations and to
differentiate different metal atoms. The working principle of STMwith chemically
modified tips resembles that of chemically modified electrodes in
electroanalytical chemistry. While in the former case electrons are transferred
between the STM tip and sample, the electron transfer in the latter caseoccurs
between the sensor electrode and a molecule in the sample solution. In both
cases, an overlap of the electronic wave functions of the electron-donating and
accepting side is required for the electron transfer.In the latter case, the
chemical modification of electrodes is used to control selected redox reactions.
In the STM case, an analogous enhancement of electron transfer by chemical tip
modification results in selective recognition of selected functional groups or
atoms in a surface image.&lt;br/&gt;To observe individual functional groups or
atoms on a sample, a chemically modified tip must interact chemically only with
one functional group of the sample at a time. Unfortunately, electrochemically
etchedand chemically modified metal tips that are sharp at the molecular level
cannot be produced with high reproducibility. Consequently, chemical
interactions between the sample and several interaction sites on chemically
modified tip used so far often occur simultaneously, impairing the resolution.
To obtain very high resolution, this project explores the use of chemically
modified carbon nanotubes as STM tips. Carbon nanotubesare ideally suited for
chemically modified STM tips. Carbon nanotubes have a cylindrical shape with
diameters that are typically between 0.8 and 15 nm. These extraordinarily small
diameters provide for very slender and atomically sharp tips. Also, the rigid
arrangement of the covalently linked carbon atoms that form a carbon nanotube
results in great stiffness under conditions that are typical for STM
imaging.&lt;br/&gt;In this project, carbon nanotubes will be chemically modified
in various ways and used to image well-understood test samples. The ability of
chemically modified carbon nanotube tips to distinguish between different
functional groups and atomsof the test samples will be investigated, and the
experimental parameters determining the resolution will be
studied.&lt;br/&gt;The unique ability of STM to characterize samples at
atmospheric pressure in liquids and gases, combined with the capability for
chemical selec-tivity, should make this technique a very generaltool for
nanosciences. Potential real-life applications are, for example, the
characterization of nanodevices, self-assembled structures, catalytic surfaces,
or electroanalytical sensor surfaces, as well asthe in-situ observation of
chemical reactions and biological processes.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;