* 0103825
* Modeling, Simulation and Analysis of Epitaxial Film Growth
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Timothy Schulze, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2004
* USD 76,000.00

DMS Award Abstract Award #: 0103825

PI: Schulze, Timothy Institution: University of Tennessee, Knoxville Program:
Applied Math Program Manager: Catherine Mavriplis

Title: Modeling, Simulation and Analysis of Epitaxial Film Growth

This proposal concerns the growth of epitaxial films. The simulation technique
and coarse-grained model discussed in this proposal are based on kinetic Monte-
Carlo (KMC) simulations, which are an established method of simulating crystal
growth on an atom-by-atom basis. While believed to be faithful to the micro-
scale physics, KMC simulations are extremely slow and there is a recognized need
for models appropriate for larger length and time scales. The first of the two
approaches discussed in this proposal is a new simulation technique referred to
as an Atomistic Difference Scheme. In this method, one assumes that the
distribution of atoms on the surface of the film is in near equilibrium and can
be computed by time-stepping difference equations derived directly from the KMC
transition probabilities. The topography of the crystal, on the other hand, is
assumed to evolve on a slower time-scale and is computed on a discrete basis
that conserves mass. The second approach seeks a homogenized, continuum version
of this micro-scale model. The continuum model takes the form of partial
differential equations that describe the system's evolution on macroscopic
length and time scales. A final component of this investigation considers the
application of these two methods to a continuous processing configuration where
substrate (a tape) is continuously passed through a deposition zone. The
continuously moving contact-line and its stability are of particular interest.

Epitaxial films are of vital technological importance in the semi-conductor
industry. As applications for high-temperature super-conductors (HTSC) develop,
epitaxial films hold still further promise, with extensive efforts under way to
produce HTSC wires and tapes that have enormous current-carrying capacities. At
the same time, the film growth process is a burgeoning source of inspiration for
applied mathematicians, requiring a wide range of mathematical techniques and
simulation tools to explore the behavior of these systems over an enormous range
of length scales. In particular, the research undertaken in this proposal seeks
to enhance our ability understand and control the nano-scale structure of
materials, placing a special emphasis on linking atomic-scale models with
traditional modeling approaches.

Date: June 22, 2001