* 0103516
* NIRT:  Creating Functional Nano-Environments by Controlled Self-Assembly
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2006
* Matthew Tirrell, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 07/31/2006
* USD 1,600,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0103516&lt;br/&gt;M.Tirrell, University of California-
Santa Barbara&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The work proposed here aims to
develop the science of spontaneously dividing three-dimensional space into
compartments, that is, into controlled environments, at the nanometer size
scale, in order to accomplish several engineering objectives. The objectives
include: controlled release of therapeutic agents (e.g., drugs, genetic
materials); controlled access to biofunctional components (switching or masking
activities when desirable); embedding biological signaling within 3D matrices
(nano-phase-separated block co-polypeptides decorated with targeting or "homing"
ligands) and using surface patterning and templating to produce novel or
tailored structures and environments. Four project areas encompass and organize
our overall plan: 1. Creating nano-environments via lipid encapsulation; 2.
Nano-environments from peptide amphiphiles; 3. Amphiphilic block copolypeptides
with hierarchical structures; 4. Patterned surfaces for self-assembly. The work
we will do is conceptually similar to creating artificial cells in the sense of
separating regions for different functions (without any attempt to build in
self-replication). We are aiming toward bio-mimetic structures for functions
that may not be naturally occurring, and that mimic or supply interesting
functionality. The kinds of functions we wish to incorporate vary from
biological (e.g., cell adhesion) to non-biological (e.g., fluid
connectivity).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The science we will pursue is the principle
of spontaneously creating compartments or confined regions with a definite
inside and outside. As a practical matter, this means delving deeper into
controlled formation of micelles, vesicles, domains, tubules and other
controlled regions, as part of larger assemblies of nanoscale components. We
will synthesize new lipid-like and macromolecular architectures to drive self-
assembly in ways that can encapsulate some species and exclude or display
others, controllably, on the interiors and exteriors, respectively, of defined
regions. Our research will produce new materials for biomedical applications,
new therapeutic approaches based on controllable binding and transport processes
and new ways of integrating biological structures with semiconductor fabricated
devices. Our core expertise includes extensive experience with lipid and
macromolecular structure and phase behavior, based on substantial ability to
synthesize new molecules. We have experience with assessing and influencing
biological activities and functions, ranging from cell adhesion, to drug
delivery and gene transfection, to the roles of metal ions in growth processes
and pathological conditions. Characterization expertise and facilities for all
of this work are readily available among the members of this collaboration:
electron microscopy (adapted in several ways for soft, wet, biological samples),
scanning probe nicroscopies, optical microscopy (with fluorescence, confocal,
interference and video capabilities), surface force measurements, x-ray and
neutron scattering, neutron reflectometry and organic
synthesis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interdisciplinary talents of this team are
essential to educate students broadly in the new fields of nanotechnology and
biotechnology. The five graduate students and one postdoctoral fellow supported
by this proposed grant will work in broad areas of the overall project where
interests of several groups overlap strongly. In this way, the students will
have continued exposure to the full interdisciplinary group of biochemists,
chemists, physicists, chemical engineers and materials scientists that make up
our team. An active effort is planned to attract a diverse population of
students to this project. We believe that the students and fellow trained in the
course of this research will be extraordinarily flexible in their talents, and
therefore exceptionally, well-prepared for careers in industry or universities,
because of the multiple advisor, multiple technique environment we will provide.
The PI and co-PI's will manage this project to continuously promote this
interdisciplinary approach in the selection of specific projects to be pursued.
The efforts from this project will feed new ideas, examples and practical
experience into a new laboratory-based course under development entitled,
"Biomaterials Preparation and Characterization".&lt;br/&gt;