* 0103169
* Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Teams (NIRT):  Superhard Nanostructured Films
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2006
* C Carter, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Charalabos C. Doumanidis
* 07/31/2006
* USD 1,525,000.00

This Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team (NIRT) project will be conducted
by a team that includes researchers on fracture micromechanics, characterization
of structure and interfaces, plasma technology, aerosol technology, and
microfabrication, together with collaborators at Los Alamos and Sandia National
Laboratories. Evidence from a number of studies suggests that it should be
possible to produce nano-crystalline composites that are superhard possessing
hardness rivaling diamond and that also possess other properties that make them
superior to diamond for applications requiring friction and wear resistance. A
novel approach is proposed for synthesizing such materials, based on plasma
synthesis and deposition of nanoparticles. The synthesis tool will be hypersonic
plasma particle deposition, in which nanoparticles nucleate in thermal plasma
and are then accelerated, in a hypersonic expansion, causing them to deposit by
high-velocity impact. Nanocomposite films will be deposited with grain sizes in
the range 5 to 10 nm, comprised of various combinations of the elements boron,
carbon, nitrogen, silicon and titanium. In separate experiments, aerodynamic
lenses will be used to focus the nanoparticles to collimated beams. These beams
will be used in conjunction with microfabrication techniques to demonstrate
fabrication of Micro-Electro-Mechanical System (MEMS) devices from
nanoparticles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These synthesis studies will be supported by
fundamental studies of structure-property relations. The structure,
crystallinity, chemical composition and deformation behavior of the synthesized
material will be characterized at length scales ranging from the atomic level to
individual nanosized grains, to interfacial regions, to the entire film. In
addition to these experimental studies, numerical simulations of nanoparticle
deformation at the atomistic scale will be performed in the context of both the
processing and the subsequent mechanical performance. The highly
interdisciplinary, highly interactive environment between two academic
departments, several laboratories, and collaborators from Los Alamos and Sandia
National Labs will provide graduate and undergraduate students with a breadth of
experience in nanomanufacturing and nano-materials characterization. In
additions, K-8 students involved in the NSF-supported ScienceWorks Program will
be provided the opportunity to experience this novel research area.&lt;br/&gt;