* 0103470
* NER:  A Novel Concept of Electrophoretic Separation of Long DNA Molecules with High Resolution at the Nanoscale Dimensions
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2001,11/30/2002
* Dilip Gersappe, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Douglas D. Frey
* 11/30/2002
* USD 100,000.00

Abstract &lt;br/&gt;CTS-0103470&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;NER: A Novel Concept for
Electrophoretic Separation of Long DNA Molecules with High Resolution at
Nanoscale Dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Vladimir A. Samuilov and Dilip
Gersappe&lt;br/&gt;State University of New York Stony
Brook&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recent advances in molecular biology
rely on improved techniques for the separation of long (multi-kilobasepairs and
megabasepairs) DNA molecules. Current methods employ electrophoresis of DNA
molecules in different sieving matrixes, such as junction points in a gel and
the entanglements in polymer solutions. Separation of DNA by size, in
particular, is at the heart of genome mapping and sequencing and is likely to
play an increasing role in diagnosis. There have been important advances in
fast-developing and innovative technology like elechophoresis on microchips. In
the implementation of micro-fabricated systems for electrophoresis based on
silicon technology, the interaction of DNA molecules with the surfaces of the
devices should be taken into account in analyzing the mechanisms of the
separation. This research introduces a novel approach to the liquid-solid
interface as the separation medium and to the mechanism of electrophoresis
itself at nanoscale dimensions. Also, a new concept of loading of the DNA sample
onto a microchip is considered. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Specifically the study
considers the electrical transport properties of long DNA molecules at a flat
liquid-semiconductor interface. One-dimensional positioning of DNA molecules on
a silicon surface is accomplished by a simple physical alignment process using
capillary forces applied by the receding front of an evaporating drop containing
DNA molecules. A diblock-copolymer system, self-assembled with L-B technique, is
used to produce patterns at the nanometer length scale, which are used as a
template for introducing metal nanopatterns on semiconductor surfaces to serve
as DNA separation media. Success in this effort will make possible more rapid
and more precise DNA analyses for a variety of applications and provide an
important new tool for genetic analyses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;