* 0103080
* NER:  Dynamic Behavior of Ligand-Receptor Interactions in Living Cells on the Nanoscale
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2003
* Rong Wang, Illinois Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Soo-Siang Lim
* 05/31/2003
* USD 99,945.00

This research project, supported by the Division of Integrative Biology and
Neuroscience, will be carried out by Dr. Rong Wang, Dr. Nickolas Menhart and
their students at the Illinois Institute of Technology. The target of the
research is to develop a novel approach that allows a real-time study of the
dynamic behavior of individual ligand-receptor pairs (typical size of several
nanometers) in the living cell environment. The essence of this approach is to
guide the tip of the atomic force microscope (AFM) to desired receptor proteins
regardless of the roughness and complexity on the cell membrane surface. Besides
imaging of biomolecules at the submolecular level under physiological
conditions, dynamic and kinetic processes of the biorecognition events can be
clarified on the nanoscale. The research will involve novel experiments aimed at
fundamental studies of single ligand-receptor interaction in the natural
environment. This will provide the molecular basis for biological activities and
molecular communications within cells. One of the promising applications is to
elucidate a vaccine or drug target at the particular cell-surface protein in a
diseased cell or an activator target in a growth cell. This revolutionary
approach shows strong promise to elevate the development of the fundamental
understanding of molecular functions in bioscience to an entirely new level, and
will stimulate progress in the study of biological and biologically inspired
systems in which nanostructures play an important role.