* 0103984
* Human Migration in Early Neolithic Europe
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* R Bentley, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 08/31/2003
* USD 77,666.00

With National Science Foundation support Drs. T. Douglas Price and R. Alexander
Bentley will continue their analysis of archaeological skeletons of the earliest
farmers in Central Europe. They will attempt to distinguish between two
hypotheses which account for the appearance of agriculture in Europe: the spread
of actual populations vs. the spread of ideas across essentially immobile
groups. Because agriculture appears suddenly in Central Europe and is
accompanied by a suite of other cultural items such as distinctive ceramic
styles, many archaeologists have accepted this as evidence of human migration.
Other researchers however have noted that humans are adaptable, can accept new
modes of behavior and that it may have been ideas rather than people which
moved. To select between these options Drs Price and Bentley will continue their
examination of isotope values in skeletons from relevant populations. The ratio
of two isotopes of strontium in bones and teeth provides a record of the
geological environment in which the person lived. Since bone tissue is replaced
continually over an individual's lifetime while the competition of teeth is set
at adolescence, a measured difference in the strontium isotope ratio between
bones and teeth can identify an immigrant. The foreign signal in an immigrant's
tooth can then be traced to a likely region of origin based on regional geology.

In their research to date, analyses have indicated that a mixture of the two
models best explains the skeletal data. These suggest that most likely a small
number of migrants may have initially brought farming into Europe, but its
adoption by indigenous Europeans also played a major role. To improve on these
preliminary finding the team will expand the analysis to a larger number of
skeletons. In order to create a baseline "map" of strontium and also lead
isotope signatures, the researchers will analyze archaeological animal teeth
collected from different geological provinces in regions adjacent to the study
area in southwestern Germany and eastern France. On this basis they hope to
identify immigrants' points of origin.

This research is important for several reasons. It will provide insight into an
important time period and seminal event in European prehistory. It will shed
light on the basic processes which drive culture change and help to develop an
analytic tool potentially applicable to a wide array of archaeological questions
in many parts of the world