* 0103381
* Dynamics in Time Dependent Continuous and Discrete Equations and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2005
* Wenxian Shen, Auburn University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2005
* USD 80,000.00

NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0103381 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical Sciences:
Dynamics in Time Dependent Continuous and Discrete Equations and Applications
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;DMS-0103381&lt;br/&gt;Wenxian
Shen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project investigates three aspects of
the dynamics of time dependent (specifically time quasi-periodic and almost
periodic) continuous and discrete equations: (i) traveling waves in time-
dependent evolution equations; (ii) asymptotic behavior of time-dependent
population models, and (iii) oscillatory dynamics for quasi- or almost periodic
oscillators and wave equations. In the first area, problems related to traveling
wave solutions in time dependent continuous and discrete equations of bistable
and Kolmogorov-Petrovskii-Piskunov types are studied. The second research topic
is focused primarily on uniform persistence, coexistence and convergence in time
dependent multi-species competition models. The third area concerns a general
study of oscillatory dynamics in quasi- or almost periodic oscillators and wave
equations through investigation of the existence and structure of attractors in
general quasi-periodically forced first-order "oscillators" as well as some
second order oscillators. The results of the project will enhance understanding
of dynamics in time-dependent continuous and discrete equations and will have
application to numerous physical and biological
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is very important to understand the asymptotic
behavior of solutions of nonautonomous differential equations, especially in
situations where the nonautonomous part depends on time in a roughly, but not
exactly, periodic way. Such equations are widely used as models for processes in
biology, chemistry, physics, and engineering. A deep understanding of such
almost-periodic or quasi-periodic equations will have a great impact on the
development of theory as well as on applications. The objective of the proposed
research is to investigate various aspects, of interest in applications, of the
solutions to such equations. The results of the project will have significant
impact for the analysis of a wide range of mathematical models that are based on
these equations.&lt;br/&gt;