* 0103399
* NIRT: Multiscale Simulation of the Synthesis, Assembly and Properties of Nanostructured Organic/Inorganic Hybrid Material
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2001,11/30/2002
* Sharon Glotzer, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 11/30/2002
* USD 1,050,000.00

This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science
and Engineering" (NSF-00-119). The resulting grant is co-funded by the Divisions
of Materials Research and Chemical and Thermal Systems. The proposed research
will be carried out at the Universities of Tennessee, Michigan and Virginia.
Also participating are NIST, Hybrid Plastics and Tal
Materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polyhedral oilgomeric silsesquioxane (POSS)
molecules are unique nanometer-sized structures. POSS molecules have a
polyhedral core which can be multifunctional and serve as platforms that can be
synthetically modified to contain groups for polymerization, adhesion, light
sensitization, binding catalyst species, and improved solubility. The ability to
independently functionalize each corner of a POSS cube with different organic or
inorganic groups confers a nearly infinite array of possible hybrid
nanostructures made of assemblies of POSS molecules. Depending on the
functionalization of the POSS cages, the resulting systems can be solid or
liquid, or on crosslinking turned into a network. They are a truly
nanostructured building block, which, through self-and guided-assembly, can be
transformed into a remarkable array of products, and due to recent breakthroughs
in rapid synthesis technology, are only just now becoming available to industry
on a commercial scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;While much is known experimentally
about the chemical synthesis of POSS systems, very little theoretical
understanding exists at the molecular level or beyond. In particular, the way in
which individual POSS molecules can be assembled and manipulated at the
nanoscale to form meso-and macro-scale systems has not been studied. In this
grant a multiscale computational framework will be developed to simulate the
synthesis and self-and guided-assembly of POSS systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In
order to address POSS systems at many levels, beginning at the quantum
mechanical through to the mesoscale and macroscopic, the principal investigators
(PI's) have the requisite expertise ranging from electronic structure
calculations to molecular simulation. This expertise will be applied to three
initial problems: (1) structure of cross-linked POSS networks; (2)
nanostructured phase prediction; and, (3) templated nanostructured thin films.
Feasible multiscale modeling routes to describing these systems have been
developed, based on the expertise and codes available among the PI's.
Modifications will be made as the modeling effort evolves. The simulation codes
developed will be in the public domain, documented in user manuals and technical
reports, and distributed to the user community. These techniques will enable the
prediction, essentially from first principles, of the physical and structural
properties of hybrid inorganic/organic nanostructured systems.
&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;