* 0103053
* NIRT:  Nanoscale Processes in the Environment:  Nanobiogeochemistry of Microbe/Mineral Interactions
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Susan Eriksson, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* David Lambert
* 08/31/2005
* USD 1,000,000.00

EAR-0103053&lt;br/&gt;Hochella&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The primary objective of
this research program is to observe and quantitatively characterize, on the
nanometer (10-9 meters) scale, the complex interactions that occur between
microorganisms (specifically bacteria) and minerals. These interactions are
ubiquitous in soils and rocks near the Earth's surface. We hypothesize that
microbe-mineral interactions, when studied directly at the nanoscale, will
result in the discovery of exotic behavior relative to current concepts and
models that seek to explain mineral-microbe association and dependence. In order
to accomplish our goal, we will depend heavily on biological force microscopy
(BFM), a variation of the atomic force microscope that we have developed in our
lab over the last two years. This technique, for the first time, allows for the
direct measurement of forces (both attractive/repulsive and adhesive) between
fully functional cells and any other substrate as a function of separation
distance. Reproducible and reliable measurements between bacteria and mineral
surfaces are readily obtained with nano- to pico (10-12)-Newton force resolution
while at the same time controlling their separation to the nanometer level. This
has already given us an unprecedented view of the intricacies on mineral-microbe
interaction as a function of water chemistry, microbial physiology, and surface
mineralogy. Practical application of this work includes the development of a new
generation of transport model for microorganisms in surface or subsurface
environments, using the wealth of nanoscale information obtained from our BFM
and associated measurements. Such models should be very useful in developing
more robust subsurface bioremediation strategies in the future. This proposal
was submitted in response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science and
Engineering" (NSF 00-119).&lt;br/&gt;