* 0103799
* Relaxation and Regularity Theory in the Calculus of Variations: Applications to Multiscale Problems, Thin Structures, and Magnetic Materials
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2004
* Irene Fonseca, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2004
* USD 233,740.00

DMS Award Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Award #: 0103799&lt;br/&gt;PI: Fonseca,
Irene&lt;br/&gt;Institution: Carnegie Mellon University &lt;br/&gt;Program:
Applied Mathematics&lt;br/&gt;Program Manager: Catherine
Mavriplis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Relaxation and Regularity Theory in the
Calculus of Variations: Applications to Multiscale Problems, Thin Structures,
and Magnetic Materials&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The general objective of this
project is the development of techniques in the calculus of variations,
geometric measure theory, and in the regularity theory for systems of partial
differential equations to address equilibrium and stability problems involving
both bulk and surface energies, and where the admissible fields develop fast,
multiple scale oscillations, and well as defect concentrations. The underlying
models include singularly perturbed energies, multiscale homogenization, shape
optimization for gradient-constrained functionals, and multiscale problems for
dimension reduction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research activity will be
motivated by contemporary issues in materials science and solid physics, where
the contribution of mathematicians has already paved the way to important
advances in the theoretical understanding of advanced materials and in high-
technology performance. Emerging issues require state-of-the-art techniques in
applied analysis, new ideas, and the introduction of innovative tools. The
program contemplates the study of phase transformations (e.g. nucleation and
growth of phases, dynamics of phase boundaries, multi-phase elasto-plastic
materials), micromagnetism and ferromagnetism, nanostructures and thin films,
optimal design of composites, and multiple scale
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Date: May 30, 2001&lt;br/&gt;