* 0103687
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant:  A Settlement System Model for the Central Alaska Peninsula Pacific Coast
* GEO,OPP
* 05/01/2001,04/30/2003
* Allen McCartney, University of Arkansas
* Standard Grant
* Anna M. Kerttula
* 04/30/2003
* USD 19,515.00

ABSTRACT FOR OPP-0103687&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A Settlement System Model for the
Central Alaska Peninsula Pacific Coast&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Allen P.
McCartney, Principal Investigator&lt;br/&gt;Patricia L. McClenahan, Co-
Investigator&lt;br/&gt;Department of Environmental Dynamics&lt;br/&gt;University
of Arkansas, Fayetteville&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The past 1,000 years witnessed
the transition of North Pacific hunter-gatherers from small, egalitarian family-
based groups to complex hunter-gatherers. The upper and lower Pacific coast of
the Alaska Peninsula, Kodiak, and the Aleutian Islands were intensely inhabited
prehistorically, and after 1,000 B.P. the residents were taking part in a
greater southwest Alaska cultural interaction sphere. However, there is little
information about the prehistoric and historic inhabitants of the central Alaska
Peninsula Pacific coast. The project will retrieve archaeological and
environmental data from the Portage Bay watershed. The goal is to better define
the central Alaska Peninsula with regard to subsistence and settlement
strategies compared to those of the greater Alaska Peninsula through time. The
project will utilize ethnohistoric and ethnographic data now being gathered
about the subsistence-settlement systems of the historic inhabitants of Portage
Bay. The project will contribute to recording and preserving the prehistoric and
historic traditions and cultural heritage of the Alutiiq people and others
&lt;br/&gt;