* 0103907
* Mathematical modeling and analysis of high precision sensors for polymer characterization
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* Gilberto Schleiniger, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2004
* USD 120,870.00

DMS Award Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Award #: 0103907&lt;br/&gt;PI: Schleiniger,
Gilberto&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Delaware&lt;br/&gt;Program:
Applied Mathematics&lt;br/&gt;Program Manager: Catherine
Mavriplis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: GOALI: Mathematical Modeling and Analysis
of High Precision Sensors for Polymer Characterization&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) research project
will address the mathematical modeling and analysis of piezoelectric transducers
for polymer characterization. The principal investigator and a graduate student
will work in cooperation with a researcher at DuPont to develop mathematical
models and corresponding analytical and numerical tools to describe the response
of thickness-shear mode resonators to contact with inhomogeneous viscoelastic
media, a critical step in developing piezoelectric based transducers into
operational chemical sensors. DuPont will participate in the development of the
models by providing access to experimental facilities, data and involvement of
the graduate student at the industrial site. The mathematical modeling is based
on boundary-value problems for the linear and nonlinear systems of partial
differential equations governing the physical processes at work in the sensor.
Both perturbation and numerical methods will be used to obtain results, simplify
the problem when appropriate, and to gain insight into special limiting cases.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The design of low-cost, high performance sensing systems
is of great interest both to research and commercial applications. Examples of
areas that can benefit from such systems are processing waste material from
mining and other industries which are of environmental concern, coating (e.g. in
the automotive industry as well as in medical applications), packaging (e.g.
food, medical) and pollution control sensors. This Grant Opportunities for
Academic Liaison with Industry (GOALI) research project will address the
mathematical modeling and analysis of sensors for polymer characterization. The
DuPont company will collaborate with the principal investigator and a graduate
student to develop models for the improvement of these sensors. The project will
benefit from this collaboration, including an industrial training opportunity
for the mathematics graduate student. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Date:
June 4, 2001&lt;br/&gt;