* 0103739
* Geometry and Dynamics in Riemannian and Finsler Spaces
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2001,11/30/2004
* Dmitri Burago, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Alexandre Freire
* 11/30/2004
* USD 202,750.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract for DMS - 0103739&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project can be
conditionally divided into the following (related) &lt;br/&gt;parts: Study of
periodic metrics (including area-minimizing properties &lt;br/&gt;of flats in
normed spaces, symplectic filling volumes for Finsler&lt;br/&gt;metrics,
asymptotic volume growth of Finsler tori, Riemannian metrics &lt;br/&gt;without
conjugate points on products, and Lagrangian systems on tori &lt;br/&gt;without
conjugate points); Relationship between bi-Lipschitz equivalence &lt;br/&gt;and
quasi-isometries (with the most intriguing cases of general Penrose
&lt;br/&gt;tilings and finitely presented groups, including co-compact lattices
in &lt;br/&gt;the same Lie group); Products of non-commuting maps, flows of
positive &lt;br/&gt;metric entropy, and sequential dynamics; Applications of
geometry of &lt;br/&gt;non-positive curvature to algorithmics and dynamics;
Geometry of &lt;br/&gt;non-negatively-curved manifolds (foliations by minimal
surfaces, &lt;br/&gt;isolated flat totally geodesic tori); the PI's graduate
students work &lt;br/&gt;on generalizations of the Finite Distance Theorem to
non-Abelian groups, &lt;br/&gt;approximations of embedded surfaces with small
variation of Gaussian &lt;br/&gt;curvature by developing surfaces, constructing
Lipschitz homeomorphisms &lt;br/&gt;with prescribed Jacobians, generating
certain groups by products of &lt;br/&gt;conjugates of elements from a bounded
subset.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first part of the project deals with
large-scale invariants of &lt;br/&gt;periodic metrics. Their physical analogs
are macroscopic properties of &lt;br/&gt;periodic media (such as a crystal
substance), and the problem is to &lt;br/&gt;understand how such properties can
be recovered from microscopic &lt;br/&gt;characteristics and vice versa. A large
part of the project belongs to &lt;br/&gt;a borderline between geometry and
dynamics, and in particular new &lt;br/&gt;applications of geometric methods.
For instance, problems of stability &lt;br/&gt;in sequential dynamics model
situations where the laws of evolution of &lt;br/&gt;an object (for instance, a
physical or an ecological system) are subject &lt;br/&gt;to small perturbations;
it is desirable to understand the result of such &lt;br/&gt;perturbations in the
large time scale. There are also applications of &lt;br/&gt;modern geometry of
singular spaces to problems originated from statistical &lt;br/&gt;physics (such
as estimates on the number of collisions of particles in &lt;br/&gt;gas models,
a problem that goes back to Boltzmann), and to computational &lt;br/&gt;problems
(such as: how to numerically find a shortest path between&lt;br/&gt;around
several obstacles). The last part of the project deals with &lt;br/&gt;stability
of geometric objects described by curvature-type &lt;br/&gt;characteristics.
Indeed, whenever we study a geometric object &lt;br/&gt;(for instance, a
surface), we deal with imprecise information. Thus it is &lt;br/&gt;important to
understand whether small deviations in this information &lt;br/&gt;can result in
crucial changes for the geometric object (or even a &lt;br/&gt;non-existence of
a model object).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;