* 0103676
* Postdoctoral:  Experiments in Security and Quality of Service in Mobile Systems
* CSE,CNS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* Bharat Bhargava, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Harriet Taylor
* 07/31/2003
* USD 66,000.00

EIA-0103676 Bhargava, Bharat. Purdue University

CISE Postdoctoral Associates in Experimental Computer Science: Experiments in
Security and Quality of Service in Mobile Systems

Disaster recovery after an emergency such as an earthquake, terrorist attack, or
war may depend on mobile systems for communications. Security and Quality of
Service (QoS) are of utmost importance. Providing security and QoS is a
difficult problem in mobile systems because the availability of network and
other resources may change as the mobile host fails, moves, or comes under
intentional or unintentional attack. Research on a technique to achieve fault-
tolerant mobile node authentication in an efficient way is proposed for a
postdoctoral research associate. Such a technique would eliminate single points
of failure, distribute loading, and enhance scalability and survivability, and
make failures transparent to users. A series of experiments are planned that
will evaluate this technique under a variety of variables and lead to the
development of new authentication and key management techniques. The associate
will 1) identify guidelines for authentication between an upstream domain and an
ingress router in a QoS enabled network, 2) evaluate various secure group
communication and access control techniques for suitability in wireless
communications, and 3) explore adaptability requirements when considering
security as a QoS parameter.

