* 0103817
* RUI: Phase Stability and Chromophore Reorientation in Photorefractive Polymer Composites
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* David McGee, Drew University
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 08/31/2005
* USD 133,857.00

This RUI project addresses photo-refractive macromolecular materials research
with emphasis on the synthesis and characterization of new chromophores with
appropriate non-linear optical response, and seeks to identify the relationship
between phase stability and chromophore reorientation in low-Tg (glass
transition temperature) photorefractive polymers. Photorefractive polymers
blended with nonlinear optical dye molecules exhibit relatively large refractive
index modulations due to spatial reorientation of the dye. An interdisciplinary
team of Drew University students and faculty from the Chemistry and Physics
departments will fabricate photorefractive polymers spanning a range of
materials behavior by synthesizing dye molecules of relatively similar optical
properties but considerably different interactions with the host polymer. The
phase stability of each composite will be observed through measurements of the
time dependent optical absorption coefficient. The refractive index modulation
will be determined by diffraction efficiency measurements, and the relative
orientational mobility of the dyes will be inferred through frequency dependent
transmission ellipsometry. This data will be used to delineate boundaries of the
phase-stability/orientational-mobility tradeoff, and to improve understanding of
dye-polymer interactions and the design of blends suitable for
applications.&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;An important feature of the program is
the integration of research and education through the training of students in a
fundamentally and technologically significant area. All of the materials
fabrication and optical characterization will occur at Drew University in
chemistry and laser laboratories. These laboratories have been developed in part
through an NSF-ILI grant "Materials science and nonlinear optics in physics and
chemistry laboratories" and represent an ongoing effort to integrate the
fabrication and characterization of nonlinear optical materials with Drew
undergraduate instructional labs. The experiments are tabletop in scale and
expose students to the photonic and electronic technology valued by employers
and graduate schools. Students will also have the opportunity to study the
holographic image storage properties of the materials they fabricate through a
collaboration between the principal investigator and Dr. G. Wood of the Army
Research Lab. The research is intellectually accessible to undergraduates,
giving them a sense of ownership in their work. This RUI award will support six
summer research students over three years, and will provide equipment support
for Honors and Independent Study projects during the academic year. Results will
be disseminated in peer-reviewed research literature with student co-authors and
presented at professional meetings. &lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;