* 0103036
* Crystal Chemistry
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2001,11/30/2004
* Michael O'Keeffe, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* David Nelson
* 11/30/2004
* USD 413,880.00

This project aims to systematically evaluate and describe the structures that
arise from packings (including low density ones) of simple geometrical objects
such as spheres, polyhedra and cylinders. These will be evaluated for their
utility as the basis for designed crystal structures. A complementary study will
be the systematic evaluation of the topology of known periodic (crystal)
structures to determine how they are related to the geometric packings. A
product of this work will be a database of known structures that can be used to
identify the topologies of new materials. Also, methods for the determinations
of crystal structures of materials for which crystal size is too small for
single crystal X-ray diffration will be developed. Techniques for combining
electron diffraction with X-ray powder diffraction, and with libraries of
possible topologies for structure analysis will also be developed. Experimental
work will be focused on the synthesis of novel 3- and 4-connected oxide and
oxyhalide frameworks using unusual combinations of elements such as boron either
alone or in combination with heavier metals. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;A program
to develop the experimental and theoretical basis for designing and synthesizing
new classes of inorganic materials with novel properties has significant
potential for high impact in important areas of high national interest,
including areas such as new optical, semiconducting, and structural materials of
high interest to industry. A unique aspect to this research is the active
interplay of the theoretical and experimental components of solid state chemical
research to optimize the search for important new materilas.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;