* 0103012
* NER:  Microarray Devices of Aligned Carbon Nanotubes for Biological/Biomedical Research
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* Tsu-Wei Chou, University of Delaware
* Standard Grant
* Venkata Mulpuri
* 07/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This proposal was received in response to NSE, NSF-0019. The goal of the
research is to explore the potential application of carbon nanotubes for greatly
enhancing the efficiency of existing microarray devices in biological/biomedical
research. The proposed work will synthesize arrays of well-aligned carbon
nanotubes that can be used to transfer biomolecules from the tips of the
nanotubes for creating microarrays at a level of packing density not achievable
by current techniques. Carbon nanotubes are uniquely suited for this application
owing to their extremely high elastic modulus and strength as well as
exceptional capability in sustaining large nonlinear elastic
deformation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a preliminary feasibility study of a
novel idea in nanoscience and engineering with focuses on nanoscale devices and
systems architecture, and modeling and simulation at the nanoscale. The effort
is likely to catalyze rapid advances in biological/biomedical
research.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objectives of this exploratory research are
to (a) better understand the growth of aligned carbon nanotubes for achieving
optimal control of their length, diameter, and packing density &lt;br/&gt;in
microarrays, (b) better understand the structures and performance of individual
nanotubes &lt;br/&gt;as well as microarrays through microscopic and mechanical
characterizations, (c) initiate computational mechanics effort at both the
continuum and atomistic levels for modeling the &lt;br/&gt;nano-structure,
chirality, and mechanical behavior of nanotubes, (d) develop the tools and
criteria for assessing the performance of this novel microarray device for
biological/biomedical research, and (e) evaluate the feasibility of the
nanotube-based microarray devices.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is expected that this
project will advance microarray technology to enable more rapid study by
biological and biomedical investigators in areas of genetic research.
Ultimately,this technology may result in advancements in the study and treatment
of human disease. Fundamentalinvestigations on synthesis, characterization, and
property modeling of carbon nanotubes will benefit the technology of nanotube
synthesis and engineering. Better understanding of nanotube growth mechanisms
will enable improved synthesis and control of the nanotube structure.
Development of structure/property models for mechanical behavior of carbon
nanotubes, along with synthesis/structure relationships, will ultimately provide
a tool for engineering their mechanical properties.&lt;br/&gt;