* 0103952
* Synthesis and Properties of Mesostructured Thin Films
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2007
* Bruce Dunn, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* David Nelson
* 06/30/2007
* USD 770,000.00

This project concerns the synthesis and properties of mesostructured thin films
of metal oxides based on surfactant and block copolymers as the structure-
directing agents. A central concept involves the chemically different and
spatially separated regions of the mesostructure. On the molecular level, the
mesostructures consist of two distinct regions: the "framework" that is formed
by the sol-gel metal oxide, and the "organic" region that is formed by the
template. The project contains two complementary objectives. The first objective
is to deliberately place dopants in specified regions of transparent
mesostructured silica. The location of specific molecules will be characterized
by optical spectroscopy, and the spatial relationships between multiple dopants
will be probed by energy transfer. The second objective is to synthesize
semiconductor frameworks in mesostructured films and to characterize their
formation processes. Mesostructured films of tin dioxide will be synthesized and
optical probes will be used to monitor and interpret the dynamics of both
micelle and metal oxide framework formation. The optical methods to be used
provide 50 nm resolution of the dynamic transformations taking place in a time
frame of a few seconds over film dimensions of several centimeters. The
experiments are directed at determining the evolution that occurs from the
dissolved "unimer" (individual dissolved copolymer molecules) to the micelle to
the mesostructured metal oxide film. These dynamic measurements will correlate
the chemical changes and structural development occurring as the film is
deposited. The second set of experiments will monitor the development of the
semiconductor framework. Electron transport in mesostructured films will be
measured and interpreted. %%% The prospects for creating mesostructured films
with unique electrical and optical properties. The development of these novel
materials will have a significant impact on the fields of optical physics, and
device areas such as sensors for medical applicatons (e.g., implants and in vivo
and in vitro biosensors). Students trained in these areas will compete very
favorably in the job market. This project is to be funded jointly by the
Chemistry Division and the Division of Materials Research.