* 0103945
* Scanning Probe Microscopy Studies of Polycrystalline and Nanocrystalline Semiconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,05/31/2006
* Thomas Kuech, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 05/31/2006
* USD 393,799.00

This project addresses materials issues in polycrystalline, semiconductor
materials, with emphasis on the dominating influence which interfaces and grain
boundaries have on film properties. Project goals are: to develop a new,
comprehensive approach to polycrystalline film characterization based on
exploring chemical, electronic, and optical properties of individual
crystallites within a film, and to apply this approach to understanding and
improving polycrystalline CdTe and GaAs for electronics and photonics
applications such as displays and high efficiency solar cells. The approach
utilizes scanning probe techniques including low temperature NSOM PL and AFM
measurements of surface potential on polycrystalline films. This information
will be correlated with that from other techniques such as scanning Auger
spectroscopy, XPS, STM and transport measurements. CdTe has been chosen because
existing approaches allow films with good minority carrier properties to be
prepared making it a potential model system to study in terms of finding general
methods for improving polycrystalline materials. High quality polycrystalline
films of GaAs have been more problematic. Studies of GaAs and related III-V
materials will be directed at characterizing the effects on electronic and
optical performance of novel approaches for improving minority carrier
properties. Success with this system would have important technological
implications given the broad technological base which exists for III-V
materials. Numerical modeling of NSOM excitation in the presence of surfaces and
grain boundaries is included. As the study proceeds, information from these
investigations will be fed back into the film growth processes to test results
and, ultimately, to improve film quality. %%% The project addresses basic
research issues in a topical area of materials science with high technological
relevance. These studies will improve fundamental understanding of factors
limiting the efficiency of displays and solar cells. An important feature of the
program is the integration of research and education through the training of
students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area. The project is
designed to develop strong technical, communication, and
organizational/management skills in students through unique educational
experiences made possible by a forefront research environment. There will be
active involvement of undergraduates in the program and formal emphasis on
developing effective oral and written communication skills. A new
microelectronic processing course will provide students with expertise in
materials preparation and processing. Collaboration of CSM students with
students at the University of Wisconsin will be an additional, valuable,
learning opportunity. ***