* 0103232
* NER:  Construction of Bioactive Nanoparticles and Investigation of the Relationship Between Particle Size and Enzyme Activity
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2001,01/31/2003
* Ping Wang, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 01/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

Enzymes are the catalysts that effect chemical transformations in biological
world. The wide application of enzyme-based technologies is viewed as an
important strategy to develop green industries that are energy-efficient and
environment-benign. Immobilized enzymes, which are usually prepared by attaching
enzymes to solid materials, are preferred in industries due to the ease of reuse
and extended lifetime. Among other properties, the size of the solid materials
is critical in determining the effective content and availability of attached
enzymes. Accordingly, nano-sized particles provide the upper limits of the
performance of immobilized enzymes. &lt;br/&gt;Currently, however, not much
knowledge regarding the preparation and behaviors of bioactive nanoparticles is
available. The feasibility of a unique process for the construction of enzyme-
bearing nanoparticles will be examined in this research. The assumption is that
enzyme molecules grafted with hydrophobic polymer chains will function as
surfactants, and can selectively assemble at oil-water interfaces if applied to
a microemulsion polymerization system. This mechanism will lead the enzyme to be
covalently attached to the external surface of the resulted nanoparticles.
&lt;br/&gt;In addition to the development of high performance nano biocatalysts,
intent is also to shed light on mechanisms governing their catalytic behaviors.
Like free enzyme molecules, nanoparticles exhibit Brownian motion. That means
the attached enzymes are not immobilized, but with restrained mobility. This
consideration points to an interesting transitional region bridging those of
free and immobilized enzymes. Current theories appear to be difficult to cover
such a transitional region. For example, the collision theory fails to provide a
reliable prediction on the impact of particle size on enzyme activity. This
project will probe the validity of classical theories for such size-activity
relationships, thus inspire future theoretical studies regarding nano
biocatalysts. Results from this study will also help to understand a much
broader range of fundamental issues in other areas, such as the behaviors of
aggregated proteins in biological systems, nano-size drug delivery devices, and
biomedical diagnostic and drug-targeting
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;