* 0103889
* Topology &amp; Dynamics of Moduli Spaces of Geometric Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2004
* William Goldman, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2004
* USD 214,214.00

DMS-0103889&lt;br/&gt;William M. Goldman&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
continues the PI's investigation of locally &lt;br/&gt;homogeneous geometric
structures on manifolds, their moduli &lt;br/&gt;spaces and their symmetries.
The holonomy correspondence &lt;br/&gt;relates moduli of geometric structures to
the representation &lt;br/&gt;theory of the fundamental group. The primary
geometric &lt;br/&gt;structures of this investigation include conformally flat
&lt;br/&gt;Lorentz and Riemannian structures, real projective and affine
structures, and real and complex hyperbolic structures. &lt;br/&gt;Dynamical
questions concerning both the action of the &lt;br/&gt;fundamental group,
various flows (including and generalizing&lt;br/&gt;the geodesic, horocycle and
frame flows) and the automorphisms &lt;br/&gt;of the moduli space will be
studied. The close interaction &lt;br/&gt;between the dynamics of the mapping
class group and the &lt;br/&gt;global topology of the moduli space is especially
notable. &lt;br/&gt;The moduli spaces often possess symplectic structures which
&lt;br/&gt;lead to important and mysterious algebraic constructions,
&lt;br/&gt;such as the Lie algebra based on curves in a smooth
surface.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These objects play an increasingly important role
both &lt;br/&gt;in mathematics and physics. Lorentzian manifolds arise as
&lt;br/&gt;cosmological models in relativity. Moduli spaces have become
&lt;br/&gt;central in quantum physics, and mapping class group actions
&lt;br/&gt;and Teichmuller space have become prominent in 2-dimensional
&lt;br/&gt;quantum gravity. This study lies in the interface between
geometry/topology, dynamical systems, analysis and algebra. &lt;br/&gt;Despite
their complicated nature, the examples studied are&lt;br/&gt;extremely explicit.
Thus one can profitably investigate &lt;br/&gt;them experimentally. Our current
computer technology is &lt;br/&gt;appropriate for such projects. With Dr.
Richard Schwartz &lt;br/&gt;and the support of the University of Maryland
Mathematics &lt;br/&gt;Department, the Experimental Geometry Lab has been
operating &lt;br/&gt;for over a year. This lab has included software projects
&lt;br/&gt;performed by postgraduates, graduate students, and especially
undergraduates.&lt;br/&gt;