* 0103455
* NIRT:  Molecular Nanomagnets: Magnetic and Electronic Properties of Novel Magnetic Nanostructures and Nanostructured Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2006
* Glenn Agnolet, Texas A&M Research Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 07/31/2006
* USD 1,720,000.00

This research focuses on synthesis of nanoscale magnetic molecules whose
magnetic and electrical properties can be tailored by design, and on techniques
to "wire" these molecular magnets together to create new nanostructures and
nanostructured magnetic materials. The impact of these nanostructured materials
on material science may be comparable to that of fullerenes and nanotubes. The
studies will focus on high-symmetry molecules, for which phenomena associated
with quantum coherence (resonance effects, high magnetic susceptibility,
generation of radiation with adjustable frequency) can be observed at reasonable
temperatures. Research goals include: 1) designing and synthesizing new magnetic
nanoscale molecules; 2) understanding the quantum properties of these large-
magnetic-moment molecules; 3) assembling new nanostructures from these molecular
building blocks that will exhibit magnetic and electronic effects useful for a
new type of electronics based on electronic spin; 4)understanding the
interaction of these molecules in complex nanostructures. Graduate students will
learn state-of-the-art technology and develop skills that prepare them for
careers in industry, academia or government. Selected high school, junior
college and four-year college teachers will participate in the research in
outreach efforts.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on synthesis of
nanoscale magnetic molecules whose magnetic and electrical properties can be
tailored by design, and on techniques to "wire" these molecular magnets together
to create new nanostructures and nanostructured magnetic materials. Research
goals include: 1) designing and synthesizing new nanoscale magnetic molecules;
2) understanding the quantum properties of these large-magnetic-moment
molecules; 3) assembling new nanostructures from these building blocks that will
be useful for a new type of electronics based on electronic spin; 4)
understanding the interaction of these molecules in complex nanostructures. This
project will establish foundations for a new spin electronics technology with
potential applications in data storage, mobile communications and quantum
computing. Graduate students will learn state-of-the-art technology, and develop
skills that prepare them for careers in industry, academia or government.
Selected high school, junior college and four-year college teachers will
participate in the research in outreach efforts.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;