* 0103862
* Topology of Nonisolated Singularities and Scale-based Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2001,12/31/2004
* James Damon, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 12/31/2004
* USD 84,507.00

DMS-0103862&lt;br/&gt;James N. Damon&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Damon's
research will apply infinitesimal and &lt;br/&gt;stratification methods from
singularity theory to investigate&lt;br/&gt;the topology and deformation
properties of a general class of &lt;br/&gt;highly nonisolated singular spaces.
These spaces arise as &lt;br/&gt;nonlinear sections of certain natural universal
varieties. &lt;br/&gt;For instance, geometric and deformation properties of
mappings &lt;br/&gt;under various equivalences can be captured by such universal
&lt;br/&gt;varieties. The structure of the tangent vector fields will be
&lt;br/&gt;used to deduce algebraic formulae for certain fundamental
&lt;br/&gt;topological invariants. These will be given in terms of
&lt;br/&gt;certain natural algebraic and geometric multiplicities,
&lt;br/&gt;measuring the singular behavior of mappings relative to
&lt;br/&gt;associated geometric structures such as foliations Second,
&lt;br/&gt;he will refine these ideas for questions in computer imaging
&lt;br/&gt;by developing geometric structures associated to objects and
&lt;br/&gt;features in images in terms of such highly singular spaces.
&lt;br/&gt;The presence of discreteness, noise, and distortions in images
&lt;br/&gt;require a "scale-based geometry" which is applicable to
nondifferentiable functions, measures, and even distributions. &lt;br/&gt;Such a
geometry will apply to "almost all" objects in a given &lt;br/&gt;type, and will
yield stable geometric structures in scale space. &lt;br/&gt;This will allow the
geometric analysis of images using functions &lt;br/&gt;and measures
discriminating various features in images.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first part
of Professor Damon's research will determine &lt;br/&gt;for specific types of
systems of nonlinear equations, the &lt;br/&gt;qualitative properties of the set
of solutions. These can be &lt;br/&gt;obtained from certain universal systems of
equations. He &lt;br/&gt;proposes to use certain infinitesimal symmetries of the
&lt;br/&gt;equations to deduce properties of the set of solutions &lt;br/&gt;in
terms of algebraic invariants which reflect both properties &lt;br/&gt;of the
universal equations and how the specific equations &lt;br/&gt;relate to the
universal ones. Second, the research will be &lt;br/&gt;applied to problems in
computer imaging. To objects and &lt;br/&gt;features in images, one may
associate geometric structures &lt;br/&gt;capturing their properties for various
imaging purposes. &lt;br/&gt;Such structures are defined using systems of
equations as &lt;br/&gt;above. The presence of discreteness, noise and
distortions &lt;br/&gt;in images interferes with identifying geometric features.
&lt;br/&gt;The research will refine the methods described above via
&lt;br/&gt;"scale-based" versions which introduce robust geometric
&lt;br/&gt;structures overcoming these difficulties, which can then
be&lt;br/&gt;used for a variety of computer imaging
problems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;