* 0103104
* Non-uniform sampling and reconstruction:Theory and algorithms
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Akram Aldroubi, Vanderbilt University
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2005
* USD 147,500.00

Aldroubi&lt;br/&gt;0103104&lt;br/&gt; The investigator and his colleagues
develop a mathematical&lt;br/&gt;framework and fast computational schemes for
the reconstruction&lt;br/&gt;of functions, signals or images from noisy, very
large sampled&lt;br/&gt;data sets, acquired on nonuniform grids, by nonideal
acquisition&lt;br/&gt;devices. The problem of nonuniform sampling and
reconstruction&lt;br/&gt;is treated in the context of shift-invariant subspaces,
Besov&lt;br/&gt;spaces, and in arbitrary dimensions. The theory is developed
for&lt;br/&gt;the case when the samples are obtained from weighted
averages.&lt;br/&gt;Density conditions for exact reconstruction are established.
When&lt;br/&gt;the data are noisy, incomplete, or when the assumptions
needed&lt;br/&gt;for exact reconstruction are not satisfied, bounds on the
error&lt;br/&gt;between the reconstructed and original signal are derived
in&lt;br/&gt;terms of the sampling densities, the averaging functionals,
and&lt;br/&gt;the noise statistics. The development of the
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;framework and the computational schemes requires a new
set of&lt;br/&gt;techniques and ideas, and involves several areas of
mathematics&lt;br/&gt;including wavelet theory, frame theory, functional
analysis, and&lt;br/&gt;harmonic analysis.&lt;br/&gt; The project is motivated
by problems arising in data&lt;br/&gt;transmission, geophysical exploration,
astronomy, spectroscopy,&lt;br/&gt;and biomedical imaging. The problem of
reconstructing a signal or&lt;br/&gt;an image from a set of nonuniform samples
is encountered in many&lt;br/&gt;applications of signal or image processing. For
example, the loss&lt;br/&gt;of data packets during transmission through internet
or from&lt;br/&gt;satellites can be viewed as a nonuniform sampling
and&lt;br/&gt;reconstruction problem. In geophysical exploration, the
earth's&lt;br/&gt;magnetic field is measured by a combination of airborn,
fast&lt;br/&gt;moving acquisition devices, as well as scattered
stationary&lt;br/&gt;devices resulting in highly nonuniform sampling patterns,
and a&lt;br/&gt;huge data set. The goal is to reconstruct the magnetic field
and&lt;br/&gt;use it to reveal geological features. In fact, modern
digital&lt;br/&gt;data processing of signals or images always uses a
sampled&lt;br/&gt;version of the original analog signals or images. However,
the&lt;br/&gt;sampling devices are never ideal, and the collected data
consist&lt;br/&gt;of average samples. Moreover these data are often very
large,&lt;br/&gt;incomplete, and corrupted by noise. The question then
arises&lt;br/&gt;whether and how the original signal can be recovered from
the&lt;br/&gt;data. Therefore the investigator aims to 1) quantify
the&lt;br/&gt;conditions under which it is possible to reconstruct a
signal&lt;br/&gt;exactly from different sets of nonuniform average-samples; 2)
use&lt;br/&gt;these analytical results to develop explicit, and
computationally&lt;br/&gt;efficient reconstruction schemes; and 3) analyze the
performance&lt;br/&gt;of the algorithms under adverse conditions, or when the
data are&lt;br/&gt;incomplete or corrupted by noise. The development of a theory
and&lt;br/&gt;algorithms that perform well under stringent and
realistic&lt;br/&gt;situations will help the analysis, processing and management
of&lt;br/&gt;very large data sets obtained digitally by new
acquisition&lt;br/&gt;modalities, and transmitted or received by communication
networks&lt;br/&gt;such as the internet, cellular phones, and other
distributed&lt;br/&gt;communication systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;