* 0103009
* NIRT:  Nanostructured Optoelectronic Materials: New Concepts in Theoretical Design, Synthesis, and Processing
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2005
* William Steier, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 05/31/2005
* USD 1,630,000.00

This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science
and Engineering" (NSF 00-119). The project addresses theoretical methods to
design new families of nanostructured building blocks and to guide the assembly
of these blocks into mesoscale lattices. Dendritic and molecular self-assembly
synthetic techniques will be used to implement theoretically-inspired nanoscale
structures. Novel 3-D circuit fabrication techniques will be employed to pattern
materials on both the nano and mesoscales to achieve integration of nanoscale
materials with traditional micron scale optics and electronics. Equilibrium
statistical mechanics and kinetic Monte Carlo theoretical methods, relevant to
treating long-range and spatially-anisotropic intermolecular electrostatic
interactions, will be refined and implemented. Theory will be used to guide
design of the shape of nanoscale molecular objects to permit realization of
highly-ordered mesoscale acentric molecular lattices. Such organic lattices do
not occur naturally but are critical to device-related phenomena of electro-
optic (EO) activity, unimolecular rectification, and photorefraction. Kinetic
Monte Carlo calculations will also be employed to investigate nanoscale phase
separation and molecular ordering phenomena and to guide the development of
processing conditions relevant to the realization of optimized nanostructured
acentric material lattices. Precisely sized and shaped nanoscale dendrimers
permit inhibition of unwanted intermolecular electrostatic interactions and the
realization of a wide range of desired auxiliary properties. Included are low
optical loss at telecommunication wavelengths, high thermal and photochemical
stability of induced acentric molecular order (electro-optic activity), and
processability that permits the fabrication of buried channel EO waveguides and
the integration of such waveguides with VLSI electronics and with fiber optics.
Second order nonlinear optical chromophores (required for EO activity) can be
assembled into a variety of dendrimer structures including those containing
multiple chromophores. The operation of dendrimer-based EO devices requires half
the drive voltages and extends to twice the bandwidth of current commercial
lithium niobate devices. EO dendrimers can be constructed using fluorinated and
cyanurate dendrons, which reduce optical loss at 1.55 microns telecommunications
wavelength to 0.1-0.2 dB/cm. Use of such dendrons also permits precise control
of material refractive index relevant to circuit integration. Surface
functionalization of dendrimers with crosslinkable moieties can lead to
materials with exceptional thermal and photochemical stability. EO chromophore-
containing dendrimers will be assembled into electro-optic materials by a
variety of methods including sequential assembly and self-assembly methods;
however, the primary method employed for such assembly will be electric field
poling. Once prepared, dendrimer-based EO materials will be fabricated by
reactive ion etching, two-photon lithography and multi-color lithography into
3-D passive/active optical circuitry, which will be integrated with
semiconductor VLSI drive electronics and silica transmission fibers. Organic EO
materials will also be integrated with photonic bandgap structures and with
controlled-birefringence block copolymer and layered organic materials to
realize special device performance. A variety of devices, including spatial
light modulators, phased array radars, ultra high bandwidth signal sources and
detectors, etc., will be fabricated and evaluated. &lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The
project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of materials science
with high technological relevance. The proposed research and the format of
education/technology exchange contribute to positive economic and social
impacts. An integrated research/education program based on an undergraduate
student/graduate student/faculty team will be implemented building upon
experience NSF-IGERT, NSF-EEC, UW UIF Nanotechnology Center, and UW
international exchange programs. A new course will be offered to permit wider
dissemination of specialized nano-engineering tools developed in this
research/education program. Extensive interactions exist with industry,
government laboratories, and international research centers. The project is co-
supported by the DMR/EM, ECS/PFET, and EEC Divisions.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;