* 0103447
* Protein Logic
* MPS,CHE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Jeffrey Moore, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 08/31/2006
* USD 1,150,000.00

Divisions of Chemistry, Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, Chemical Transport
Systems, Computer-Communications Research, and Experimental and Integrated
Activities support this multidivisional award to University of Illinois Urbana-
Champaign. This Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team (NIRT) award is part
of the Nanoscale Science and Engineering program. Under this project, an
interdisciplinary team with Joseph Lyding as the principal investigator will
develop protein-based logic chips that interfaces between biochemical reactions
and conventional microfabricated silicon-based electronics such as metal-oxide
semiconductor (MOSFETs) taking advantage of biocomplexity and electronic speed.
These protein interfaced MOSFETs will help to create atomically accurate protein
arrays to function as cellular nonlinear/neural network, and this in turn will
help to over come the 100 nm limit in miniaturization of the present transistor
technology. Industrial collaborations and outreach programs in the K-12 system
will be part of the project. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Under the award, ordered and
atomically accurate protein arrays that interfaces between biochemical reactions
and conventional microfabricated silicon-based electronics will be developed.
Strong industrial collaboration will help in the industrial development and
technology transfer of this science. In addition, the research program will
provide multidisciplinary education and training opportunities in materials
chemistry, protein chemistry and electronics to students from K-12 to post
doctoral candidates.