* 0103118
* NER:  Nanoparticle Deposition and Implantation:  Exploratory Research into a New Method for Making and Modifying Thin Films
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* Brian Genge, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 07/31/2003
* USD 100,000.00

0103118 Myrick This proposal was received in response to the solicitation
"Nanoscale Science and Engineering" (NSF 00-119).

This project will explore a novel technique for film formation and implantation
that is applicable to vacuum processing of polymers and low-vapor-pressure
organic materials. This approach uses accelerated nanoparticles to create films
from materials that ordinarily require non-vacuum processing (such as spin-
casting) and are thus incompatible with most integrated circuit/semiconductor
processing methods.

Nanoparticles will be injected into a vacuum chamber by a particle beam
interface that employs a supersonic free jet expansion and an electron impact
ionization system to charge and accelerate the particles. We will explore
whether this interface can be used to deposit nanoparticles with sufficient
kinetic energy to instanteously melt the materials on impact. It is hoped that
the use of nanoparticles may keep the energy density of the material below the
point at which the primary chemical nature of the particle is irreversibly
altered.

Nanoparticles deposited by settling and acceleration onto surfaces will be
studied with surface spectroscopies, probe microscopy and temperature-programmed
desorption mass spectroscopy. These studies will inform us about the nature of
the materials deposited, whether the nanoparticles have been damaged by
deposition/melting, and about the morphologies of the deposits.

Molecular dynamics simulations will be performed to develop understanding that
may lead to control of deposition. These simulations will be based on the
classical method of molecular dynamics simulations by mixing sophisticated many-
body potentials with simple pairwise potentials. ***