* 0103354
* NIRT:  Artificially Engineered Nanoscale Ferroelectrics
* MPS,DMR
* 06/01/2001,02/28/2006
* Xiaoqing Pan, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 02/28/2006
* USD 1,602,127.00

0103354&lt;br/&gt;Schlom&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The technical objective of our
NIRT is to understand the fundamental science underlying the structural,
dielectric, and optical response of artificially-engineered nanoscale
ferroelectrics, which can be drastically different from that of conventional
homogeneous ferroelectrics. Using "first-principles effective Hamiltonian"
approaches (based on lattice Wannier functions) and Landau-Ginzburg-type
phenomenological methods, we will predict the effect of one-dimensional
composition and strain gradients, and mechanical and electrical boundary
conditions on the appearance and stability of the spontaneous polarization in
these systems and on the modifications of ferroelectric domain structures. These
predictions will be compared against observations on corresponding
nanostructures (made by reactive MBE) of perovskite ferroelectrics in which
composition and strain are varied in one direction. The resulting films will be
characterized via a combination of TEM, x-ray diffraction (including synchrotron
studies), Raman spectroscopy, second harmonic generation, dielectric property
measurements as a function of electric field and temperature, and piezoelectric
and pyroelectric techniques and compared with corresponding theoretical
predictions in order to refine our understanding of nanoscale ferroelectrics.
Composition and strain gradients in ferroelectric films will be investigated as
a means to incorporate new functionalities: enhanced dielectric and pyroelectric
responses, as well as a variety of novel optical
properties.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;For over 30 years molecular beam epitaxy
(MBE) has been used to build up layered semiconductor nanostructures atom-by-
atom to investigate and improve our understanding of semiconductor physics and
create new devices. These devices (which include laser diodes, high-performance
transistors, and magnetic field sensors) have advanced healthcare, national
security, communications, entertainment, and transportation-resulting in
significant improvements in the quality of life for all Americans. Recent
progress in research has demonstrated that this same atom-by-atom synthesis
technique can be used to build up nanostructures of oxides, including
ferroelectrics, with comparable nanometer-scale layering control. Since
ferroelectric materials exhibit a wide variety of electrical, optical, and
electromechanical properties, they are extensively used in healthcare (e.g.,
medical ultrasound), national defense (e.g., night vision and sonar systems),
and communications (e.g., miniature capacitors for cell phones and computers).
The ability to customize the layering of ferroelectric materials at the atomic-
layer level opens exciting possibilities in terms of creating new functional
materials that we believe can be designed (with sufficient understanding) to
have exceptional properties. The improved understanding gained via this research
will be applied to the development of improved (enhanced performance and smaller
size) capacitors, night vision devices, and optical components. This NIRT
program will also train and educate future scientists in a highly
interdisciplinary research environment in a technologically-significant area of
national importance. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was submitted in
response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science and Engineering" (NSF 00-119).
The award is jointly supported through outside sources and the NSF Ceramics and
Electronic Materials programs of the Division of Materials Research in MPS with
the assistance of the initiative.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;