* 0103588
* FETI Algorithms for Mortar Methods
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2003
* Alan Edelman, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Michael H. Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2003
* USD 64,350.00

The investigator, Dan Stefanica, extends the Finite Element Tearing and
Interconnecting (FETI) algorithms to mortar methods, thus taking advantage of
the inherent flexibility of the mortar elements. He establishes that the
resulting algorithms preserve the convergence properties of the FETI methods for
conforming elements. This agrees with extensive numerical experiments for FETI
algorithms for low order mortar finite elements. He checks whether the condition
number estimates obtained for the FETI algorithms for mortars are sharp. He
extends the FETI method to spectral methods and mortar spectral elements, by
providing numerical and theoretical convergence analysis for these algorithms.
Finally, he designs Dual--Primal FETI algorithms for both geometrically
conforming and geometrically nonconforming mortar methods.

The algorithms analyzed in this project are part of the larger family of domain
decomposition methods, which are powerful, fast, and easily parallelizable
methods for the numerical solution of partial differential equations arising
from a large spectrum of practical applications. The investigator couples one of
these methods, the FETI method, with a versatile discretization of the
equations, called the mortar method. Thus, he is able to solve problems with
very complicated geometry while concentrating most of the computational effort
on resolving the critical parts of the problem. The FETI method has already been
implemented in huge parallel codes for a large spectrum of applications.
Improvements in it developed by this project will be important for such
applications as aerospace design, computational mechanics and fluid flow
problems.