* 0103621
* Basidiomycetes of Neotropical Pine Forests: Connections Between a Possible Refugium in Belize and Endemic Pine Forests in the Dominican Republic
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Joaquin Cifuentes, SUNY College at Cortland
* Standard Grant
* Judith Skog
* 07/31/2005
* USD 422,981.00

An international team of mycologists (experts on fungal diversity), led by Dr.
Timothy Baroni of SUNY-Cortland, is surveying the fleshy fungi (mushrooms,
boletes, polypores, puffballs, crust fungi) associated with neotropical pine
forests. The investigation will concentrate on the beneficial symbionts
of&lt;br/&gt;pine roots, which are mostly boletes and mushrooms known as
ectomycorrhizal fungi. Some previous work in the Dominican Republic with the
endemic pine forests (Pinus occidentalis) has revealed many undescribed species
of fleshy fungi and at least some of these species are clearly related to
ectotrophic mushrooms (root symbionts) from western and northwestern North
America. Because tree hosts and fungal symbionts are tightly associated, it is
difficult to explain the presence of these widely separated populations of
fungal species from northwestern North America and the Dominican Republic. One
plausible explanation is to consider a historical migratory route for pines and
their fungal symbionts along a corridor extending from the Rocky Mountains
through the Sierrra Madre Occidental into the geologically ancient (for this
part of the world) Mountain Pine Ridge and Cockscomb Mountain zones of Belize in
Central America. This migratory route established a southern most source, a
refugium, for these island hopping symbionts which could have been carried to
Hispaniola from Belize and/or neighboring countries in Central America due in
part perhaps to late season hurricane activity. Late season hurricanes in this
region tend to produce easterly moving storms. These storms could have and still
may carry seeds and fungal spores to Hispaniola and other islands in the
Caribbean. Because the pine in the Dominican Republic is endemic and the only
native pine to this island, and appears to be related to Central American pines,
the hypothesized transport event likely occurred in the distant past.
&lt;br/&gt; Inventory collecting in the possible fungal refugium in the Mountain
Pine Ridge and Cockscomb Mountain zones in Belize is central to the study. This
area is significantly older geologically than much of the rest of Central
America(100-400 MY vs. 3-5 MY). It is also believed that these mountains
remained&lt;br/&gt;above water as "islands" when sea levels rose in the past.
Therefore, because of the possible long-term isolation, this region has the
potential to harbor a significant number of new species of fungi, especially
since this area has never been thoroughly surveyed. Data on undescribed
amphibians from the area tends to support this view. The fungal symbionts of
Belizian pines should be similar to or show close relationships with species
from western and northwestern North America, and also be similar to some of the
species from the Dominican Republic. The Dominican Republic will also be the
focus of further mycological survey work and study. It appears to be a nexus of
migratory paths for fungi, showing species from eastern North America, the
Lesser Antilles and from South America as well as those recently found from
western and northwestern North America. The survey is likely to cover 1000 to
1500 species from a broad spectrum of basidiomycetes (12 orders, 36 families,
over 300 genera). Based on previous results, the team expects to discover
approximately 20% to perhaps 30% new taxa. In addition to species descriptions
and range distributions, published in the specialist literature, summaries of
the results and materials (including selected color photographs for
identification by amateurs and "mushroom hunters") will be made available to
individuals in the ecotourism industry in Belize and the Dominican
Republic.&lt;br/&gt;