* 0103690
* Survey of Invertebrates at Sea Floor Deployments of Wood in the North Pacific Ocean
* BIO,DEB
* 02/01/2002,11/30/2006
* Janet Voight, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* Patrick S. Herendeen
* 11/30/2006
* USD 77,001.00

Survey of Invertebrates at Sea Floor Deployments of Wood in the North Pacific
Ocean

Perhaps because of the small, well-defined habitats in which they occur, animals
at sea floor hydrothermal vents are increasingly well known, but our knowledge
of animals that live elsewhere on the vast sea floor continues to be limited. Do
species known from vents and their relatives occur in comparable, non-vent
habitats in which oxygen is limited? One little-known seafloor habitat, that
provided by wood sunken to the sea floor, shares with hydrothermal vents
temporal transience, random distributions, ecosystems based on bacterial
production. Both hydrothermal vents and sunken wood provide hard substrates on
the otherwise sediment-laden sea floor. The earliest deep-sea discovery cruises
first reported the very high diversity and unusual animals associated with wood
falls trawled from the sea floor, but the composition of the wood fall fauna
remain poorly known. Experimental deployments of wood and a control substrate,
basalt, will sample this little-known fauna to determine its composition and
relationship with the vent fauna.

Individual lengths of wood and basalt cubes in a mesh bag will compose
deployment units. Four of these units will be tied to a frame constructed from
PVC tubing. Two frames with units will be deployed in the North Pacific Ocean
from a surface ship using the CTD wire with a transponder at Axial Volcano at
1500 m depth and two deployed on the abyssal plain at 2500 m depth. After one
year, half of the deployments at each site will be recovered by a Remotely
Operated Vehicle to ascend to the surface ship in a lidded box. The other half
will be recovered after two years. Because these sites differ in substrate,
depth and proximity to hydrothermal venting, the recovered units will likely
carry maximal species diversity.

Specimens recovered on-board ship will be deposited in The Field Museum
collections where existing collections from North Pacific hydrothermal vents
will facilitate direct comparisons. Improving the availability of deep-sea
specimens will increase our knowledge of wood fall specialists in the North
Pacific Ocean, and of their habitat specificity, especially relative to
hydrothermal vents.