* 0103159
* Nanoscale Exploratory Research:  Dispersion of Nanopowders in Solidifying Molten Metals and Formation of High-Strength Nano-Composite Solders
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/15/2001,12/31/2003
* Srivatsan Tirumalai, University of Akron
* Standard Grant
* Julie Chen
* 12/31/2003
* USD 98,565.00

This Nanoscale Exploratory Research (NER) project is an exploratory study aimed
at understanding the key physical mechanisms governing the dispersion of nano-
particles in molten metals and the concomitant solidification of the nano-
particle-reinforced molten metals resulting in the formation of nano-particle
reinforced composite solders having attractive combinations of strength,
durability and reliability. Carefully orchestrated and planned experiments will
be performed to produce nano-particle reinforced composite solders based on
commercial tin-lead and lead-free solder mixtures blended well with nanopowders.
In the first phase of this research nanopowders of copper, iron, molybdenum and
nickel will be chosen and in the follow phase nanopowders of titanium dioxide
and aluminum oxide will be the candidates. Innovative techniques will be
developed after several trial and error experimentation to establish an
efficient means for blending the nano-powders with the micron-size powders of
the solder resulting in a molten solder mixture having a near uniform dispersion
of nanoparticles. Quantitative measurements will be conducted to characterize
the dynamics of solidification of the composite molten solder mixture.
Metallurgical observations using both optical microscopy and scanning electron
microscopy will be made to characterize the nature, morphology and distribution
of intrinsic microstructural features and the presence and distribution of
artifacts such as micro and macro porosity, voids and microscopic cracks.
Mechanical tests, to include microhardness, tensile deformation and cyclic
fatigue, will be conducted to demonstrate the overall superiority combination of
mechanical properties of the nano-particle reinforced composite solders.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It is anticipated that the findings of this research study
will provide a viable solution to engineering high strength materials by adding
trace amounts of nanopowders into a solidifying molten metal to form nano-
particle reinforced composite. The engineered composite solders will have
attractive combinations of strength; damage tolerance and durability coupled
with improved reliability thereby enhancing the probability of its use on in a
spectrum of microelectronic and opto-electronic devices and assemblies. Results
of this research exercise will also have far reaching consequences beyond
soldering materials. It is expected that the study would also shed light on
several fundamental issues related to the formation of nanoparticle-reinforced
metallic and even non-metallic composites. A study of the influence of nano-
particles on crystalline nucleation kinetics and microstructural development
will contribute to enhancing our understanding of modern solidification
theory.&lt;br/&gt;