* 0103813
* Problems in Fluid Dynamics and Elasticity
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2004
* Michael Renardy, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2004
* USD 104,949.00

Research is proposed on the following topics:&lt;br/&gt;1. Breakup of liquid
jets: This research will mathematically analyze&lt;br/&gt; the capillary breakup
of jets of Newtonian and viscoelastic liquids. The effect&lt;br/&gt; of polymer
additives in suppressing breakup is well known and exploited both&lt;br/&gt; in
nature (spider webs) and in technology (control of drops sizes in
spraying&lt;br/&gt; of liquids). The research will concentrate on the
asymptotics of breakup and&lt;br/&gt; compare various constitutive
theories.&lt;br/&gt;2. Stability of viscoelastic flows: Elastic instabilities
have been&lt;br/&gt; investigated extensively over the past ten years. Such
instabilities often&lt;br/&gt; pose limits for polymer processing conditions. In
the numerical investigation&lt;br/&gt; of instabilities in complex flows,
continuous spectra which are poorly resolved&lt;br/&gt; pose a significant
challenge. The research is aimed at using analytical &lt;br/&gt; techniques to
determine the location of these continuous spectra.&lt;br/&gt;3. Shape control
in elasticity: An elastic medium is controlled by&lt;br/&gt; actuators which can
supply a stress of a given type. The research will &lt;br/&gt; investigate the
question whether such controls can achieve a given shape of&lt;br/&gt; the
medium.&lt;br/&gt;4. Numerical simulation of two-fluid flows: The research will
continue&lt;br/&gt; work on simulation of flows of two liquids using a volume of
fluid code. The&lt;br/&gt; following three problems will be
investigated:&lt;br/&gt; a) Formation of ``staircase" structures on impacting
drops due to&lt;br/&gt; capillary waves.&lt;br/&gt; b) Tipstreaming in drop
breakup under shear when surfactants are&lt;br/&gt; present.&lt;br/&gt; c)
Effect of normal stresses on breakup of viscoelastic drops under&lt;br/&gt;
shear.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research addresses fundamental issues
which arise in the processing and&lt;br/&gt;use of polymeric liquids, the
control of deformations of elastic solids and the&lt;br/&gt;formation of
emulsions by shear mixing. The proposed topics include a comparison
of&lt;br/&gt;the qualitative behavior various models of polymeric fluids in jet
breakup, the&lt;br/&gt;stability of polymeric flows, the question which shapes
of an elastic medium can&lt;br/&gt;be achieved by a given type of control, and
the development of numerical methods for&lt;br/&gt;two-fluid
flows.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;