* 0103979
* Some Studies on Microtexture and Acoustoelasticity in Polycrystalline Media
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2001,12/31/2004
* Chi-Sing Man, University of Kentucky
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 12/31/2004
* USD 151,177.00

DMS Award Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Award #: 0103979&lt;br/&gt;PI: Man, Chi-Sing
&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Kentucky&lt;br/&gt;Program: Applied
Mathematics&lt;br/&gt;Program Manager: Catherine
Mavriplis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Some Studies on Microtexture and
Acoustoelasticity in Polycrystalline Media&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To the naked
eye, the polished surface of a metal sheet appears as a homogeneous continuum.
Under the metallographer's microscope the same surface reveals, after etching,
an underlying polycrystalline structure. Many materials, including metals, ice
and rocks, are aggregates of tiny&lt;br/&gt;crystals or grains, which assume
different orientations in space and are separated by interfaces called grain
boundaries. Comprehensive mapping of grain boundaries and individual grain
orientations in polycrystals has recently become possible with the emergence of
orientation imaging microscopy. Details about grain orientations, e.g., the
misorientations of neighboring grains, are called microtexture. Microtexture
could exert a strong influence on the mechanical behavior of polycrystalline
materials (e.g., on the volume of backscattered ultrasonic noise,
which&lt;br/&gt;at sufficiently high levels renders ultrasound totally useless
for material flaw detection in aircraft engines; an undetected metallurgical
defect in the No. 2 engine was the culprit for the crash of a United Airlines
DC-10 in 1989).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objectives of the present project
are as follows: (i) to reexamine the mathematical foundations and properties of
several theoretical constructs which have been proposed by material scientists
for describing microtexture in various degrees of detail and sophistication;
(ii) to delineate the effects of microtexture on the mechanical anisotropy of
sheet metals in forming operations; (iii) to study the effects of microtexture
on the acoustoelastic behavior of stressed polycrystals; (iv) to develop further
an earlier study that concerns using the dispersion of Rayleigh waves for the
nondestructive inspection of surface layer of residual stress, which is imparted
on critical components of aircraft engines to enhance their high-cycle fatigue
performance.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Date: May 18, 2001&lt;br/&gt;