* 0103003
* NIRT: Coherence and Correlation in Electronic Nanostructures
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2006
* Harold Baranger, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2006
* USD 2,000,000.00

0103003&lt;br/&gt;Baranger&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was submitted in
response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science and Engineering" (NSF-00-119).
The resulting grant is co-funded by the Divisions of Materials Research,
Chemistry and Physics. The proposed research will investigate quantum
interference (coherence) and electron-electron interactions (correlations) in
both model and realistic systems over a wide range of spatial scales, from
nanometers to microns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interplay of correlations and
coherence is one of the deepest topics in current chemistry and physics.
Nanostructures provide a novel controlled environment for studying these
effects: both interactions and interference can be manipulated by changing the
size and shape of the nanostructure, thereby directly gaining information on
their interplay. The principal investigators (PI's) will calculate the results
of such manipulation in several prototypical cases spanning size scales from one
nanometer to one micron.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, a number of long-
range technologies being investigated involve electron-electron interactions and
quantum interference in their operation - single electronics, spintronics,
molecular electroncs, and quantum computing, for instance. The PI's plan to
investigate coherence and correlation in these possible device structures. Thus,
the project will contribute to the knowledge base needed to evaluate the
practical relevance of these nascent nanotechnologies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;More
precisely, four scale sizes will be studied: correlations at the scale of the
electron wavelength, simple single and multiple quantum dots, metallic
"nanomolecules," and finally, networks of carbon nanotubes. Three computational
techniques will be used - quantum Monte Carlo (QMC), full density functional
theory (DFT), and a simplified density functional technique suitable for
nanotubes. These electronic structure techniques will be combined with the
semianalytic techniques of random matrix theory and semiclassical theory
developed recently in nanophysics. Each of the computational techniques requires
substantial innovation. In the case of QMC, the "fermion sign problem" will be
atacked by using the recently developed cluster-type algorithms. For the
metallic nanomolecules, teh full DFT code must be modified to properly include
spin-orbit effects critical in spintronics. And for the simplified DFT method,
the recently developed linear-scaling and self-consistent tight-binding methods
must be combined and optimized for carbon nanotubes. The computations will be
done on a parallel beowulf-class cluster of processors.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
specific issues which the PI's intend to elucidate include: (1) the combination
of Coulomb blockade and single-particle quantization effects in quantum dots and
nanoparticles and their relevance for single-electronic devices; (2) correlation
effects at the "soft edge" of quantum dots; (3) the role of disorder and pairing
correlations in transport through nanoparticles; (4) the spin states, magnetic
moment, and anisotropy energy of metallic nanomolecules and, deduced from these,
their spintronic properties; (5) the robustness of entangled states in multiple
quantum dots of interest for quantum computing; and, (6) the interactive
behavior of a large collection of carbon nanotube quantum dots - an "artificial
macromolecule."&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;This proposal was submitted in response
to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science and Engineering" (NSF-00-119). The
resulting grant is co-funded by the Divisions of Materials Research, Chemistry
and Physics. The proposed research will investigate quantum interference
(coherence) and electron-electron interactions (correlations) in both model and
realistic systems over a wide range of spatial scales, from nanometers to
microns.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interplay of correlations and coherence is one
of the deepest topics in current chemistry and physics. Nanostructures provide a
novel controlled environment for studying these effects: both interactions and
interference can be manipulated by changing the size and shape of the
nanostructure, thereby directly gaining information on their interplay. The
principal investigators (PI's) will calculate the results of such manipulation
in several prototypical cases spanning size scales from one nanometer to one
micron.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Furthermore, a number of long-range technologies
being investigated involve electron-electron interactions and quantum
interference in their operation - single electronics, spintronics, molecular
electroncs, and quantum computing, for instance. The PI's plan to investigate
coherence and correlation in these possible device structures. Thus, the project
will contribute to the knowledge base needed to evaluate the practical relevance
of these nascent nanotechnologies.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;