* 0103795
* Biotic Survey of the Gaoligongshan, a Biodiversity Hotspot in Western Yunnan, China
* BIO,DEB
* 04/01/2002,03/31/2008
* Peter Fritsch, California Academy of Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 03/31/2008
* USD 2,403,296.00

A five-year survey will be conducted of the biodiversity of the Gaoligongshan
region of western Yunnan Province, People's Republic of China. The Gaoligongshan
region, which extends from the eastern Himalayas to southern Yunnan Province, is
recognized by global conservation agencies as one of the "hottest" of
biodiversity hotspots worldwide. At the heart of this region lies the
Gaoligongshan, a spectacular high ridge of mountains running some 600 km from
north to south near the border between southwestern China and northeastern
Myanmar (Burma). Unlike much of the surrounding area, the forests of the
Gaoligongshan have remained largely intact because of their remote location. The
survey will be very broad taxonomically and include the following groups:
bryophytes and vascular plants, diatoms, arthropods, and vertebrates. The
foundation for this project consists of a three-way collaboration between the
California Academy of Sciences (CAS), the Kunming Institute of Botany, and the
Kunming Institute of Zoology. To provide sufficient scientific expertise for our
endeavor, the three primary institutions will collaborate with a number of other
institutions that maintain vigorous research programs on the Chinese biota: the
Royal Botanic Garden Edinburgh, the Institute of Zoology in Beijing, Hunan
Normal University, the Missouri Botanical Garden, Harvard University, and the
United States National Herbarium. A large number of experts have been recruited
worldwide to aid in the identification of specimens belonging to the most
species-rich taxonomic groups (plants and arthropods). The CAS will collaborate
directly with the Yunnan Cultural Relics and Archaeology Institute in a survey
of quaternary cave deposits. This will complement the neontological survey by
providing a picture of how the Gaoligongshan's vertebrate fauna has changed
since the mid-Holocene with the advent of intensive agriculture.&lt;br/&gt; The
project includes a major training component for Chinese graduate students,
postgraduates, and employees at nature reserves. The information generated from
this project will provide the basic knowledge necessary for sound management and
conservation decisions affecting the Gaoligongshan ecosystem. The collections
resulting from the project will be used by members of the project team in
various scientific endeavors, from the publication of monographs to molecular
phylogenetic studies. The data also will be used as the basis for more specific
studies of evolutionary patterns and processes, such as tests of biogeographic
models of the northern hemisphere, biodiversity and environmental patterns
through time and space, and the utility of the hotspot concept in predicting the
diversity of poorly inventoried groups. &lt;br/&gt;