* 0103045
* Experimental Investigation of Competing Orders, Quantum Criticality and Spin/Charge Transport in Cuprate Superconductors
* MPS,DMR
* 04/15/2001,03/31/2004
* Nai-Chang Yeh, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 03/31/2004
* USD 315,000.00

This individual investigator award is for an experimental research project that
will address some of the most fundamental physics issues associated with high-
temperature superconducting cuprates. The primary objectives are: [1] To
investigate the competing orders and possible existence of a quantum critical
point in different families of hole-doped (p-type) cuprate superconductors as a
function of the doping level and temperature by means of low-temperature
scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and spectroscopy (STS). [2] To compare the
pairing potential, pairing symmetry, and competing orders in the electron-doped
(n-type) cuprate superconductors with those in the p-type cuprates. [3] To
elucidate the characteristics of spin and charge transport in the p-type cuprate
superconductors by studying the effects of spin-polarized and simple
quasiparticle injection in perovskite ferromagnet-insulator-superconductor
(F-I-S) and in normal metal-insulator-superconductor (N-I-S) heterostructures.
The superior spatial resolution of STM/STS is expected to provide unique
information for the microscopic properties of cuprate superconductors, and the
investigation of spin/charge transport in these superconductors can yield
insights into the roles of spin- and charge-degrees of freedom in their pairing
state. In addition to the potentially significant impact of these studies on
revealing the fundamental physics of cuprate superconductivity, the wide range
of forefront experimental techniques employed in conducting this project will
provide sound technical and scientific training for the participating students
and postdoctoral researchers. Furthermore, novel microelectronic devices based
on the tunable superconducting properties of F-I-S heterostructures under
variable spin-polarized quasiparticle currents may be devised for a range of
applications.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This individual investigator award will
fund an experimental research project that attempts to address some of the most
fundamental physics issues and potential applications associated with high-
temperature superconducting cuprates. There are two primary experimental
approaches. One involves the use a low-temperature scanning tunneling microscope
(STM) to study the microscopic physical properties of cuprates with atomic-scale
spatial resolution, thereby proving direct information for the quantum nature of
these unconventional superconductors. The other experimental approach involves
studying how various superconducting properties of the cuprates are modified
under the injection of electrical currents in novel devices comprising of thin-
film layers of ferromagnet-insulator-superconductor (F-I-S) and normal metal-
insulator-superconductor (N-I-S) heterostructures. In addition to potentially
significant impact of these studies on revealing the fundamental physics of
cuprate superconductivity, the wide range of frontier experimental techniques
employed in conducting this project will provide sound technical and scientific
training for the participating students and postdoctoral researchers.
Furthermore, the tunable superconducting properties of the F-I-S
heterostructures under variable injection currents are promising candidates for
various microelectronic device applications.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;