* 0103807
* Collaborative Research: Nonlinear PDEs and Integro-Differential Equations in the Complex Plane
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2005
* Ovidiu Costin, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2005
* USD 74,002.00

NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0103807&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical Sciences: Collaborative
Research: Nonlinear partial differential equations and integro-differential
equations in the complex plane&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&g
t;&lt;br/&gt;DMS-
0103807&lt;br/&gt;Costin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research
focuses on new complex analytic methods exploiting Borel-Laplace duality to
investigate regular and singular properties of solutions to certain classes of
nonlinear partial differential equations and integro-differential equations in
the complex plane. Problems to be studied include equations arising in physical
applications that at some critical value of a parameter are either ill-posed in
the real domain or are structurally unstable. The methods enable control over
sensitive dependence close to a critical point in the parameter space.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many phenomena in nature are modeled by equations that
depend sensitively on parameters. Such equations arise in descriptions of fluid
mechanics, crystal growth and pattern formation. The underlying sensitivity can
make such problems difficult to tackle using computer simulations. It is
important to develop theoretical tools based on mathematical analysis to allow
precise understanding of such phenomena, and our research is geared towards this
goal. &lt;br/&gt;