* 0103556
* NER:  Biological Nanomachines:  Assembly and Function of Protein-DNA Nanostructures at the Single-Molecule Level
* BIO,MCB
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2002
* Ronald Baskin, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Parag R. Chitnis
* 06/30/2002
* USD 100,000.00

Through evolution, biology has produced a remarkably diverse and efficient
collection of proteins. These proteins assemble into a seemingly infinite
variety of nanobiostructures, and they promote an extensive repertoire of
chemical processes; hence, they comprise an interesting collection of
biomolecular nanomachines. The proteins that are responsible for the maintenance
and manipulation of DNA are one important subset of this collection. Their
capacity to assemble with, and to alter the structure of, DNA is essential for
all biological function. These proteins function in the packaging of DNA, the
high-fidelity copying of genetic information, the reading of the genetic code
and its conversion into RNA, the generation of genetic diversity, and the
preservation of genetic and structural integrity of the genome. This project
describes a new experimental approach to study the assembly and function of
several of the nanomachines that function in these biological processes. The
method involves the direct visualization by fluorescence microscopy, in real-
time, of the assembly, disassembly, and movement of these nanobiostructures on
single, optically-trapped DNA molecules using a novel, multi-port, laminar-flow,
micro flow cell. This instrument will allows one to readily introduce an
individual, optically-trapped DNA molecule sequentially into a series of
reaction conditions, and to visualize the changes in structure/assembly of the
molecules in real-time using multi-wavelength fluorescence microscopy. The
successful development of this instrument will reveal important information
about the structure and function of DNA-protein interactions that cannot be
obtained using large ensembles of DNA molecules (where such information is often
lost by averaging, or obscured by competing intermolecular interactions). This
research will provide revolutionary new information about how proteins function
to alter the structure of DNA. Furthermore, the experimental techniques can be
applied to the study of many other nanoscale biostructures.