* 0103548
* NIRT:  Integration of Carbon Nanotubes, Magnetic Nanocrystals, and Silicon Microstructures for Ultra-High-Resolution Magnetic Force Microscopy
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2006
* Moungi Bawendi, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2006
* USD 1,150,000.00

Magnetic Force Microscopy (MFM) is one of the most promising and best-known
techniques for probing magnetic phenomena on length scales approaching 10
nanometers, but the spatial resolution of MFM is presently limited to about 30
nanometers. Factors limiting the spatial resolution include both the the force
sensitivity of the cantilevers used for MFM and the ability to create controlled
magnetic nanostructures on the cantilevers. The PIs propose that MFM sensors
based on the integration of nanomagnets, carbon nanotubes, and optimized silicon
microstructures can push these limits to allow sub-10-nm spatial resolution. The
PIs individually have experience in atomic force microscopy, novel magnetic
microscopies, the growth of single-walled and multi-walled carbon nanotubes, the
integration of carbon nanotubes with silicon microstructures, the growth and
characterization of cobalt nanomagnets and nanorods, and the fabrication of
high-bandwidth ultra-sensitive force cantilevers with integrated displacement
sensors. This research requires the participation of an interdisciplinary
research team, populated by a collection of graduate and undergraduate students
from many departments in science and engineering. The fabrication of these
sensors will require the integration of advanced nanomaterials and modern
fabrication processes, benefiting researchers and industrial developers. The
processes that are developed during the course of this research will be
published in the NNUN's on-line process library, as well as in research
journals. Undergraduate and graduate students whose research includes the
development of these techniques and their application to materials science will
be well suited to make ongoing contributions to nanoscience and technology.
&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Research on "nanomaterials" such as bucky-balls,
nanotubes, nanomagnets, molecular manufacturing, and many other examples has led
to excited speculation regarding the technological promise of nanoscience.
However, these nanotechnologies do not easily merge with conventional
technologies, including microfabrication. Stanford has recently demonstrated
methods for localizing the growth of carbon nanotubes on specific locations
within a conventional microfabrication process, a breakthrough that could allow
nanotechnology to approach important technological applications. The propsed
work would use this breakthrough to integrate nanotubes and nanomagnets into
MicroElectroMechanical Systems (MEMS) fabrication, producing a useful new family
of ultrasensitive physical probes and developing realistic processes for the
integration of nanomaterials and silicon
microstructures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was submitted in response to
the solicitation "Nanoscale Science and Engineering" (NSF 00-119). The award is
jointly supported through two directorates at NSF: (i) Mathematical and Physical
Sciences and (ii) Biological Sciences. Additional support comes from the
National Facilities and Instrumentation program of the Division of Materials
Research (DMR).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;