* 0103895
* Dynamics and Control of Mechanical Systems
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Anthony Bloch, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2005
* USD 200,001.00

DMS-0103895&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;PI: Anthony M.
Bloch&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dynamics and Control of Mechanical
Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a proposal
for the continuation and extension of the &lt;br/&gt;proposer's research into
the dynamics and control of nonlinear &lt;br/&gt;mechanical systems in finite-
and infinite-dimensions. In &lt;br/&gt;particular, research is proposed in the
following areas: integrable &lt;br/&gt;dynamical systems in finite- and
infinite- dimensions including both &lt;br/&gt;Hamiltonian and nonholonomic
systems, the stabilization and control of &lt;br/&gt;nonlinear mechanical
systems via energy methods and the extension of &lt;br/&gt;these methods to
systems with nonholonomic (nonintegrable) constraints, &lt;br/&gt;the geometry
of the smooth and discrete dynamics of rigid bodies, and &lt;br/&gt;the control
of quantum mechanical systems. A general area of interest &lt;br/&gt;that
encompasses several parts of this proposal is the relationship
&lt;br/&gt;between energy preservation and asymptotic behavior in dynamical
systems &lt;br/&gt;and between reversible and irreversible behavior. In the
integrable &lt;br/&gt;systems area the proposer is interested in the nonabelian
Toda lattice, &lt;br/&gt;infinite-dimensional generalizations of Toda, and
generalized smooth &lt;br/&gt;and discrete rigid body systems. Finally he
intends to analyze the &lt;br/&gt;dynamics and control of various coupled
mechanical systems in both the &lt;br/&gt;classical and quantum
regimes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is aimed at studying the behavior of
various mechanical &lt;br/&gt;systems that are important for applications in
science and engineering. &lt;br/&gt;These include systems such as wheeled or
articulated robots, aerospace &lt;br/&gt;systems, submarine vehicles, and
quantum (microscopic) devices. Quantum &lt;br/&gt;devices, where the laws of
motion of atoms and molecules play a key role, &lt;br/&gt;have become
increasingly important in such areas as communication and &lt;br/&gt;coding
theory. In addition to studying the behavior of these systems &lt;br/&gt;the
proposer intends to analyze their control and optimal control -- &lt;br/&gt;that
is, to provide methods for using such systems in engineering
&lt;br/&gt;applications in a practical, stable, and efficient manner. The
proposer&lt;br/&gt;intends to analyze various key examples of such mechanical
systems with &lt;br/&gt;mathematical structure which is particularly amenable to
detailed&lt;br/&gt;qualitative and quantitative analysis. Further, the proposer
intends to&lt;br/&gt;analyze the transition between the behavior of systems at
the quantum&lt;br/&gt;(microscopic) level and the large scale (macroscopic)
level. This &lt;br/&gt;transition is important for the application of physical
devices in the &lt;br/&gt;real world as well as interesting from the scientific
point of view. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;