* 0103970
* Mathematical Analysis of the Orientation of Symmetric Particles Sedimenting in Newtonian and Viscoelastic Liquids
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Giovanni Galdi, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2005
* USD 120,000.00

Over the last 40 years the study of the motion of small particles in a viscous
liquid has become one of the main focuses of applied research. The presence of
the particles affects the flow of the liquid, and this, in turn, affects the
motion of the particles, so that the problem of determining the flow
characteristics is highly coupled. It is just this latter feature that makes any
fundamental mathematical problem related to liquid-particle interaction a
particularly challenging one. The goal of this project is to furnish a
mathematical analysis of one of the several important and still not completely
understood aspects of this fascinating subject, namely, the orientation of
homogeneous, symmetric particles sedimenting in Newtonian and viscoelastic
liquids. In particular, the PI intends to furnish a quantitative and rigorous
explanation of the challenging "tilt-angle phenomenon" that is observed in
certain viscoelastic liquids, where particles orient themselves at a preferred
angle with the main flow. The angle depends on the shape of the particle, their
mass and on the physical properties of the liquid. Liquid models such as
Oldroyd-B with shear-dependent viscosity will be used, along with some suitable
analytical tools (the "splitting method") that the PI with his collaborators has
been developing over the last few years for the study of well-posedness of
several viscoelastic liquid models.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The orientation of
homogeneous long bodies in liquids of different nature is a fundamental issue in
many problems of practical interest. In composite materials, the addition of
short fiber-like particles to a polymer matrix will to enhance the mechanical
properties of the material; for instance, it could make the material softer or
harder, and more durable. The degree of enhancement depends strongly on the
orientation of the fibers and the fiber orientation is in turn caused by the
flow occurring in the mold. Another important application occurs in separation
of macromolecules by electrophoresis. Modern applications include weight
determination of proteins, DNA sequencing, and diagnosis of genetic disease.
Electrophoresis involves the motion of charged particles (macromolecules) in
solution, under the influence of an electric field. The orientation of the
molecules plays an important role, since it is responsible for the loss of
separability during steady-field gel electrophoresis. A final, but not less
important application of particle orientation, occurs in blood flow, where the
blood cells under certain flow conditions tend to chain themselves along the
axis of the artery at certain preferred angles (tilt angle). &lt;br/&gt;