* 0103858
* Giant Physical Response in Multi-scale Inhomogeneous Oxides
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2004
* Sang-Wook Cheong, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 06/30/2004
* USD 370,316.00

This proposal focuses on the microscopic electronic/magnetic/structural
inhomogeneity found in functional oxides, and its corresponding roles in the
macroscopic physical response of these materials, such as magnetoresistance,
magnetic permeability, piezoelectric constants, and linear and/or non-linear
optical characteristics. Understanding and controlling the inter-relationship
between the inhomogeneity and physical response are of paramount importance for
the development of new advanced electronic and magnetic devices. The concepts of
thermodynamic or quantum criticality, soft modes, disorder effects and
electronic phase separation will be important to understand the coexistence or
fluctuations of neighboring phases in phase space. The activities envisioned in
this program include a few important classes of complex oxide materials. The
first topic is the area of magnetoresistive materials (such as CuIr2S4-CuCr2S4
and also (Bi,Sr)MnO3-(La,Sr)MnO3), showing a competition between, as well as a
coexistence of, charge-ordered-insulating and ferromagnetic-metallic phases.
Other topics include the enhanced piezoelectric response near MPB of
ferroelectric relaxors (PMN-PT) and chemical pressure effects in geometrically
frustrated antiferromagnets such as ZnCr2O4. We will also study tunneling
magnetoresistance in polycrystalline films as well as a trilayer structure of
double perovskite (Ca,Sr,Ba)Fe0.5Mo0.5O3. The success of this project will
critically depend on a comprehensive characterization of the functional, complex
oxides (or chalcogenides) as well as the fabrication of high-quality
polycrystalline materials and single crystals. Materials synthesis and classical
characterization including magneto-transport, susceptibility, and thermodynamic
measurements will be done in the PI's lab at Rutgers University. In addition,
x-ray scattering, neutron scattering, TEM, microwave, Raman, and low-temperature
STM experiments will be performed through inter-institutional collaborations.
This research will be conducted with the assistance of students who will thereby
be prepared for entry into scientific/technological careers in industry,
government or academia. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Modern electronic and magnetic
devices often utilize physical responses of materials when the materials are
exposed under external parameters such as magnetic or electric fields, pressure,
or optical irradiation. Recent investigation has suggested that the large-scale
physical response such as magnetoresistance, piezoelectricity, or linear and/or
non-linear optical response can be drastically enhanced in materials with
microscopic electronic/magnetic/structural inhomogeneity. Thus, this enhanced
response in microscopically inhomogeneous materials can provide the scientific
underpinning for future technologies. In this project we focus on understanding
as well as controlling the inter-relationship between the microscopic
inhomogeneity and macroscopic physical response. The inhomogeneity can be
associated with various charge/spin/orbital degrees of freedom, and may
accompany dynamic fluctuations, in addition to static spatial fluctuations. We
will primarily investigate functional, complex oxides and also other
chalcogenides, showing various competing or mutually antagonistic ground states.
The success of this project will critically depend on a comprehensive
characterization of the materials as well as the fabrication of high-quality
polycrystalline materials and single crystals. Fabrication and basic
characterization of the materials will be performed in the laboratory of the
Principal Investigator at Rutgers University, while other more complex
characterization will be performed through functioning inter-institutional
collaborations. This research will be conducted with students. They will acquire
advanced training in a forefront area of condensed matter physics and materials
science and thus prepare them to enter the scientific/technological workforce.
&lt;br/&gt;