* 0103678
* A Proposal to Support the Next Generation of Curriculum Materials in Science, Mathematics and Technology
* EHR,DRL
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2008
* Jo Ellen Roseman, American Association for the Advancement of Science
* Continuing Grant
* Janice M. Earle
* 06/30/2008
* USD 6,259,603.00

The project will build on prior successful work and:

1) Explore extending the applicability of its criteria for evaluating materials
to the elementary school level and to a greater variety of topics.

2) Produce a set of interrelated on-line databases of instructional components
-- research summaries, representations, phenomena and questions/tasks that
developers can use to creat K-12 goals-based textbooks and other materials that
focus on important ideas and skills in science, mathematics and technology. It
is anticpated that these databases will also be valuable to practicing teachers
(this component forming the basis for Project inservice programs) and to those
designing preservice courses.

3) Create an expanded set of conceptual strand maps portraying students' growth
of understanding for important topics such as weather and climate, basic
functions of living things, energy conservation, and electricity and magnetism;
and

4) Create professional development workshop plans and presentation materials
designed particularly for curriculum materials developers and educators
responsible for evaluating and selecting textbooks.

In addition, a new component to the initiative will:

Design strategies and create materials to help parents, decision-makers, and the
public in general to understand basic scientific literacy. This component will
include the Conover Miller Group/Global Strategy Group who will conduct public
opinion/market research polls and develop a strategic communications plan. The
Project will produce a customized website that links the resources of AAAS with
other organizations such as the NSTA, NRC and the Annenberg/CPB Project to help
teachers and parents increase their understanding of the important issues
related to science education. This component will encourage teachers and parents
to become more actively involved in their state's efforts to improve science
education.