* 0103144
* Biodiversity of Lotic Aquatic Insects of Northern Thailand
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Gregory Courtney, Iowa State University
* Continuing Grant
* William Carl Taylor
* 08/31/2006
* USD 299,958.00

The biota of Thailand is one of the richest, most endemic (unique), and most
endangered in the world. Concerns about deforestation and the loss of
biodiversity has prompted conservation organizations to identify Thailand and
surrounding areas as a biodiversity hotspot, underscoring the richness,
endemism, and immediate threat to the biota. The mountains of northern Thailand
represent the southeastern edge of a montane corridor that extends northward to
Nepal, and interdigitate with an extension of the tropical rain forest farther
from the equator than anywhere else in the world. Consequently, northern
Thailand is a nexus where typically northern and southern taxa have invaded
biogeographically extreme latitudes. Concern about deforestation, pollution,
watershed degradation, and attendant loss of aquatic species has led to an acute
interest in Thailand's aquatic insects and in their potential use as indicators
of water quality. Many lotic (stream-inhabiting) insects are thought to be
especially sensitive to environmental perturbations; however, the general use of
lotic taxa as bioindicators requires baseline data on their diversity,
distribution, relative abundance, and life history.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
primary goal of this project is to survey stream-inhabiting insects of northern
Thailand. Specimens will be gathered by diverse methods, including Malaise-trap,
black-light, and aerial collection of adults, rearing of larvae and pupae,
drift-netting, and qualitative and quantitative sampling of numerous habitats
(e.g., riffles, depositional areas, rootmats). Material will be collected from
throughout the region, but several sites have been selected for more frequent
and intensive inventory. A team of taxonomic experts, including specialists from
the United States, Thailand, and Europe, will participate in two field
expeditions and will use resultant collections to conduct taxonomic, ecological,
phylogenetic, and biogeographic studies. The primary objectives of this
inventory are to: (1) discover and describe new species of lotic insects; (2)
document the distribution, relative abundance, and natural history of lotic
species; (3) associate and construct user-friendly keys to all life stages of
lotic taxa; (4) develop a database and web site for faunal, distributional, and
ecological information. Another important objective is to help build a
foundation for a strong aquatic entomology program in Thailand. This will be
accomplished through educating Thai and American students in the methods of
systematics, including biotic inventories, curation, and taxonomic techniques,
and through the provision of museums and educational institutions with research
collections, reference material, and a database for Thailand's aquatic
insects.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study will provide a comprehensive inventory
of stream-inhabiting insects from northern Thailand. This inventory will greatly
enhance our knowledge of the regional insect fauna and our understanding of
Southeast Asian biodiversity. It also will provide an authoritative reference
collection for educators and researchers in aquatic entomology and systematics,
and for future revisionary, phylogenetic, and biogeographic studies. The
educational value of this collection and the training of personnel will be among
the lasting products. Data on the diversity, distribution, relative abundance,
and natural history of aquatic insects will provide insights into potential
bioindicators of water quality. All of these will strengthen aquatic entomology
and insect systematics programs in Thailand. Another product of this survey will
be a database and web site that will be useful to insect systematists, aquatic-
and fisheries biologists, biogeographers, conservationists, and resource
managers. The data generated in this study will permit identification of areas
of local endemism and sites of phylogenetic and biogeographic significance,
which will have important implications in the conservation and management of
Thailand's streams. Thai colleagues also have expressed great interest in
organizing future taxonomic workshops, which will provide additional
opportunities to educate students, researchers, resource managers, and the
public about the identification, value, and use of insects in stream
ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;