* 0103034
* NIRT:  Zeolitic Materials for Nanoscale Electronics and Quantum Computation
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2006
* Nicholas Bonesteel, Ohio University
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 07/31/2006
* USD 1,185,200.00

0103034&lt;br/&gt;Soghomonian&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal addresses an
avenue toward self-assembled collections of molecular electronic devices, via
the synthesis, experimental characterization and theoretical study of zeolitic
materials as hosts for single-electron transistors. The open zeolitic framework
is synthesized to possess single-electron transistor functionality at lattice
sites. Individual addressability is obtained through the conducting framework of
the zeolitic material: some chains of the framework carry current, others
fulfill the role of voltage gates. The individual chains comprising the zeolitic
structure are in turn connected to external, macroscopic, metallic electrodes by
flexible and functionalized biopolymers such as DNA wires. This cross-
disciplinary endeavor also addresses quantum-computational aspects of the
zeolite transistor arrays and lithographic two-dimensional analogs, and
comprises theoretical and experimental studies of the collective charge
transport phenomena that surface in arrays of interconnected nanoscale or
molecular devices.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Molecular electronics promises to
shrink electronic devices to the nanoscale, by utilizing properties of chemical
species at the molecular level. This project aims to adapt zeolitic materials to
host vast arrays of molecular-scale, single-electron transistors. The
transistors are formed during the crystal growth, as part of the crystal
lattice, and thus vast numbers of near-perfect, near-identical devices may be
produced at once. The problem of accessing each of the electrical locations on
the crystal/chip is solved through the inherent conducting chains of the
zeolitic material. The result is a self-assembled and chemically contacted dense
and vast array of single-electron transistors, with implications for future
quantum-computational architectures, nanoelectronics and memory devices.
Educationally, graduate, undergraduate and two-year technical college students
will be introduced to new interdisciplinary concepts with potential future
impact in a variety of disciplines.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was
submitted in response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science and Engineering"
(NSF 00-119). The award is jointly supported through this initiative within the
Ceramics and Electronic Materials programs of the Division of Materials Research
in MPS.&lt;br/&gt;