* 0103010
* An Interdisciplinary Approach to Understanding the Growth of Nanoporous Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 07/01/2001,12/31/2006
* Peter Monson, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 12/31/2006
* USD 1,006,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0103010&lt;br/&gt;P. Monson, U of Massachusetts Amherst
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was submitted in response to solicitation
"Nanoscale Science and Engineering (NSF 00-119)" and requests support for an
interdisciplinary research program concerned with understanding the growth of
nanoporous materials- focusing on zeolitic materials. A research program in this
area will have immediate impact on an enormous worldwide effort for developing
porous materials with properties tailored at the nanoscale for applications such
as catalysis or separations. Moreover, a central feature in the growth of such
materials is the assembly of supramolecular precursor particles to form complex
organic-inorganic structures with crystalline order. This mechanism is
paradigmatic for the synthesis of a whole range of new materials, ranging from
substrates for quantum confinement and laser applications to biomaterial
implants with controlled porosity and
nanostructure.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal has its origin in a
collaboration among some of the PI's on the problem of crystal growth of
silicalitc-1 zeolite, in which important features of a growth mechanism
involving the formation and assembly of subcolloidal zeolite particles were
elucidated. The collaboration featured both experimental work and modeling of
the growth process. As this work developed it became clear that further progress
would be greatly enhanced with a larger research team. In particular, it was
clear that expertise was required in detailed atomistic modeling of the growth
process as well as in characterization by light scattering and atomic force
microscopy. The NSF NIRT initiative has created an opportunity for this research
team to come to full fruition. Our interdisciplinary team involves researchers
in four departments at the Universities of Massachusetts and Delaware,
partnerships with companies at the forefront of applications of nanoporous
materials and collaboration with a government
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project is divided into two main research
areas:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Synthesis, Purification and Structure of
Subcolloidal Particles:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Assembly of Subcolloidal Particles
and Silicalite Crystal Growth&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In addition to elucidating
fundamental aspects of zeolite growth, we anticipate that in the longer term our
research will lead to novel assembly methods and the development of new
materials grown by assembly of subcolloidal zeolite particles. Each of our
research areas will feature both experimental and modeling investigations. A
spectrum of modeling techniques will be employed spanning length scales from the
atomistic level, required to understand the formation and structure of
subcolloidal zeolite particles, to the mesoscopic level, required to understand
the crystal growth habit of zeolite materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
research program has substantial educational component including: the
development of new graduate courses on nanoscale materials and on computational
materials science at both partner Universities, industrial internships for
graduate students and postdoctoral scholars, as well as involvement of
undergraduate students in the research. &lt;br/&gt;