* 0103435
* Geometric Group Theory and Surface Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,12/31/2004
* Michael Handel, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 12/31/2004
* USD 93,616.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0103435&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Michael Handel&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal divides into four
projects in the related fields of&lt;br/&gt;two dimensional dynamical systems
and geometric group theory.&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the first, which is a
collaboration with Mark Feighn,&lt;br/&gt;is to compute, in a transparent,
geometric and algorithmic way,&lt;br/&gt;the centralizer of an element of the
outer automorphism&lt;br/&gt;group. The second is to continue the principal
investigator's&lt;br/&gt;study of the forcing order on braid types in the four
times&lt;br/&gt;punctured disk. This project has both an experimental
and&lt;br/&gt;theoretical part. Computer programs are used to
generate&lt;br/&gt;examples and to aid in the formation of conjectures.
Once&lt;br/&gt;conjectures are made that cannot be disproved by
computer,&lt;br/&gt;rigorous proofs will be attempted. The third project is
a&lt;br/&gt;collaboration with John Franks with the long term goal of
proving&lt;br/&gt;that generic area preserving diffeomorphisms of the
two&lt;br/&gt;dimensional sphere have dense periodic orbits. The
more&lt;br/&gt;immediate goal is to find analogs for generic area
preserving&lt;br/&gt;diffeomorphisms of the topological structure that is known
to&lt;br/&gt;exist for twist maps. The fourth is a collaboration with
Lee&lt;br/&gt;Mosher. The first steps in the project will be to identify
and&lt;br/&gt;study quasi-lines that can play the role in Culler Vogtmann
space&lt;br/&gt;that Teichmuller geodesics play in Teichmuller
space.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal is concerned with the interface
between two areas&lt;br/&gt;of mathematics: two dimensional dynamical systems
and geometric&lt;br/&gt;group theory. The former studies the long term behavior
of&lt;br/&gt;systems that evolve over time, while the latter treats
algebraic&lt;br/&gt;objects by geometric means. The fields have been intertwined
for&lt;br/&gt;more than fifty years and have been the focus of a great deal
of&lt;br/&gt;research in the past twenty. Part of the proposal focuses on
two&lt;br/&gt;long standing fundamental questions in two dimensional
dynamical&lt;br/&gt;systems. The first examines how simple systems change
into&lt;br/&gt;chaotic ones. The second concerns transformations of the
sphere&lt;br/&gt;that preserve area, and asks whether every piece of the
sphere&lt;br/&gt;contains at least one point that eventually (as the
system&lt;br/&gt;evolves) returns to its original position. There are two
groups&lt;br/&gt;(in the technical algebraic sense) that are most closely
related&lt;br/&gt;to two dimensional dynamical systems. They are the mapping
class&lt;br/&gt;group and the outer automorphism group. To understand
the&lt;br/&gt;geometry of a group one must understand its geodesics; i.e.
what&lt;br/&gt;the shortest paths are between any two points. The geodesics
of&lt;br/&gt;the mapping class group have been well understood for some
time.&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator will generalize from what is
known&lt;br/&gt;about the geodesics of the mapping class group to identify
and&lt;br/&gt;study geodesics for the outer automorphism group.&lt;br/&gt;