* 0103607
* GARCH, Diffusion, Stochastic Volatility and Wavelets
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Yazhen Wang, University of Connecticut
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 06/30/2005
* USD 121,632.00

There are two independent strands of financial stochastic modeling: continuous-
time models centered in the modern finance literature and discrete-time models
in the empirical finance literature. The continuous-time models are dominated by
the diffusion which elegantly accommodates finance theory such as arbitrage and
option pricing but is very hard for statistical inference. Most of the discrete-
time models are the autoregressive conditionally heteroscedastic (ARCH) and
stochastic volatility (SV) models which often provide parsimonious
representations for the observed discrete-time data and are relatively easier
for statistical inference. It is natural to ask whether the discrete-time model
can be compatible with the continuous-time model. Not until recent years did
researchers begin to bridge the gap between the two modeling approaches and
establish the weak convergence of the discrete-time ARCH model to continuous-
time diffusion. Because of the weak convergence linkage, there is a general
belief in financial economics and financial mathematics that the ARCH model and
its diffusion limit are ``equivalent'' at all respects. Since both types of
models involves unknown parameters, their practical implementation requires to
estimate and test the parameters from the data. Because of the belief and ARCH's
easier statistical inference, it is a common practice toapply statistical
procedures derived under the ARCH model to the corresponding diffusion. However,
the claimed statistical equivalence and the employed practice are much based on
blind faith and lack of adequate statistical justification. In particular, they
can not be rigorously justified by the weak convergence linkage. In this
proposal PI will initiate a new research topic: study the statistical
relationship between these discrete-time and continuous-time models. Three
interrelated problems will be investigated. &lt;br/&gt;Whether the experiment
formed by observations from the ARCH model is asymptotically equivalent in terms
of Le Cam's deficiency distance to an experiment comprised by
observations&lt;br/&gt;from the diffusion limit ? Study model equivalence or
nonequivalence at different frequencies (e.g. daily, weekly and monthly);
Propose a wavelet stochastic volatility model for widely available high-
frequency data. The proposed research bears important computational and
practical consequence. For example, if the two models are asymptotically
equivalent at certain lower frequencies, the easily obtained statistical
inference based on the ARCH model can be applied to the subsample that are
sampled from the diffusion data at the corresponding frequencies; because ARCH
and SV models describe stationary processes and fail to account for local sharp
peaks and long-memory founded in high-frequency data, the proposed wavelet model
is expected to fit high-frequency data better and easily pick up high frequency
features like sharp peaks, local shock, and non-stationarity as well as low
frequence phenomenon such as long-memory and long term
trend.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Stock market modeling has two types of
approaches in the literature. One is continuous-time modeling that assumes a
stock price to change with time continuously and obey a continuous-time
stochastic process. Historically, continuous-time models based on stochastic
differential equations have been developed in financial economics. Because of
elegant accommodation of finance theory such as arbitrage and option pricing,
modern finance theory is much based on the continuous-time modeling. However, in
reality all data are recorded only at discrete intervals. Unknown parameters in
the continuous-time models need to be estimated and tested from the observed
discrete-time data. Due to the difficulty in statistical inference for the
continuous time model based on the discrete data, the validity of the
continuous-time modeling is not straightforward to check. Another approach is
discrete-time modeling of available discrete data. Successful discrete-time
models are the autoregressive conditionally heteroscedastic (ARCH) and
stochastic volatility (SV) models. These discrete-time models often provide
parsimonious representations for the observed discrete-time data, and their
statistical inference is relatively easier. But the discrete-time models are
statistical models in nature and are not easy to accommodate finance theory.
This proposal will study the statistical compatibility of the two types of
models and investigate wavelet modeling for high-frequency data. The research
bears important theoretical and practical consequences. For example, the
research can yield a picture on when continuous-time and discrete-time models
are statistically equivalent; if equivalent, the easily obtained statistical
inference procedures for thediscrete-time models can be applied to the
continuous-time models; the wavelet based model is expected to fit high-
frequency data better and easily pick up high frequency features like sharp
peaks, local shock, and non-stationarity as well as low frequence phenomenon
such as long-memory and long term trend.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;