* 0103000
* NER:  A Block Copolymer Precursor Approach to Novel Functional Nanotubes
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2003
* Samuel Gido, University of Alabama at Birmingham
* Standard Grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2003
* USD 99,987.00

This proposal was received in response to NSE, NSF 00-119. This Nanoscale
Exploratory Research award is part of the National Nanotechnology Initiative
(NNI). It will exploit self-assembly of block copolymers of styrene and
1,3-cyclohexadiene into a core-shell cylinder-in-cylinder morphology, followed
by crosslinking of poly(cyclohexadiene) (PCHD) and removal of the polystyrene
(PS) segments, as a means for producing novel functionalized PCHD nanotubes.
PCHD may be aromatized to poly(phenylene) (PP), a strong, crystalline, and
thermally stable engineering polymer. As an alternative, PCHD can be carbonized
by pyrolysis. These materials will be thoroughly characterized in terms of their
sized, shapes, surface chemistry and mechanical properties. To conduct this
work, an interdisciplinary collaboration between the polymer chemistry group of
Dr. Jimmy Mays (University of Alabama at Birmingham, UAB) and the polymer
physics/morphology group of Professor Sam Gido (University of Massachusetts,
UMass) is proposed. %%% Composites incorporating such nanotubes could lead to a
new class of robust, lightweight, high strength materials. By controlling
molecular weight and processing conditions, we should be able to create
nanotubes of varying radius, wall thickness, and aspect ration. By varying the
composition of the block copolymer, other shapes besides tubes (cylinders,
plates) can also be made. Reactive hydroxyl groups present on the surface of
these molecular objects can be used to manipulate their processing
characteristics and to provide strong bonding to matrix materials. The PP
nanotubes may be insulating or they may be made conducting by doping. Such
materials could be used as component in a smart composite designed to transmit
an electronic signal, for example, if impacted. Opto-electronic, nanoprobe, and
medical applications are also envisioned for these materials.