* 0103248
* NIRT: Self-Aligned and Self-Limited Quantum Dot Nanoswitches
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2001,03/31/2007
* Ilesanmi Adesida, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 03/31/2007
* USD 1,640,000.00

This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science
and Engineering" (NSF 00-119). The project addresses the fabrication of quantum
scale devices through the combined oxidation and etching of Si/SiGe/Si
nanostructured pillars. The project aims to demonstrate the validity of
nanoscale computing by developing a process technology to fashion quantum dots
of a predictable size, shape and placement, suitable for mass production and
simple electrical contact. The project includes specific strategies and
processes to control the size and composition of the nanostructured pillars and
the resulting quantum dots and oxide insulators to be formed. The research spans
issues of materials science, circuits, and device fabrication and
characterization; the structures to be fabricated are closely integrated with
quantum level devices necessary for cellular automata circuits. Methods of high
speed testing to characterize the devices as well as theoretical modeling to
optimally design the structures are included. The project is highly
collaborative between Ohio State, Illinois, Notre Dame, UC Riverside, the Naval
Research Laboratory and Air Force Research Laboratory. &lt;br/&gt;%%%
&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of
materials science with high technological relevance. An important feature of the
program is the integration of research and education through the training of
students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area. The project
brings together electrical engineers, material scientists, physicists, computer
scientists, experimentalists, and theoreticians for the purpose of realizing
advanced nanostructured quantum dot devices. The project is designed to develop
strong technical, communication, and organizational/management skills in
students through unique educational experiences made possible by a forefront
research environment. There will be active involvement of undergraduates in the
program with an emphasis on developing effective oral and written communication
skills. Cross-disciplinary research and site visits to each other will enhance
the educational process. The project is co-supported by the DMR/EM and ECS/EPDT
Divisions/Programs.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;