* 0103134
* NIRT:  Photonic Crystal Laser Technology Based on Nanostructured Active Material
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Kerry Vahala, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/2005
* USD 1,400,000.00

This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science
and Engineering" (NSF 00-119). The goal of this project is to develop laser and
optoelectronic device technologies that achieve photon and electron confinement
to generate 0-dimensional states, based on advances in nanolithography and dry
etching to fabricate nanocrystals containing self-organized quantum dots. A
decrease of a semiconductor laser's volume to its minimum size, while
maintaining high Q, along with a decrease in the electronic confinement
potential, may result in revolutionary advances in device operation. These
include high-speed operation below and at threshold, and high efficiency in the
spontaneous regime below threshold. In the ultimate limits of small active
volume and sufficiently high Q the system can enter the quantum reversible
regime necessary to create quantum-entangled states. Both these quantum limits
of the photons and electron-hole pairs are possible using III-V nanostructured
active material and nanostructured photonic crystals. The materials to be
employed in these studies will be GaAs/AlGaAs/InGaAs strained layer
heterostructures grown by molecular beam epitaxy, which will be fabricated into
photonic crystal lasers and microcavities. The III-V heterostructures will be
grown at the University of Texas/Austin Microelectronics Research Center, and
photonic crystal fabrication will take place at the California Institute of
Technology(CIT) and at UT-Austin. The III-V nanostructures will be optimized for
high-speed operation based on studies to be carried out at CIT. Manufacturable
processes for the nanolithography will be developed at UT-Austin. Graduate
research assistants working towards Ph.D. degrees represent a major component of
this research. The expected impact of the research is the development of a new
technology for low power, high speed optoelectronic interconnects suitable for
wavelength division multiplexing and low power transceivers for optical
interconnects, and new devices useful for exchange of quantum information.
&lt;br/&gt;%%% &lt;br/&gt;The project addresses basic materials science and
engineering research issues in a topical area of materials science with high
technological relevance. An important feature of the program is the integration
of research and education through the training of students in a fundamentally
and technologically significant area. The project will develop strong technical,
communication, and organizational/management skills in students through unique
educational experiences made possible by a collaborative forefront research
environment. The project is co-supported by the DMR/EM, ECS/PFET, and EEC
Divisions.&lt;br/&gt;*** &lt;br/&gt;