* 0103023
* NGS: Scalable I/O Management and Access Optimizations for Scientific Applications for High-Performance Computing
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Alok Choudhary, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 08/31/2004
* USD 99,827.00

EIA-0103023&lt;br/&gt;Alok Choudhary&lt;br/&gt;Northwestern
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scalable I/O Management &amp; Access
Optimizations for Scientific Applications for High-Performance
Computing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objective of this proposal is to address
the problem of large-scale storage, performance management of I/O, automatic
performance optimizations of I/O using historical information and access
patterns, data management, analysis, and access using simple interfaces which
permit flow of access information to lower levels software for exploiting higher
level information. Furthermore, since analysis at such a scale is simply not
feasible if done manually (e.g., visualization alone or off-line analysis),
integration of on-line analysis and feature extraction while simulations and
experiments are executing is very important. Our observation is that neither
parallel file systems nor runtime systems and database management systems (DBMS)
fully-address the large-scale data management problem, as they lack global
information about the applications access patterns and most of them are not
effective in handling storage hierarchies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We believe that
the results from the proposed research will enable scientists to address one of
the most important bottlenecks in computational simulation cycles; namely, the
bottleneck of analyzing and managing massive data in high-performance
distributed computing environment (such as Grid).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;