* 0103019
* U.S.-Hungary Biophysical Studies of the Enzyme Thiocapsa Roseopersicina Hydrogenases
* O/D,OISE
* 05/01/2001,04/30/2006
* Michael Maroney, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 04/30/2006
* USD 46,016.00

This U.S.-Hungarian research project involves Michael Maroney of the University
of Massachusetts, Amherst, and Csaba Bagyinka of the Institute of Biophysics at
the Hungarian Biological Research Center, Szeged. They intend to examine the
biological processes in hydrogenase reaction mechanisms, which catalyze the
reversible two-electron redox chemistry of dihydrogen. The project features work
with the enzyme Thiocapsa roseopersicina.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Theory suggests a
number of possibilities for structures of T. roseopersicina catalytic
intermediates which the international team will test by spectroscopic and other
physical probes. To do so the researchers plan to use time-resolved FTIR studies
for determining the species involved in catalysis. They will characterize
interconversions and their rates, hoping to detect kinetic intermediates and
follow evolving thermodynamic microstates. The US-Hungarian partners
specifically seek answers to questions about what roles protons play in
determining the charge on active sites, what redox states are involved in
catalysis, or whether protonated cysteines are present. If successful, findings
may provide clues applicable to conversion of chemical energy to electricity for
fuel cells and to storage of solar energy in chemical form via photochemical
hydrogen production.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This international project in
biophysics research fulfills the program objective of advancing scientific
knowledge by enabling experts in the Untied States and Central Europe to combine
complementary talents and share research resources in areas of strong mutual
interest and competence.