* 0103514
* NER: Nano-Textured Surfaces: Super-Hydrophobicity and Liquid Adhesion
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2002
* Frederick Lange, University of California-Santa Barbara
* Standard Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 07/31/2002
* USD 99,999.00

0103514 Lange This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation
"Nanoscale Science and Engineering" (NSF 00-119) Surfaces can be made either
super-hydrophobic or super-hydrophilic by producing a textured surface that
resembles hills and valleys, provided that the wetting angle of the liquid on a
flat surface of the same material is > 90 degree . The mechanism that produces
the effect is based on the fact that the liquid only wets the tops of the hills
and gas (air) is trapped within the valleys. Simple analytical functions have
been developed for different periodic, textured surfaces to show that the
wetting angle is related to the area fraction of wetted 'hills' and the wetting
angle for a flat surface. The lotus leaf is a natural example of a super-
hydrophobic surface. In 1997, micron size wax bumps were discovered to produce
this effect. Water drops on the lotus leaf are nearly spherical (q ~ 170 degree)
and easily roll around collecting dust particles to produce a self-cleansing
effect that has made the lotus plant revered for its purity. Synthetic super-
hydrophobic surfaces have been produced by coating a surface with a 'rumbled'
thin film and with a micromolding method. These surfaces are promising for
practical applications that include rain-repellent surfaces, surfaces designed
to decrease the resistance to fluid flow, and surfaces designed for selective
liquid condensation. Recently, we demonstrated that super-hydrophobic surfaces
could be produced by simply dip-coating a substrate into a slurry containing
small, dispersed particles. The particles were attracted to the substrate by to
their opposite surface charge, relative to the substrate. We demonstrated that
the area fraction and particle size can be systematically controlled and that
surfaces can be textured with commerically available particles in the range of 5
nm to 300 nm. By reacting the surface with fluoroalkyltrichlorosilane molecules,
a flat surface is rendered hydrophobic, and super-hydrophobic, when textured. We
observed that the super-hydrophobic effect was related to the area fraction of
adsorbed silica particles and that the super-hydrophobic effect disappears when
the average spacing between the spherical particles exceeds a critical value.
When the particles are very small the water droplet shows absolute adherence to
the surface. Both of these latter two effects can be predicted with the Laplace
equation, which relates the equilibrium curvature of a meniscus to the pressure
exerted by the water drop. Systematic experiments are planned with nano-textured
surfaces to study these two new phenomena in relation to specific functions
derived with the Laplace equation. This will be accomplished using glass
substrates that will be coated with colloidal silica particles that are
commercially available in the size range of 5 nm to 300 nm. The prepared nano-
textured surfaces will consist of randomly distributed silica sphere on a glass
substrate. The silica particles will be fixed to the substrate by sintering. The
nano-textured substrates will then be reacted with fluoroalkyltrichlorosilane
molecules to ensure optimum hydrophobicity. All experiments will be conducted
with deionized water on nano-textured surfaces treated with the same
fluoroalkyltrichlorosilane molecules. With these constrains, the surface energy
per unit area, g, and the contact angle of a flat surface, q, will be keep
constant. Spontaneous Wetting Experiments: Spontaneous wetting will occur when
the Laplace pressure exceeds a critical value to produce an instability;
spontaneous wetting is expected to be a strong function of both the area
fraction and particle size. Experiments will be designed to determine the
validity of this expected result that can be formalized as an analytical
equation. These experiments will include contact angle measurements vs. drop
size, area coverage and particle size (5 nm to 300 nm). Adhesion Experiments :
Tilting experiments will be carried out to measure the a) advancing and receding
contacts angles and b) the critical angle for drop movement, all as a function
of the drop size and the characteristics of the textured surface (area fraction
and particle size). Experiments will be carried out to determine the critical
drop size that can still adhere to the surface when the substrate is held up-
side down; these results will be related to an analytical equation that
describes the critical pressure for spontaneous de-wetting. ***