* 0103933
* CISE Postdoctoral Research and Training in Advanced Compiler Optimizations (Operating Systems and Compilers Program/CCR/CISE)
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2001,02/28/2005
* Jagannathan Ramanujam, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 02/28/2005
* USD 66,000.00

0103933&lt;br/&gt;Ramanujam, Jagannathan&lt;br/&gt;Louisiana State University
&amp; Agricultural and Mechanical College&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CISE Postdoctoral
Associates in Experimental Computer Science: CISE Postdoctoral Research and
Training in Advanced Compiler Optimization&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern
processors extensively use memory hierarchies with multiple levels of caches in
order to cope with the widening gap between processor and memory speeds. As a
result, the performance of programs depend critically on their memory access
characteristics and how these are matched to the memory hierarchy of the
processors. While several compiler transformations have been proposed towards
enhancing locality, even for programs with regular memory access patterns such
as those in dense linear algebra computations, the best compiler-optimized codes
do not match the performance of library
implementations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One goal of this research is to train a
postdoctoral research associate in the area of developing compiler
transformations (either data or computation or a combination of the two) to
handle a larger class of programming constructs than perfect nests and regular
memory accesses. Initially, the associate will build on data shackling, which
has been recently proposed as a data-centric approach to the problem of
optimizing locality. To accomplish this goal, the associate will be trained to
design an optimization strategy that will integrate data shackling (a data-
centric approach) and tiling (a control-centric approach), and implement it in a
compiler and evaluate its effectiveness. The associate
will:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1) Study a large collection of applications with both
regular and irregular memory access patterns, including scientific computing
codes and multimedia applications,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2) Design heuristics for
improving the effectiveness and applicability of data shackling, develop methods
to integrate data shackling and tiling, and implement these in a compiler,
and&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;3) Perform extensive experimental evaluation of the
techniques on several benchmarking applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;