* 0103951
* Droplet Activation in Cloud Updrafts
* GEO,AGS
* 04/15/2001,03/31/2004
* Jefferson Snider, University of Wyoming
* Continuing Grant
* Johannes Verlinde
* 03/31/2004
* USD 194,019.00

Computer models of clouds and climate rest on assumptions that relate aerosol
particles to the cloud droplets that form on them. Observations have revealed
uncertainties in these relationships. For example, the concentration of cloud
droplets computed from the measured sizes and chemical composition of aerosol
particles usually overestimates the observed concentration. The aerosols that
are capable of serving as centers for drop formation are the ones with an
affinity for water (hygroscopic). Of these, the particles important for natural
clouds in the atmosphere are those on which droplets form at relatively low
values of ambient supersaturation. The cloud-nucleating ability of an aerosol
population is measured by instruments called cloud condensation nucleus counters
(CCN counters), which record the number of cloud droplets formed per unit volume
of air as a function of the applied supersaturation. This project is an
investigation of droplet formation in different types of clouds based on
airborne observations with a CCN counter and other equipment. The work will be
conducted as part of two field projects that are independently supported by NSF:
DYCOMS-II, a study of marine stratocumulus clouds off the coast of California in
July 2001; and a Wyoming-based study of continental cumulus clouds in the summer
of 2002. The main objective of DYCOMS-II (Dynamics and Chemistry of Marine
Stratocumulus) is to obtain high-resolution aircraft data (using the NCAR C-130)
on temperature, humidity, vertical air velocity, and cloud properties, that can
be used for validating large-eddy simulations of mixing processes in the marine
boundary layer. This project contributes to DYCOMS by providing CCN measurements
and the study of aerosol-droplet relationships. Likewise, it is an important
component of the continental cloud study, based on observations with the Wyoming
King Air aircraft. In both of these field projects, the airborne Wyoming Cloud
Radar (a mm-wavelength Doppler radar) will be employed for measurements of
vertical air motion near cloud base, a parameter that is needed to test the
theoretical relationship between the activity spectra of CCN and the drops they
produce. This information has not been available in previous aerosol studies,
and may help to resolve some of the reported discrepancies between aerosol
properties and droplet counts. The ultimate goal of the research is to improve
the parameterization of clouds in large-scale models of atmospheric circulation
and climate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;