* 0103884
* The Differential Geometry of Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2001,11/30/2006
* Robert Bryant, Duke University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 11/30/2006
* USD 446,495.00

Abstract for DMS - 0103884 (Bryant, Duke)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Robert Bryant
plans to apply the theory of differential systems,&lt;br/&gt;the method of
equivalence, and methods from the calculus of variations&lt;br/&gt;to study a
collection of problems in differential geometry and&lt;br/&gt;mathematical
physics. In the first problem, motivated by mathematical&lt;br/&gt;physics,
Bryant intends to study the geometry of connections compatible&lt;br/&gt;with
either a Riemannian or pseudo-Riemannian metric that admit&lt;br/&gt;parallel
spinor fields and that differ from the Levi-Civita connection&lt;br/&gt;by a
closed 3-form. In the second problem, Bryant wants to continue&lt;br/&gt;his
investigations into the nature of singular special Lagrangian
subvarieties&lt;br/&gt;and special Lagrangian foliations of Calabi-Yau
manifolds. In the third&lt;br/&gt;problem, which concerns the study of the space
of almost complex structures on&lt;br/&gt;6-manifolds, Bryant proposes to
investigate several natural functionals on the space&lt;br/&gt;of such almost
complex structures and the geometry of the extrema&lt;br/&gt;of these
functionals. Fourth, Bryant plans to continue his study&lt;br/&gt;of the space
of homologically volume minimizing cycles in compact Lie groups,&lt;br/&gt;with
the goal of finding a complete classification of the volume
minimizing&lt;br/&gt;cycles in each homology class in a compact, simple, simply
connected Lie group.&lt;br/&gt;Finally, Bryant plans to continue his
investigations into Finsler geometry,&lt;br/&gt;particularly the problem of
classifying the spaces of constant&lt;br/&gt;flag curvature (the natural
generalization to Finsler geometry&lt;br/&gt;of constant sectional curvature in
the Riemannian case).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Optimization is a central
problem in mathematics, in which one tries&lt;br/&gt;to select the 'best'
configuration in a space of possible configurations&lt;br/&gt;of a model for a
physical system. An example is the problem of navigating&lt;br/&gt;on a body of
water in which one must take water currents into account&lt;br/&gt;in planning
the 'best' path from origin to destination, where 'best' is&lt;br/&gt;taken to
mean 'shortest time of traverse'. A path that is optimal for&lt;br/&gt;a short
period (a 'geodesic') might not remain optimal if pursued far
enough.&lt;br/&gt;This is known as instability. (For example, in a river where
the current is&lt;br/&gt;faster in midstream it turns out that downstream
geodesics are stable, but&lt;br/&gt;that upstream geodesics are not.) The
geometric quantity that measures this&lt;br/&gt;notion of stability is known as
'curvature', since it was first identified&lt;br/&gt;in studies of the curvature
of the Earth. Bryant's work studies curvature&lt;br/&gt;and 'over-determined'
systems of differential equations, and is relevant&lt;br/&gt;to optimization
problems in motion planning, control theory, robotics,&lt;br/&gt;and string
theory models in high energy physics. Some of the specific&lt;br/&gt;problems he
works on are aimed at applications to mathematical physics&lt;br/&gt;(e.g.,
connections with parallel spinor fields) or control theory
(e.g.,&lt;br/&gt;Finsler geometry, which is the subject that studies problems
such as&lt;br/&gt;the navigation problem mentioned above), while others are
aimed at more&lt;br/&gt;foundational questions about the nature of minimizers
(e.g., volume&lt;br/&gt;minimizing cycles in Lie groups) or the limits and/or
possibilities inherent&lt;br/&gt;in the current methods and techniques for
minimization problems&lt;br/&gt;(e.g., special Lagrangian geometry and almost
complex 6-manifolds).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;