* 0103246
* NER:  Novel Nanocomposites Using Controlled Dynamics Of Interfacial Processes
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2002
* Ponisseril Somasundaran, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Jorn Larsen-Basse
* 07/31/2002
* USD 99,842.00



0103246 Somasundaran This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation
"Nanoscale Science and Engineering" (NSF 00-119).

Research in nanotechnology has to date concentrated mainly on the equilibrium
properties and behavior of nano-systems, with the dynamics of the system rarely
studied. This study is based on the conviction that elucidation of the basic
mechanisms of dynamics will help in developing materials of the future which
will have an inherent smartness built into them. For example, adsorbed
polyacrylic acid structures will undergo coiled to stretched/dangling
conformational changes upon changing the pH. This can produce a marked response
in the dispersed state of suspensions. This project will focus on the dynamic
behavior of novel nano-structures and their active groups as a function of
electrical, chemical, magnetic, thermal and optical fields.

Some of the topics to be evaluated are 1) how the conformation of polymers
changes and how rapidly they do so under changing pH, thermal, electrical,
optical, magnetic and acoustic fields, 2) how the response of the active groups
can be manipulated to develop novel structures, 3) how the properties of the
nano-composites change as a function of their structure if a sinusoidal field is
applied during the preparatory stage, and 4) what happens if variations and
perturbations in the field take place after the preparation.

The general methodology involved is to add a probe to a target molecule, which
would respond to external perturbation vectors. This response would induce
conformational changes in the adsorbed target molecule which will be followed in
real time. For changes in pH we have carboxylic acid groups as probes, for
magnetic field we will use aqueous ferro-fluids (hematite nanoparticles
stabilized by surface active agents) and for optical perturbation we will use
"azo" groups. These will be adsorbed on surfaces of silica (for AFM), gold (for
SPR), and alumina (for ESR and fluorescence) functionalised for the binding of
the modified macromolecules.

The first stage of the research project involves synthesis of macromolecules
incorporated with these probes. In the second stage, the dynamics will be
studied using AFM, ESR, SPR and fluorescence spectroscopic techniques, while the
molecules are being perturbed. It is the final goal to use the information
gathered in the second stage to build novel nanomaterials with controllable
properties.