* 0103639
* Quantum Phases in Condensed Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 04/01/2001,03/31/2005
* Ramamurti Shankar, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 03/31/2005
* USD 345,000.00

This award supports theoretical research on quantum phase transitions in
electronic systems. The PI will extend his previous work to include
simultaneously, the effects of interactions between electrons and disorder due
to impurities. The main idea is to begin with the Hall problem, where the
effects of interactions are well understood and to add on disorder. Evidence
that certain magnetic phenomena in a disordered system may be described by an
effective pure interaction will be explored. The PI will explore the possibility
that a metallic state, disallowed in the noninteracting case, can occur in
systems with interactions and disorder. Another focus of this award is on the
effective communication of physical concepts and research tools of theoretical
condensed matter physics to the community, students, and the lay public.
&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;This award supports theoretical research on quantum
phase transitions -- transformations that occur at zero temperature through the
variation of an interaction or field. These transitions can have a profound
effect on materials properties at nonzero temperatures. The PI intends to focus
on a notoriously hard problem -- the reliable theoretical description of a
disordered and interacting electronic system. The PI will begin from the
fractional quantum Hall state in a clean system where the correlations that
result from the interactions between electrons are relatively well understood.
His strategy will be to introduce disorder and eventually remove the magnetic
field in the hope of elucidating the nature of the quantum mechanical ground
state of a disordered interacting system in two dimensions. The award will
support graduate and postdoctoral training in condensed matter theory and other
educational activities, including speaking and writing for a lay audience on
condensed matter physics.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;