* 0103307
* NIRT:  Molecular Brushes as Components for Nanomechanical Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2005
* Sergei Sheiko, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 06/30/2005
* USD 1,200,000.00

0103307&lt;br/&gt;Sheiko&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was submitted in
response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science and Engineering" (NSF 00-119).
Miniature actuators, which produce large strains at short response times are of
interest for nano- and biotechnologies. They can be used to construct micro
fluidic pumps, tiny locomotives, and micromanipulators. It is generally believed
that extremely efficient and fast actuators can be prepared from single
macromolecules. Cylindrical brush molecules consisting of a flexible backbone
and densely grafted side chains are possible candidates because they can change
their length in response to variations in their surrounding environment and the
effect of an external field. It is proposed to use soft cylinders with a
stimuli-responsive shape as a multifunctional platform for the development of
nanomechanical devices. One of the most interesting applications is envisioned
for an array of molecular brushes, which are tethered with one end to a solid
substrate and change their conformation under incident light. The layers will be
designed to generate surface-relief-gratings, which propagate along the
substrate plane and transport different fluids, small particles, and ultimately
biological cells. For this purpose, either IR-absorber dyes or photosensitive
azobenzene and spiropyran moieties will be introduced in the chemical structure
of brushes. Similar to tracheal cilia, the tethered molecules will beat back and
forth in a coordinated way and propel overlaying substances in a certain
direction.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will address three fundamental
questions:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(i) What are the molecular and external
parameters controlling the length of brush molecules?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(ii)
What is the force developed during contraction/extension of brush
molecules?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(iii) What are the dynamic properties of the
tethered brushes under the effect of polarized light?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
PI's will achieve their goals of answering these important questions by taking
the following steps. First, they will prepare a series of well-defined brushes
and investigate the specific effects of the side chain length, the grafting
density, and the photoisomerizable groups on the length of brush molecules.
Second, they will study mechanical properties of individual molecules and
tethered monolayers by stretching them uniaxially with an atomic force
microscope and magnetic tweezers. The experimental studies will be supported by
theoretical analysis of brush conformations. Third, an optical set-up combined
with an atomic force microscope will be built for in-situ investigation of the
morphology and the diffraction efficiency of the surface relief grating. This
will allow the measurement of the access and relaxation times of the double-
brush monolayer, and the monitoring of the transport of the overlaying
substances.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This interdisciplinary project will be based on
precise chemistry, rigorous physics, and biological concepts. It presents a
perfect opportunity for students to master several of these fundamental
disciplines and at the same time gain experience at the cutting edge of
nanotechnology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;