* 0103559
* Artificial Molecular Machines and Devices
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2005
* James Heath, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2005
* USD 999,999.00

Under the influence of light, electricity, or chemical reagents, certain
interlocked molecules, known as catenanes and rotaxanes-which comprise
appropriately matched ring and dumbbell-shaped components-will perform motions
(e.g., rotary and linear) at a molecular level reminiscent of the moving parts
of macroscopic machines. Such molecular motors hold promise as the intelligent"
building blocks for the construction of devices and machines. A team of chemists
and engineers from two different institutions (UCLA and nearby CALTECH) will
address the fundamental scientific issues surrounding the relationships between
controllable molecular machines, nanoscate devices, and the predictable
movements of machine components at a macroscopic level.

The aims of this collaborative project-which focuses on the NSE RESEARCH THEME
of Nanoscale Devices and System Architecture-are to (I) develop the template-
directed synthesis (self-assembly) of interlocked molecules (switchable
catenanes and rotaxanes) and interpenetrating supermolecules (addressable
pseudorotaxanes) as a forerunner to (2) attaching them covalently to frameworks
(e.g., silica, alumina) whose (3) synthesis (self-organization) must be
established prior to (4) demonstrating the abilities of these machine-like
(super)molecules to express different kinds of coherent movements (mainly linear
but also possibly rotary ones) characteristic of macroscopic machines when (5)
they are activated by chemicals (acids/bases or oxidizing/reducing agents) or
electrons or light (redox and electron transfer processes) as a prelude to (6)
transducing and amplifying the coherent molecular level movements into
macroscopic motions.

The specific objectives of the team are to demonstrate transduction of force and
motion from the relative mechanical movements of the components present in
catenanes, rotaxanes and pseudorotaxanes through the development-on the
nanoscale level-of actuating materials and devices reminiscent of (1) engines,
(2) levers, (3) muscles, and (4) valves.

In thc first instance, we envisage constructing supramolecular two-stroke
engines based on two-station pseudorotaxanes with the ring component lodged
covalently in appropriately-sized silica pores, leaving the semi-dumbbell-shaped
component to act as the piston. In the second example, we propose to design
mechanical levers to amplify nanometer motions generated by suitable molecular
or supramolecular machines. In the third instance, we propose to graft the ring
and thread components of pseudorotaxanes onto separate carbon nanotubes using an
aromatic polymer which we have demonstrated wraps itself helically around carbon
nanotubes in order to realize artificial muscles and actuators. And, in the
final example, we intend to develop molecular valves at the necks of suitably-
sized silica pores, lined with pseudorotaxanes that can be induced to associate
and dissociate (rings from threads) such that guest molecules located within the
pores are, respectively, trapped or free to escape.

The anticipated outcome of the proposed program of research includes (I) the
synthesis of new molecular motors capable of operating as machines, (2) the
synthesis of integrated power supplies for the machines, (3) a bottom-up and
top-down integration of frameworks for the machines, (4) new fundamental
understanding of forces, friction, etc., on the nanoscale, and (5) a group of
students with both broad perspectives and individual expertise in nanoscicnce.

With chemists and engineers working side-by-side, this highly integrated project
seeks to transform molecular machines from being scientific curiosities into
functioning nanosystems with technological potential, to enrich the education of
both graduate and undergraduate students, and to promote the public awareness of
nano-science and technology through community outreach.