* 0103253
* Research in Stochastic Processes
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2004
* Michael Marcus, CUNY City College
* Continuing Grant
* Robert J. Serfling
* 06/30/2004
* USD 249,572.00

Professors Marcus and Rosen have been studying the relationship between the
local times of strongly symmetric Markov processes and Gaussian processes for
many years. They have obtained many interesting results about local times which
they have published in more than a dozen papers and a monograph. Until recently
their work was based on an isomorphism theorem of Dynkin, which is difficult to
prove and to apply. In the last two years this has all changed. Together with
Professors Eisenbaum, Kaspi and Shi, they have obtained new, simple isomorphisms
relating local times and Gaussian processes and have greatly simplified and
clarified their early work. They have also obtained many new results; the most
significant is a simplified version of Ray's theorem on the local times of
diffusions. They will continue this work to generalize the scope of Ray's
theorem to consider local times of processes which are not continuous. They will
apply their new results and techniques to consider other properties of Markov
processes that can be studied through their local times. They also plan to
extend their results to more general classes of continuous additive functionals
of strongly symmetric Markov processes by comparing them to Gaussian chaos
processes. Professor Marcus will continue his studies of sample path properties
of infinitely divisible moving average processes. These process are fundamental
in applied mathematics. They appear to have remarkable smoothness properties and
to behave better than similarly defined Gaussian processes. This surprising
observation will be investigated. Professor Rosen plans to study the time needed
for a simple random walk to visit each point on a finite graph. The case of the
two dimensional lattice torus is particularly challenging. He intends to study
this discrete problem by relating it to a continuous one concerning Brownian
motion on the two dimensional torus. This in turn will lead to the analysis of
`late points', those points whose approach by the Brownian path takes an
unusually large amount of time. Professor Rosen also plans to study points of
infinite multiplicity on the path of planar Brownian motion. This research deals
with fundamental properties of stochastic processes and has potential
applications in all areas that deal with random phenomena. Generally speaking
phenomena that evolve in time do so in a random fashion. Examples are the Dow
Jones average, data on global warming or communication with satellites. Of
particular importance is the amount of time that a process takes a specific
value. This is studied in terms of the local time of the process. In this
proposal the local times of Markov processes will be investigated by means of
associated Gaussian processes. Until very recently these two important classes
of stochastic processes, Markov processes and Gaussian processes, were
considered to be essentially unrelated. Professors Marcus and Rosen have shown
that they are intimately related and are searching for a unified theory for
these important processes.