* 0103822
* Neuronal Dynamics of The Basal Ganglia and Related Systems
* NONE,NONE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* David Terman, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing grant
* Michael H. Steuerwalt
* 08/31/2004
* USD 252,000.00

Terman 0103822 The investigator and his colleague develop geometric, dynamical
systems tools for analyzing biophysical, conductance-based models for a broad
class of neuronal networks. These systems arise in numerous applications
including motor activity, sensory processing and learning. They also develop
computational models for the generation of sleep rhythms, epilepsy and
parkinsonian tremor. The investigators also construct and refine a mathematical
and computational model for electrical activity in the subthalamic nucleus and
external segment of the globus pallidus. These are two nuclei in the basal
ganglia, a part of the brain involved in motor activity. Dysfunction of the
basal ganglia is associated with movement disorders such as Parkinson's disease
and Huntington's disease. The model is used to test hypotheses on the role of
the basal ganglia in both normal and pathological movement. Numerous experiments
have demonstrated that neurons within the basal ganglia display a rich variety
of dynamic behavior; moreover, patterns of neuronal activity, both spatial and
temporal, are different between a normal and a pathological state. The
investigators characterize the possible patterns of neuronal activity that arise
in the model and determine how these patterns change with respect to modulations
of network parameters and structure. A long term goal is to develop a model
realistic enough so that it can shed light upon the key parameters and
mechanisms responsible for the generation and modulation of observed activity
patterns. A mathematical theory for the analysis of neuronal dynamics helps
illuminate the role played by various components of a model in generating a
particular population rhythm. These components may correspond to some intrinsic
property of individual cells, or to some network property such as the strength
and type of synaptic coupling or the probability that two cells communicate with
each other. Clarification of the mechanisms underlying different activity
patterns may lead to a classification of all possible rhythms that can emerge
from a given network, and enable us to determine how complicated a model should
be in order to display some observed behavior. It also helps predict transitions
of the network behavior as parameters in the model are varied. The investigators
develop models for neuronal dynamics, and in particular of electrical activity
in the subthalamic nucleus and external segment of the globus pallidus. These
are two nuclei in the basal ganglia, a part of the brain involved in motor
activity. Dysfunction of the basal ganglia is associated with movement disorders
such as Parkinson's disease and Huntington's disease. The model is used to test
hypotheses on the role of the basal ganglia in both normal and pathological
movement. Such models may help illuminate both fundamental neuroscience
questions and clinical issues about how the brain and central nervous system
work.