* 0103976
* 4-manifolds and controlled topology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Frank Quinn, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2004
* USD 188,886.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0103976&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Frank Quinn&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves two
distinct areas: 4-dimensional&lt;br/&gt;manifolds, and high-dimensional
controlled topology. Recent&lt;br/&gt;successes with topological 4-manifolds
suggest the time is ripe&lt;br/&gt;to try to formulate surgery obstructions for
arbitrary&lt;br/&gt;fundamental groups. Improved understanding of
handlebody&lt;br/&gt;structures and a new construction of topological field
theories&lt;br/&gt;in dimension 4 offer hopes for combinatorially-defined
invariants&lt;br/&gt;of smooth 4-manifolds. In the controlled area recent work
with&lt;br/&gt;Ranicki has provided a proof of an elusive stability theorem
for&lt;br/&gt;controlled surgery obstructions. This may point the way to a
full&lt;br/&gt;description of the groups as generalized homology, analogous
to&lt;br/&gt;earlier descriptions of the end and controlled
h-cobordism&lt;br/&gt;obstructions. Such a description would have applications
ranging&lt;br/&gt;from local structure in stratified sets to sharpening
2-torsion&lt;br/&gt;conclusions in some cases of the Novikov
conjecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project explores the boundary between the
discrete and&lt;br/&gt;continuous worlds. Geometry and analysis (continuous
points of&lt;br/&gt;view) have revealed strange behavior in dimension 4. In
terms of&lt;br/&gt;the mathematics used in physics, other dimensions are
"classical"&lt;br/&gt;while dimension 4 seems to be "quantum."
Topologically&lt;br/&gt;4-dimensional objects are described in terms of
3-dimensional&lt;br/&gt;building blocks (a discrete point of view), particularly
knots&lt;br/&gt;and links in 3-space. One objective is to bridge the gap
between&lt;br/&gt;these two views, and in particular understand the
quantum&lt;br/&gt;behavior from the topological point of view. In higher
dimensions&lt;br/&gt;algebraic and qualitative topology (e.g. surgery theory)
are&lt;br/&gt;discrete points of view. Twenty years ago the PI bridged the
gap&lt;br/&gt;between this and local continuous topology in one
case,&lt;br/&gt;"pseudoisotopy." This has had numerous applications. Many
more&lt;br/&gt;applications await a widening of this bridge to include
other&lt;br/&gt;cases, for instance algebraic K-theory and surgery, but
the&lt;br/&gt;methods are complex and intensely technical and have so
far&lt;br/&gt;resisted extension. The other objective of the project is
to&lt;br/&gt;carry through these generalizations.&lt;br/&gt;