* 0103160
* Research in Geometrical PDE
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Jie Qing, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2005
* USD 53,999.00

Abstract for DMS - 0103160&lt;br/&gt;PI: Jie Qing&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposed project consists of two related research &lt;br/&gt;topics. The first
part is research in conformal geometry. &lt;br/&gt;The second part is a
continuation of the research of &lt;br/&gt;formation and structure of
singularity developed along &lt;br/&gt;geometric flows. For conformal geometry
part it takes surface &lt;br/&gt;theory as the guideline of geometry in higher
dimension. The &lt;br/&gt;theory of conformally flat structure, in 4 dimension
for &lt;br/&gt;instance, has not been so successful because of the lack of
&lt;br/&gt;right analytic tools, in our view point. But it seems that
&lt;br/&gt;some replacement of complex analysis by theory of fourth
&lt;br/&gt;order PDE is found to be very promising to study conformal
&lt;br/&gt;geometry. Therefore the main thread in the part of this
&lt;br/&gt;proposed research is to further develop conformal geometry
&lt;br/&gt;with those newly developed analytic tools. The proposed
&lt;br/&gt;research takes a fundamental and comprehensive approach &lt;br/&gt;to
the study of conformal geometry. It will significantly &lt;br/&gt;enhance and
develop the conformal geometry. It will also &lt;br/&gt;provide some ways to
better understand topology in 3 and 4 &lt;br/&gt;dimension. For the second part
of this proposed project we &lt;br/&gt;continue our research in the study of
formation and structure &lt;br/&gt;of singularity developed along the heat flow
for harmonic &lt;br/&gt;maps from surfaces. It is always very interesting to
&lt;br/&gt;understand the behavior of the flow across the finite time
&lt;br/&gt;singularity. The better understanding of the finite time
&lt;br/&gt;singularity is believed to be very helpful in further
&lt;br/&gt;applications of the theory of harmonic maps in topology and
&lt;br/&gt;physics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The development of conformal geometry
has a very long &lt;br/&gt;history and extensive literature. It is intimately
tied with&lt;br/&gt;modern physics as we have seen it in conformal field
theory.&lt;br/&gt;Particularly it becomes even more important as the
correspondence &lt;br/&gt;between quantum gravity and conformal field theory
relatively&lt;br/&gt;well understood in physics demands mathematical foundation,
as&lt;br/&gt;well as stimulates development in conformal geometry.
Therefore&lt;br/&gt;it is clear that conformal geometry is an exciting frontier
of&lt;br/&gt;modern sciences. Singularities naturally develop in many
&lt;br/&gt;mathematical models for almost everything in sciences.
Singularity,&lt;br/&gt;for instance, develop when some parameters in the
physical system &lt;br/&gt;approach certain critical values, like Ginzburg-
Landau model in &lt;br/&gt;super-conductivity and super-fluids. To study the
singularities in &lt;br/&gt;evolution systems have been the major problems in
the theory of &lt;br/&gt;partial differential equations with tremendous
applications to &lt;br/&gt;many physical and engineering fields. Any essential
analytic &lt;br/&gt;progress in this line will greatly attract attention from
experts &lt;br/&gt;in all related areas. At last, but not the least, the
proposed &lt;br/&gt;project is also generating research activities to the
benefit&lt;br/&gt;of the graduate program in the Department of Mathematics at
UCSC.&lt;br/&gt;