* 0103667
* The Topology, Geometry and Arithmetic of Moduli Spaces of Curves
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2004
* Richard Hain, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 06/30/2004
* USD 107,061.00

DMS-0103667&lt;br/&gt;Richard M. Hain&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to better understand the &lt;br/&gt;structure of mapping class groups
and then to apply this &lt;br/&gt;knowledge to the problem of understanding
motives over &lt;br/&gt;the spectrum of the integers. The Principal Investigator
&lt;br/&gt;hopes to compute the stable highest weight decomposition
&lt;br/&gt;of the graded quotients of the lower central series of &lt;br/&gt;the
Torelli groups (tensored with the reals) as modules &lt;br/&gt;over the real
symplectic group of rank g. This should be &lt;br/&gt;of interest to those
studying 3-manifold invariants. The &lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator plans to
use his knowledge of this&lt;br/&gt;stable decomposition to study the image of
the Galois group &lt;br/&gt;of the rational numbers on appropriate completions
of mapping &lt;br/&gt;class groups. In particular, he (in joint work with Makoto
&lt;br/&gt;Matsumoto) hopes to be able to characterize the Zariski
&lt;br/&gt;closure of the image of the Galois group in the group of
&lt;br/&gt;outer automorphisms of the relative unipotent completion
&lt;br/&gt;of mapping class groups of large genus. This should lead
&lt;br/&gt;to improved understanding of the connections between Hodge
&lt;br/&gt;Theory and Galois Theory; in particular, to improved
&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the role of mixed zeta numbers in Galois
theory.&lt;br/&gt;The Principal Investigator also plans to study the
&lt;br/&gt;pseudoconvexity of the moduli spaces of curves. &lt;br/&gt;Looijenga
has conjectured that there is a proper,&lt;br/&gt;non-negative,
(g-2)-pseudoconvex real-valued function &lt;br/&gt;defined on the moduli space
of genus g curves. Hain, in &lt;br/&gt;joint work with Looijenga, hopes to prove
that the function &lt;br/&gt;that he constructed with David Reed several years
ago is &lt;br/&gt;such a function. This result would lead to new
vanishing&lt;br/&gt;results for coherent cohomology of moduli spaces of curves
&lt;br/&gt;as well as unified proofs of several results of Diaz and
&lt;br/&gt;Harer on the topology of these moduli
spaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Topology is the study of those geometrical
properties &lt;br/&gt;of surfaces and their generalizations that remain
unchanged &lt;br/&gt;under stretching (short of tearing) and other continuous
&lt;br/&gt;deformations. Geometry is the study of those properties &lt;br/&gt;of
surfaces and their generalizations that preserve geometric&lt;br/&gt;properties
such as distances and/or angles. There is a profound connection between the
topological symmetries of a surface&lt;br/&gt;(called the mapping class group of
the surface), the geometry &lt;br/&gt;of all of the different ways of measuring
angles on such a &lt;br/&gt;surface (the moduli space of conformal structures on
the surface) &lt;br/&gt;and the arithmetical properties of the surface when
viewed as &lt;br/&gt;the graph of a polynomial. Questions about mapping
class&lt;br/&gt;groups and moduli spaces of conformal structures on surfaces
&lt;br/&gt;arise in many areas of mathematics (such as the study of numbers,
&lt;br/&gt;and algebraic geometry), and have applications to particle
&lt;br/&gt;physics through string theory and conformal field theory. There
&lt;br/&gt;are also potential significant applications to cryptography. The
&lt;br/&gt;goal of this proposal is to further explore and understand the
intricate and deep connections between these topological, &lt;br/&gt;geometrical
and arithmetical aspects of surface theory,&lt;br/&gt;especially those aspects
with connections to number theory.&lt;br/&gt;