* 0103022
* NER:  Exploring A Novel Plasma-Based Copper Nano-Line Etch Method for Nano-Devices And Circuits
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2001,09/30/2002
* Yue Kuo, Texas A&M Engineering Experiment Station
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 09/30/2002
* USD 81,161.00

&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;0103022&lt;br/&gt;Kuo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal
was received in response to NSE, NSF-0019. The goal of this proposal is to
explore a novel method for etching copper nano-lines at room temperature, which
is crucial for the fabrication of future nano-devices and circuits. The PI plans
to study the key step in the process, i.e., a unique anisotropic plasma-copper
reaction, in the nano-scale region.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an experimental
research project. The PI is going to investigate a number of issues in the nano-
line definition process, such as the critical dimension control, profile,
sidewall surface, and residue formation, through fundamental studies of plasma-
copper surface reaction, solid-state reactant transport and copper-halide
reactions. This research involves the microstructure of the copper material,
plasma chemistry, and directional solid-state reaction mechanisms. In addition
to plasma process characterization, he will make extensive use of Transmission
Electron Microscopy (TFM) as well as other thin-film analytical methods to probe
the plasma-copper reaction phenomenon at the nano-
scale.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The plasma reaction will he carried out in the
principal investigator's (P1's) Thin Film Microelectronic Research Laboratory.
All experiments will employ a simple parallel-plate reactive ion etching reactor
with a 13.56 MHz RF generator. The nano-line pattern, e.g., sub-100 nm, will be
prepared in the NSF National Nanofabrication Users Network (NNUN) facility
located in the Pennsylvania State University using c-beam lithography. The
industry sponsor AMD agrees to support this project by supplying thin film
characterization service, technical consulting, and 6-inch wafers.