* 0103647
* Manifolds and C*-Algebraic Index Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Jonathan Rosenberg, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 06/30/2005
* USD 81,549.00

DMS-0103647&lt;br/&gt;Johathan M. Rosenberg&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Professor Jonathan Rosenberg will study the topology and
&lt;br/&gt;geometry of manifolds and manifold-like spaces, as well as
&lt;br/&gt;C*-algebraic index theory. By this we mean a combination
&lt;br/&gt;of C*-algebra theory, index theory of elliptic
operators,&lt;br/&gt;K-theory, geometry, and topology. One main focus of the
&lt;br/&gt;proposal will be the use of invariants coming from C*-algebras
(especially Kasparov's KK-theory) to study the geometry and &lt;br/&gt;topology
of manifolds. For example, KK-classes coming from the classical elliptic
operators (the Euler characteristic&lt;br/&gt;operator, the signature operator,
and the Dolbeault operator)&lt;br/&gt;will be intensively studied. Attention
will also be paid to the equivariant case, where a finite group acts on the
manifold in question. These studies will deepen the link between
&lt;br/&gt;topological and analytic approaches to manifold theory. &lt;br/&gt;In
addition, Professor Rosenberg will study the classification &lt;br/&gt;of
manifolds via their Yamabe invariants, and the &lt;br/&gt;classification of
metrics of positive scalar curvature, &lt;br/&gt;problems which involve a quite
subtle blend&lt;br/&gt;of differential topology, differential
geometry,&lt;br/&gt;and analysis. He will also study the
applications&lt;br/&gt;of K-theory to the study of C*-algebras, and various
&lt;br/&gt;related problems on algebraic K-theory, especially on
&lt;br/&gt;algebras of operators or on algebras coming from
&lt;br/&gt;quantization of geometrical systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The context
of this project is the use of new methods &lt;br/&gt;in analysis, based on
noncommutative operator algebras, &lt;br/&gt;for attacking problems in geometry
and topology. On the &lt;br/&gt;one hand, these methods are useful as a new
source&lt;br/&gt;of tools for studying geometry, especially in high dimensions.
&lt;br/&gt;And on the other hand, the methods are motivated (and more
&lt;br/&gt;or less forced) by the quantization of classical physical
&lt;br/&gt;systems. The study of the scalar curvature properties of
&lt;br/&gt;manifolds is also motivated by problems in gravitation.
&lt;br/&gt;Professor Rosenberg will continue to train
graduate&lt;br/&gt;students in analysis, geometry, and topology, and will
&lt;br/&gt;also work toward integration of mathematical software &lt;br/&gt;into
the undergraduate mathematics curriculum.&lt;br/&gt;