* 0103409
* nirt:  Synthesis of and Structure-Function Relationships in Heterostructures of Quasi-2D Materials
* NONE,NONE
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2006
* Stephen Kevan, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 06/30/2006
* USD 1,200,000.00

This research applies a novel synthetic approach based upon modulated elemental
reactants to kinetically trap oriented thin films of novel compounds,
heterostructures, and superlattices based upon quasi-two-dimensional transition
metal dichalcogenide compounds their 3d transition metal intercalates and
phosphochalcogenide compounds. These materials provide unprecedented variability
in the type of heterostructures that can be formed since the constituent
materials range from wide and narrow gap semiconductors to antiferromagnetic
insulators to semimetals to metals, some ferromagnetic, antiferromagnetic, or
superconducting. X-ray diffraction, cross sectional TEM, SEM, AFM and STM will
be used to characterize the structure and defects in these new materials. The
targeted materials are expected to exhibit distinct and interesting magnetic and
transport properties. Specific goals include: (1) grow and characterize metal-
semimetal and metal-semiconductor superlattices; (2) produce unusual magnetic
structures by preparing superlattices containing components with different
magnetic structures and; (3) induce an insulator to metal transition in the
correlated insulating MPX3 compounds by alloying and/or layering to produce
quasi-2D correlated metallic states that we expect to have interesting
conducting properties. Students will be trained in cutting-edge research
techniques during this research and exposed to the challenges and rewards of
industrial research through Oregon's Ph.D. internship program %%% This work uses
a recently developed synthetic approach to prepare thin films of novel
compounds, heterostructures, and superlattices based upon quasi-two-dimensional
transition metal dichalcogenide compounds, their 3d transition metal
intercalates and phosphochalcogenide compounds. These materials provide
unprecedented variability in the type of heterostructures that can be formed
since the constituent materials range from wide and narrow gap semiconductors to
antiferromagnetic insulators to semimetals to metals, some ferromagnetic,
antiferromagnetic, or superconducting. X-ray diffraction will be used to follow
the evolution of the initial reactants to crystalline superlattices, to
determine the superlattice modulation and to solve crystal structures of these
new materials. Cross sectional TEM will be used to explore the nature and
density of the stacking defects, and SEM, AFM and STM will be used to
characterize their lateral structure. The targeted materials include metal-
semimetal and metal-semiconductor superlattices, unusual magnetic superlattices,
and correlated-electron conductors. These materials are expected to exhibit
distinct, interesting and technologically relevant magnetic and transport
properties that can be systematically controlled by varying the structure of the
superlattice periods. Students in this program receive a broad and rigorous
training in materials science, chemistry and physics and will have opportunities
to spend part of their graduate careers participating in Oregon's Ph.D.
internship program which is designed to expose students to the challenges and
rewards of industrial research and development.

