* 0103748
* CISE Postdoctoral Research Associates in Experimental Computer Science: Parallel Hierarchical Methods for Computational Electromagnetics (CCR-NSG; ACIR)
* CSE,CNS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* Srinivas Aluru, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 07/31/2004
* USD 66,000.00

0103748&lt;br/&gt;Aluru, Srinivas.&lt;br/&gt;Iowa State
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CISE Postdoctoral Associates in Experimental
Computer Science: Parallel Hierarchical Methods for Computational
Electromagnetics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is to develop
parallel algorithms and build parallel software for the solution of a wide
variety of problems involving the computational analysis of electromagnetic
scattering. Specific problems of interest are: 1) electromagnetic scattering
from quasi-planar surfaces, 2) dielectric random rough surfaces, 3) multiregion
surfaces, 4) three-dimensional problems where the fields are characterized by
frequency and 5) three-dimensional problems where the field behavior is
dependent on time history. The unifying theme in addressing these problems will
be the use of the hierarchical Fast Multipole Method and its variants. A major
goal of the research is to develop the capability to solve highly non-uniform
problems efficiently. Emphasis will be placed on the development of
distribution-independent algorithms, i.e., provably efficient algorithms for
which the run-time is independent of the distribution without making any
assumptions on either the range of distributions or the limited precision of
computer arithmetic. The postdoctoral research associate will develop and
validate software employing these algorithms in close cooperation with experts
in electromagnetics at Iowa State University. Validation of the results will be
carried out via comparisons against experimental data as well as numerical
results obtained from slower, established solvers. The associate will perform
experimental evaluation of the performance of the software using conventional
parallel computers and high-performance
clusters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0103748&lt;br/&gt;Aluru,
Srinivas.&lt;br/&gt;Iowa State University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CISE Postdoctoral
Associates in Experimental Computer Science: Parallel Hierarchical Methods for
Computational Electromagnetics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this research is
to develop parallel algorithms and build parallel software for the solution of a
wide variety of problems involving the computational analysis of electromagnetic
scattering. Specific problems of interest are: 1) electromagnetic scattering
from quasi-planar surfaces, 2) dielectric random rough surfaces, 3) multiregion
surfaces, 4) three-dimensional problems where the fields are characterized by
frequency and 5) three-dimensional problems where the field behavior is
dependent on time history. The unifying theme in addressing these problems will
be the use of the hierarchical Fast Multipole Method and its variants. A major
goal of the research is to develop the capability to solve highly non-uniform
problems efficiently. Emphasis will be placed on the development of
distribution-independent algorithms, i.e., provably efficient algorithms for
which the run-time is independent of the distribution without making any
assumptions on either the range of distributions or the limited precision of
computer arithmetic. The postdoctoral research associate will develop and
validate software employing these algorithms in close cooperation with experts
in electromagnetics at Iowa State University. Validation of the results will be
carried out via comparisons against experimental data as well as numerical
results obtained from slower, established solvers. The associate will perform
experimental evaluation of the performance of the software using conventional
parallel computers and high-performance
clusters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;