* 0103888
* Geometric Analysis of Vortex Sheet Evolution and Value Distribution of Harmonic Maps into Hadamard Surfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Zheng-Chao Han, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2005
* USD 88,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: DMS-0103888&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Han's proposal
comprises of two research projects and an education project.&lt;br/&gt;In the
first research project Han proposes to adapt recent techniques
from&lt;br/&gt;geometric analysis to study certain geometrical and analytical
problems in&lt;br/&gt;the evolution of vortex sheets in two dimensional Euler
equations. &lt;br/&gt;In particular, the project proposes to study a possible
notion of &lt;br/&gt;weak solution in terms of rectifiable varifolds, which, if
successful,&lt;br/&gt;should provide more geometric description to the evolution
of &lt;br/&gt;singular vortex sheet than the currently available notion of
&lt;br/&gt;weak solution in terms of integrable vorticity
functions.&lt;br/&gt;In some prototype situations, Han also proposes to study
the more precise&lt;br/&gt;geometric behavior in the roll up of intersecting
vortex sheets. &lt;br/&gt;In the second project, Han proposes to establish a
&lt;br/&gt;value distribution theory for harmonic maps into negatively curved
surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;Recent results in this area have suggested very rich
geometric &lt;br/&gt;behavior of such harmonic maps in terms of induced
foliation structures&lt;br/&gt;and tree-like structures in the vicinity of
infinity.&lt;br/&gt;The geometric description of such behavior is closely
related to&lt;br/&gt;the solvability of asymptotic boundary value problems of
the relevant&lt;br/&gt;system of partial differential equations. The interaction
of geometric analysis, &lt;br/&gt;partial differential equations, and their
application to some interesting &lt;br/&gt;applied analysis problems is the
thread connecting the two projects. &lt;br/&gt;In the education project, Han
proposes to rejuvenate an undergraduate geometry course &lt;br/&gt;mostly for
math education majors and an undergraduate differential geometry course
&lt;br/&gt;to better serve the need of a wider audience that has grown out of
&lt;br/&gt;today's rapidly changing technological environments&lt;br/&gt;and
emergence of new interdisciplinary fields.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
good understanding of the evolution of concentrated vortices, such&lt;br/&gt;as
vortex sheet, has immensely important practical values. &lt;br/&gt;The
mathematical equations that govern the evolution of vortex
sheets&lt;br/&gt;exhibit many features very similar to those that have
been&lt;br/&gt;successfully studied in geometric analysis in recent years. The
PI hopes&lt;br/&gt;that the interactions of ideas and tools from across the
fields will&lt;br/&gt;bring some fruitful results in understanding better the
geometric aspects&lt;br/&gt;of vortex sheet evolution. In his second project,
the PI also hopes to&lt;br/&gt;combine closer the geometric and the analytic
approaches, the success of which&lt;br/&gt;may provide further insight back to
purely geometrical or analytical problems.&lt;br/&gt;The successful
implementation of the third proposed project will &lt;br/&gt;will be a positive
contribution to the K-12 math education through &lt;br/&gt;better training of
math education majors.&lt;br/&gt;