* 0103851
* Studies in K-theory and Arithmetic
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Wieslawa Niziol, University of Utah
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2005
* USD 110,790.00

The investigator studies various K-theories of algebraic varieties&lt;br/&gt;and
their relation to arithmetic cohomologies. In the case of
classical&lt;br/&gt;algebraic K-theory this relation has found numerous
applications in&lt;br/&gt;number theory, for example, to special values of
L-functions of motives.&lt;br/&gt;In the last couple of year the investigator
has introduced log-K-theory&lt;br/&gt;groups of log-schemes (log-scheme is a
generalization of a toric variety)&lt;br/&gt;and studied their basic properties.
She proposes to continue studying&lt;br/&gt;these groups as well as regulator
maps into log-crystalline and log-etale&lt;br/&gt;cohomologies. She believes
that this will have important
arithmetic&lt;br/&gt;applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal deals with
number theory and algebraic geometry. &lt;br/&gt;Number theory is the study of
the properties of the whole numbers&lt;br/&gt;and is the oldest branch of
mathematics. Algebraic geometry studies&lt;br/&gt;geometric figures that can be
defined by the simplest of equations,&lt;br/&gt;namely polynomials. The
questions and phenomena which arise from&lt;br/&gt;combining these two subjects
serve as driving forces in much of&lt;br/&gt;contemporary mathematics research.
Moreover, the combination of&lt;br/&gt;these subjects has contributed many
applications in such diverse&lt;br/&gt;areas as codes and data transmission,
robotics, and theoretical&lt;br/&gt;computer science.