* 0103585
* Control of Nanostructures Via Metal-Carbon Interactions Over Multiple Length Scale Via Metal and Metal Carbide Nanojunctions and Nanowelds
* MPS,DMR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2007
* Peter Eklund, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Linda Sapochak
* 08/31/2007
* USD 1,125,000.00

The main technical theme of this research is to undertake an interdisciplinary
study (chemical engineering, physics and chemistry) of the structuring and
restructuring of nanophase carbons, including nanoporous carbons, nanotubes,
nanoropes, C60 fullerene and MetCars and the nanoscale processes leading to
control of specific metal-carbon interactions. The main purpose is to study
rearrangenment of amorphous carbons into nanocrystalline domains by the action
of alkali and transition metals, welding of carbon nanotubes to one another
through the formation of metal carbide nanojunctions and other metallic
nanowelds, bonding of three dimensional structures consisting of vertically and
horizontally oriented carbon nanotubes oriented orthogonally and welded through
the metal-carbide nanojunctions, and the fabrication of monolithic metal carbide
membranes with regular, uniform and aligned pores (vias) through the bulk normal
to the average macroscopic membrance surface. The near term intellectual
products of this research will lead to novel nanofabrication processes and to
unique nanomaterials that can be used for electronic, mechanical and chemical
applications.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The direct products of this research will
be new physics, new chemistry, and new materials nanofabrication processes. The
students trained in these interdisciplinary nanomaterials areas will be highly
competitive in the nanoscience and -technology based industrial job markets of
nanomedicine, nanoelectronics and nanochemical structures and processes. This
grant is being co-funded by the Solid State Chemistry, Ceramics and Metals
Programs of the Division of Materials Research, and the Kinetics, Catalysis and
Molecular Processes Program of the Division of Chemical and Transport
Systems.&lt;br/&gt;