* 0103082
* NIRT: Phonon Transport in Nanostructures with Application to Ultrathin Silicon-on-Insulator (SOI) Transistors
* ENG,CBET
* 08/15/2001,01/31/2006
* Myung Jhon, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Patrick E. Phelan
* 01/31/2006
* USD 1,304,891.00

Proposal Number: 0103082&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Mehdi Ashe
ghi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Thi
s proposal was received in response to NSE, NSF-0019. The project is focused on
the study of two major nanoscale phenomena: (a) phonon transport in single
crystal silicon layer of thickness in the range of 10-50 nm and (b) ballistic
phonon transport near hotspots ( appr. 10 nm) in the active region of silicon-
on-insulator (SOI) transistors. The experimental part of the study involves the
very first measurements of thermal conductivity of nanometer size, single
crystal silicon layer and ballistic phonon transport near a hotspot in a
transistor. Transient and steady state heat transfer experiments on
nanostructures at both room and cryogenic temperatures will be performed to
reveal the fundamentals of phonon transport at nanometer scales. The theoretical
effort focuses on numerical simulations of phonon Boltzmann transport equation
(BTE) in the relaxation time approximation, accounting for phonon dispersion as
well as frequency dependent phonon mean free paths in silicon. The analytical
work will take advantage of the experimental data and numerical simulations to
introduce simple, yet physically realistic, expressions for phonon transport in
nanostructures, which can be used for rapid electrical/thermal
simulation.&lt;br/&gt;