* 0103042
* Survey of Orthopteroid Insects of Hispaniola
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Daniel Otte, Academy of Natural Sciences Philadelphia
* Standard Grant
* Judith Skog
* 07/31/2004
* USD 295,000.00

Survey of Orthopteroid Insects of Hispaniola&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The rapidly
expanding human population is putting great pressure on the Hispaniolan forests
and other natural areas. Many species have probably gone extinct. Others are
endangered. This project will assist in the biotic inventory of insects by
intensively surveying the orthopteroid insects (crickets, katydids,
grasshoppers, cockroaches, mantids, and stick insects). Despite their ubiquitous
presence and significance in agriculture, the orthopteroids are poorly known in
Hispaniola.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goals of the project are to sample
a variety of habitats with special emphasis on the mountain reserve areas,
identify the known species, describe and name the species not yet known to
science, provide keys on the internet to identify the species (and information
on the habitats and distributions of species), and collaborate with local
biologists in building an infrastructure for future Hispaniolan entomological
research. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The oldest parts of Hispaniola are about 105
million years old. Because of its age and proximity to the rich Neotropical
biota, Hispaniola has the third highest plant diversity of the world's oceanic
islands. It is expected that the insect diversity, once known, will be huge,
perhaps comparable to that of the continental tropics. The total number of
recorded Orthopteroids from Hispaniola is 238; however, the actual number may be
as much as six times the number presently known. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because
of the pioneering use of the internet to provide taxonomic information, this
project will almost immediately benefit the local infrastructure of biodiversity
studies in Hispaniola and will help to promote entomological research. The
principal vehicle for communicating the results will be an existing global
taxonomic database to orthopteroid insects (Orthoptera Species File Online:
http://viceroy.eeb.uconn.edu/orthoptera). &lt;br/&gt;