* 0103175
* NIRT:  Nanoscale Molecular Opto-Electronics
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2006
* Gari Harris, Arizona State University
* Continuing Grant
* Rongqing Hui
* 07/31/2006
* USD 1,213,500.00

0103175&lt;br/&gt;Lindsay&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was submitted in
response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science and Engineering" (NSF 00-119).
It brings together experts in organic photochemistry, experimental and
theoretical physicists and engineers in a University (Arizona State)-Industry
(Motorola)collaboration aimed at developing nanoscale molecular optoelectronic
devices based on paradigms from photosynthetic electron
transfer.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The first phase of the project builds on the PIs'
current work on the basic building blocks of molecular electronic devices. They
will use bifunctionalized molecules covalently bonded at one end to a gold-
coated conducting AFM tip and at the other end to a gold substrate. In this way
they will measure the electrical properties of simple molecular insulators
(n-alkanes) and molecular wires (carotenoids) at the single molecule level.
These measurements will be compared to first-principles simulations, with the
goal of developing both theory and experiment until they have a reasonably
accurate description of transport in both the molecules and their contacts to
the metal electrodes. Armed with this information, they will insert the
molecules into nano-scale gaps in gold electrodes on oxidized silicon
wafers.These devices will be made at Motorola. Final gap fabrication uses
active-feedback control of electrochemical deposition, a technique developed by
a consultant to the group.The goals of this step are to (1)make two electrode
devices on wafers that can be characterized in terms of the single-molecule AFM
data and (2) explore the current-voltage characteristics of these devices with
greater flexibility than possible in the AFM (for example, making temperature-
dependent measurements).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The second phase will focus on the
electronic properties of optically excited molecules, and molecules in high-
energy charge-separated states. The use of light to provide additional inputs to
molecular-scale electronic devices offers several advantages, and may lead the
way to the design and fabrication of technologically useful constructs. They
will use much the same approach as outlined above, but with the addition of
controlled optical excitation of chromophores. They will start with the
carotenoids, as the simplest system, but will go on to study molecules
containing porphyrins and fullerenes that are built to make transitions into
long-lived triplet states, or into long-live charge-separated states. These
systems present theoretical as well as experimental challenges, and they propose
computational approaches for dealing with nuclear-relaxation on excitation or
charging and for dealing with highly correlated molecular electronic
states.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;They propose a single-molecule opto-electronic
switch as a candidate device on which to focus the long-range efforts of the
group. The device might prove useful as an optoelectronic molecular-scale
building block. But developing the science and technology that would go into
building the device and understanding it are the main motivation for this
project.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This group provides an extraordinary opportunity
for training minority students in multidisciplinary approaches to nanoscience in
both academic and industrial research environments.&lt;br/&gt;