* 0103877
* Aspects of Geometry and Topology Related to High Energy Theoretical Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* John Morgan, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 07/31/2004
* USD 66,999.00

DMS-0103877 John W. Morgan

The work proposed to be carried out under this grant concerns mathematical
formulation and proof of some of the mathematical dualities arising from high
energy physics. The first duality to be studied concerns the F-theory/heterotic
string duality. The mathematical formulation of the duality is that for a
certain range of parameters the moduli spaces of classical vacua for various
compactifications of F-theory and of heterotic string theory should be
isomorphic. We conjecture that the appropriate mathematical statement is that
the moduli spaces of heterotic vacua are non-normal infinite-sheeted coverings
of the F-theory moduli space associated with maximal parabolic subgroups of the
fundamental group of the F-theory moduli space. These maximal parabolic
subgroups are the fundamental groups of neighborhoods of certain divisors at
infinity. This study involves a detailed analysis of the moduli space of semi-
stable principal bundles over elliptic curves as well as the notions of
differential cohomology. The second duality is the famous quantum field theory
duality between SU(2) Yang-Mills theory and the abelian Seiberg-Witten theory.
These dual descriptions are simply the high and low energy limits of a twisted
version of supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory. One part of a mathematical
understanding of this duality involves giving precise mathematical formulations
of the high and low energy limits of the twisted supersymmetric theory and
showing how certain correlation functions in this twisted theory converge in the
sense of perturbation theory to the usual Donaldson polynomial invariants in the
high energy limit and to the Seiberg-Witten invariants in the low energy limit.
This part of the story is surely amenable to rigorous mathematical formulation.
The more ambitious goal is to find some mathematical formalism which allows for
a mathematically rigorous interpelation between these two limits -- a
mathematical substitute for the mathematically undefined quantum field theory --
which would allow one to compare the high and low energy limits.

The connection between mathematics and high energy theoretical physics has
always been a close one. In the last few years it has taken on new aspects. With
the study of global issues in quantum field theory and string theory has come a
new level of interaction between geometry and topology and these areas of
theoretical physics. Belief in the existence of these (to date non-rigorous)
physics theories leads physicists to make predictions, i.e., conjectures in
mathematics. In a strange way these conjectures play the role that physical
predictions used to play. Now the physicists take confirmation that they are on
the right track when these mathematical predictions can be verified by rigorous
mathematics, which, since it is rigorous, can not make use of the quantum field
theory paradigms that we used to make the prediction in the first place. The
interest in mathematics of this interplay is that the sorts of mathematical
statements that are predicted in this way have turned out to be quite novel
producing conjectures unlike anything that had been seen before. Much of the
progress the last ten or fifteen years in large areas of geometry and topology
traces back to this source. One of the most fruitful sources of mathematical
conjectures has been various dualities in physics. These occur when there is
more than one classical mathematical limit of a quantum field theory or string
theory. The mathematical objects that arise in the description of the classical
limits then are related because they are limits of a single quantum field theory
or string theory. The mathematical problem is always the same -- define
rigorously what the relationship is and then establish it mathematically. The
work proposed here is exactly along these lines for two such dualities.