* 0103954
* Collaborative Research: Capillary Interfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2005
* Robert Finn, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2005
* USD 140,498.00

NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0103954&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical Sciences:
Collaborative Research: Capillary &lt;br/&gt;Interfaces&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DMS
-0103954&lt;br/&gt;Finn&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research addresses behavior of
solutions to the &lt;br/&gt;mathematical equations of capillarity theory. The
&lt;br/&gt;equations will be studied in their full nonlinear
&lt;br/&gt;generality, using procedures deriving from the intrinsic
&lt;br/&gt;structure of the physical problems. These procedures &lt;br/&gt;have
turned out to interact in a natural way with newly &lt;br/&gt;developed methods
of geometric measure theory, which were &lt;br/&gt;developed initially for the
special case of minimal &lt;br/&gt;surfaces in other contexts. In a number of
cases of &lt;br/&gt;interest, striking and unusual behavior of solutions was
&lt;br/&gt;uncovered in this way. Our investigations will continue &lt;br/&gt;in
directions that have already led to discoveries of &lt;br/&gt;discontinuous
dependence on boundary data, symmetry &lt;br/&gt;breaking, failure of existence
under physical conditions, &lt;br/&gt;failure of uniqueness under conditions for
which &lt;br/&gt;solutions exist, and discontinuous reversal of comparison
&lt;br/&gt;relations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Capillary interfaces play an
important role in many &lt;br/&gt;practical situations, notably in reduced
gravity or in &lt;br/&gt;configurations for which physical length scales are
very &lt;br/&gt;small. Capillarity is an essential concept for
&lt;br/&gt;describing situations in which substances are in contact
&lt;br/&gt;at surface interfaces and do not mix. A precise
&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the mathematical properties of solutions
&lt;br/&gt;of the capillarity equations will provide valuable &lt;br/&gt;insight
for resolving such matters as how to design fuel &lt;br/&gt;tanks on an orbiting
spacecraft so that the fuel will be &lt;br/&gt;accessibly located, predicting
where oil or water resides &lt;br/&gt;in underground pore spaces of rocks, or
determining the &lt;br/&gt;manner in which the faces of microelectronic
components &lt;br/&gt;will become partially covered when they are dipped in a
&lt;br/&gt;coating bath. The work under consideration is of
&lt;br/&gt;particular relevance for predicting unexpected behavior &lt;br/&gt;of
liquids in these and in other applications.&lt;br/&gt;