* 0103511
* Low-dimensional Topology and Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2007
* Francis Bonahon, University of Southern California
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2007
* USD 384,044.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0103511&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Francis Bonahon&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Project proposes to study
several geometric problems in&lt;br/&gt;dimension 2 and 3. A common theme is
that these problems all&lt;br/&gt;involve hyperbolic geometry, either as a tool
to understand wider&lt;br/&gt;range problems or as a topic of interest in
itself. The first&lt;br/&gt;half of the proposal is a natural extension of the
research&lt;br/&gt;developed by the Principal Investigator in the past few
years. On&lt;br/&gt;the purely hyperbolic side, it proposes to study convex
cores of&lt;br/&gt;hyperbolic structures on 3-dimensional manifolds, and to
further&lt;br/&gt;develop an approach to hyperbolic structures on surfaces which
is&lt;br/&gt;based on the technique of geodesic currents. On the
more&lt;br/&gt;topological side, it proposes to take advantage of methods
of&lt;br/&gt;hyperbolic geometry to analyze simple closed curves
on&lt;br/&gt;surfaces. In particular, one of the objectives of the proposal
is&lt;br/&gt;to determine the fractal dimension of the space of simple
closed&lt;br/&gt;curves on a surface. The second part of the proposal is based
on&lt;br/&gt;exciting new conjectures which would connect two aspects of
the&lt;br/&gt;theory of knotted curves in 3--dimensional space which so
far&lt;br/&gt;have had very little interaction, namely topological
quantum&lt;br/&gt;field theory and hyperbolic geometry on knot complements.
The&lt;br/&gt;project proposes to attack these conjectures and, if these
are&lt;br/&gt;proved, to further develop the connections so
established.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research is focused on the
interplay between&lt;br/&gt;hyperbolic geometry and topology. In low-dimensional
topology,&lt;br/&gt;one tries to analyze the possible shapes for spaces of
dimensions&lt;br/&gt;2 and 3. In particular, it includes as a subfield knot
theory,&lt;br/&gt;where the goal is to understand all possible ways in which
a&lt;br/&gt;string can be knotted in space; techniques of knot theory
have&lt;br/&gt;successfully been applied to analyze the recombination of DNA
and&lt;br/&gt;the knotting of complex molecular structures. Hyperbolic
geometry&lt;br/&gt;is apparently very different. It is a non-euclidean
geometry&lt;br/&gt;which was introduced in the early nineteenth century, in
order to&lt;br/&gt;test the internal consistency of the axioms of the
classical&lt;br/&gt;geometry developed by Euclid and other Greek mathematicians.
An&lt;br/&gt;unexpected connection was established in the nineteen
seventies,&lt;br/&gt;through ground breaking work of Bill Thurston who showed
that&lt;br/&gt;hyperbolic geometry could be successfully used to solve
problems&lt;br/&gt;in topology. For instance, there is a number associated to
each&lt;br/&gt;knotted curve, called its "hyperbolic volume" and which can
be&lt;br/&gt;computed fairly easily by current software. If two knotted
curves&lt;br/&gt;have different hyperbolic volumes, one is guaranteed that it
is&lt;br/&gt;impossible to deform one curve to the other. A new picture is
now&lt;br/&gt;beginning to emerge, where the hyperbolic volume of a
knotted&lt;br/&gt;curve unexpectedly occurs in techniques of mathematical
physics&lt;br/&gt;originally designed to predict the behavior of high
energy&lt;br/&gt;particles. The main part of the proposal is aimed at
clarifying&lt;br/&gt;this picture, with the expectation that the cross-
fertilization&lt;br/&gt;between topology, hyperbolic geometry and mathematical
physics&lt;br/&gt;will lead to advances in each of these three
fields.&lt;br/&gt;