* 0103174
* Protein Crystals:  New Templates for the Construction of Nanostructured Solids
* MPS,CHE
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Daniel Mittleman, William Marsh Rice University
* Continuing Grant
* Katharine Covert
* 07/31/2004
* USD 1,200,000.00

Divisions of Chemistry, Materials Research, Bioengineering and Environmental
Systems, and Molecular and Cellular Biosciences support this multidivisional
award to William Marsh Rice University. This Nanoscale Interdisciplinary
Research Team (NIRT) proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation
"Nanoscale Science and Engineering" (NSF 00-119). Under this project, Vicki
Colvin, a material chemist with experience in template chemistry, Daniel
Mittleman, an optical engineer and George Phillips, a biologist with expertise
in protein crystal growth, will develop crystalline and monolithic
nanostructured metal and ceramic materials using crystals of streptavidin,
lysozyme and related proteins. These protein crystalline structures will be
reinforced by glutaraldehyde cross-linking before the templating. X-ray
diffraction studies and atomic force microscope imaging will be used to
characterize the prepared materials with respect to crystal symmetry,
periodicity and overall quality of the crystal arrangement. These porous and
three-dimensional open crystalline inorganic structures with nanometer spacing
may find applications in diffraction gradients, lenses, mirrors and other
devices for soft X-ray optics. The research program will also provide a rich
multidisciplinary education and training opportunities in material and protein
chemistries to postdoctoral, graduate and undergraduate students.

Under the award, ordered mesoporous nanostructured metal and ceramic materials
will be fabricated using cross-linked protein crystals as sacrificial templates.
The broader impact of the project is the understanding the formation of
nanostructures, the templating effect of different protein crystal scaffolding,
and the determination of optical properties of the mesoporous structures
prepared in the soft X-ray range of the spectrum. In addition, the research
program will provide a rich multidisciplinary education and training
opportunities in materials chemistry, protein chemistry and optics to graduate
and undergraduate students.