* 0103909
* The Semiclassical Limit of the Focusing Nonlinear Schroedinger Equation
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Peter Miller, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2005
* USD 102,002.00

NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0103909&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical Sciences: The
Semiclassical Limit of the Focusing Nonlinear Schroedinger
Equation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0103909
Miller&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project addresses the
behavior of solutions of the focusing nonlinear Schroedinger equation in the
singular semiclassical limit, with particular attention paid to solutions that
are tied to definite given initial data. Specific research goals include (i)
generalizing a steepest-descents procedure for matrix Riemann-Hilbert problems
to recover asymptotics of the initial-value problem for general real-analytic
and oscillatory-analytic initial data, (ii) computing rigorous spectral
asymptotics for the nonselfadjoint Zakharov-Shabat operator and taking estimates
of the error into account in the inverse-scattering problem, (iii) studying sets
of minimal weighted Green's capacity in the upper half-plane and relating them
solidly to semiclassical asymptotics, and (iv) determining the sensitivity of
the asymptotics to the presence of singularities in the data and also robustness
to structural perturbations. The analysis will employ numerical methods, careful
asymptotic spectral analysis of a family of nonselfadjoint differential
operators, and potential-theoretic aspects of functional and complex
analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focusing nonlinear Schroedinger equation is a
ubiquitous model equation for the propagation of waves of many different kinds
(water waves, light waves, etc.) in the simultaneous presence of nonlinear
effects that can "self-amplify" the waves and "dispersion" which can pull the
waves apart. In particular, it is a tested and accepted model for the
transmission of lightwave pulses along certain types of glass optical fibers.
This project will produce new understanding of this model equation relevant to
situations where the coefficient of the dispersive term in the equation is
relatively small, or alternatively, nonlinear processes dominate the evolution
of broad disturbances for short times. "Dispersion-shifted" optical fibers
currently being installed in many modern telecommunication systems provide an
environment where the effects of dispersion and nonlinearity are present in
precisely such a skewed proportion. The results of this project will be likely
to influence the analysis and design of the next generation of high-speed
optical telecommunications systems. &lt;br/&gt;