* 0103746
* Survey of the Andean Butterfly Fauna of Ecuador (Insecta:  Lepidoptera: Papilionoidea)
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2002,12/31/2006
* Keith Willmott, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Juan Carlos Morales
* 12/31/2006
* USD 227,602.00

Survey of the Andean Butterfly Fauna of Ecuador

The purpose of this award is to contribute to the cataloging of the World's
declining biodiversity and to make that knowledge available to specialists and
the general public. Butterflies constitute perhaps the most familiar,
conspicuous and well-studied group of insects. This award will be instrumental
in aiding a comprehensive survey of the butterfly fauna of the Ecuadorian Andes,
one of the most species-rich but also threatened habitats on Earth. This project
has two main objectives: to compile and synthesize data on the geographic and
elevational distribution of the c. 2600 species of butterflies occurring in
Andean Ecuador, with critical evaluation of the taxonomic status of all species;
and to continue to improve the national collection in Ecuador and train
Ecuadorian scientists in bioinventory techniques. Field work will take place in
under-sampled regions of the country, concentrate on taxonomic groups poorly
represented in existing collections, and use a variety of underutilized field
techniques to maximize the number of known and undescribed species recorded from
each study site. This project will result in the most complete inventory of the
butterfly fauna for any Andean country. It is estimated that as many as 200
species within the study area will need to be described. Identification keys
will be published in journals and in interactive, electronic form to be
accessible to non-specialists. Information on the distributions for all species
will be presented as an electronic database supplied to principal conservation
groups within Ecuador and made available on the World Wide Web. Comprehensive
specimen collections will be deposited in the USA and the host country, in
addition to a collection of alcohol-preserved material for molecular study. It
is hoped that the collections within the host country and published taxonomic
studies will provide the basis for a long-term, national research program on
butterfly systematics, biology and conservation. The distributional data set
will be the largest, most extensive and at the finest spatial scale available
for any group of Neotropical insects. The potential applications of these data
are numerous, including testing biogeographical hypotheses concerning the
origins of the west Andean (Choco) fauna and the montane faunas on both slopes,
examining the effects of elevational gradients on species richness, testing the
value of butterflies and butterfly groups as indicators of biodiversity, mapping
the strength and type of biogeographic transition zones throughout the country,
investigating patterns of species richness and endemism, and identifying
priority areas for conservation in these highly threatened Andean forests.

