* 0103061
* NER:  Direct Electron Beam Writing for Fabrication of Functional Nano-Scale Architectures
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2003
* Peter Bennett, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Venkata Mulpuri
* 06/30/2003
* USD 100,000.00

This proposal was recieved in response to NSE, NSF-0019. Focused electron beam
decomposition of molecules adsorbed on surfaces will be investigated as a means
for fabricating electrical contacts to individual or small arrays of
nanostructures. This direct write technique offers a convenient, flexible and
practical method for bridging the gap between mesoscopic lithography and the
nanoscale. Of primary importance is the purity and resistivity of the deposited
film. Resistivity will be correlated with process parameters by depositing
between predefined metallic contact pads. Contamination of deposited metallic
features will be avoided by using inorganic precursor molecules such as TaF5,
TiCl4 and WF6 . Film purity will be determined in situ ,using standard surface
science techniques. Preliminary estimates of write speeds achievable in
environmental electron microscopes indicate that 1:1 aspect ratio,nm-scale wires
can be written at rates of 0.1 um /sec. Additionally, use of environmental
electron microscopy will allow simultaneous identification and contacting
features of interest. The flexibility of this technique will allow tailoring the
deposited structures for different applications. Examples are nanowires for
electrical contacts, metal nanodot arrays for attachment of functionalized
organic molecules or specially shaped metal gates deposited on semiconductor
surfaces to allow charge confinement and manipulation in nanoscale regions.
Thus,success of this technique will enable rapid prototyping of diverse concepts
cutting across several nanoscience and technology subfields. Longer term, the
capability for e-beam writing of entire nanodevices is envisioned. Electron-beam
decomposition of inorganic species leading to growth of semiconductors and
insulators will also be investigated. Novel precursor chemistries will be
developed for e-beam growth of insulating and semiconducting phases compatible
with Si-based nanoelectronics. Essentially,this is an athermal method for
depositing nanoscale features at temperatures below that for which the features
'melt' via surface diffusion of deposited atoms.