* 0103892
* The Role of Coulomb Interactions in Low Carrier Density, Disordered Sytems
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2001,01/31/2005
* John DiTusa, Louisiana State University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 01/31/2005
* USD 292,000.00

Experiments exploring itinerant magnetic and nearly magnetic states in low
carrier density metals and semiconductors are the focus of this research
program. Such materials are particularly sensitive to external magnetic fields
as is apparent in their transport, magnetic, and thermodynamic properties. This
sensitivity results from mechanisms unrelated to those found in the well studied
local magnetic systems where carrier scattering can be controlled by magnetic
fields. Instead, disorder, poor screening, and strong exchange interactions lead
to surprisingly large and robust quantum interference effects. The control over
carrier densities, disorder, and magnetic ground states that these materials
offer, along with their sensitivity to magnetic fields, suggest that innovative
device technologies may result from these investigations. Other experiments
included in this program involve the exploration of many body effects in low
dimensional systems such as bulk one-dimensional magnets and homogeneous ultra-
thin films. This research involves undergraduate as well as graduate students
and participants in the Teach For America program who obtain a full exposure to
experimental science from the synthesis, characterization, and careful
measurement of the materials, to the data analysis and publication of results.
&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Many of the new concepts for advanced electronic device
design rely not only on the electronic carrier charge, but also on the carriers
intrinsic angular momentum, or spin, as well. Much of the progress in realizing
these novel technologies has been made in semiconducting and metallic systems
where local magnetic moments, magnetic moments associated with the ions that
make up the crystal lattice, are either intrinsic to the material or can be
added as impurities. In this research program we are exploring magnetic systems
where the magnetism and electrical conduction are due to the very same electrons
in order to search for novel physical properties. These itinerant magnetic
systems may offer greater control over both the magnetic and electronic
attributes, which may allow innovative design technologies. The focus of this
experimental program is the exploration of materials and mechanisms by which
sensitivity to external parameters, and thus controls of physical properties
occur. This research involves undergraduate as well as graduate students and
participants in the Teach For America program who obtain a full exposure to
experimental science from the synthesis, characterization, and careful
measurement of the materials, to the data analysis and publication of results.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;