* 0103297
* On-Chip Molecular Scale Patterning and Assemblies
* ENG,ECCS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Edwin Thomas, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 07/31/2005
* USD 1,300,000.00

This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science
and Engineering' (NSF 00-119). This Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team
(NIRT) will produce and characterize photonic structures containing ordered
elements on length scales ranging from the molecular (&lt; 1 nm) to the
macroscopic (mm) by the patterning of self-organizing block copolymers. Self-
Assembled Polymer microphotonics has the potential for the ready production of
precision optical devices or elements using low cost materials and simple
processing steps. The team will study 1, 2, and 3 dimensionally periodic
photonic materials with finely tuned optical properties. Such materials will
have probable impact on technologies for communications devices, sensors,
integrated devices and related electro-optic technologies. The team will design
and create the required polymers, cany out the proposed processing and
characterize and measure the resulting nanostructures and anticipated electro-
optical devices. The patterning of block copolymers offers remarkable
possibilities for size control on much smaller length scales than currently
possible and with intricate geometries and functions not realizable with
convcntional lithography alone. In addition to advances in microphotonics, the
success of this project has the potential to completely revolutionize the way
all routine lithographic nanopatterning is carried out and to open up new
strategies for integrating soft materials onto a silicon device platform. Team
members consist of four Cornell faculty, Christopher Ober, (team leader), Geoff
Coates, Sol Gruner and Uli Wiesner plus Edwin Thomas of MIT and Nitash Balsara
of UC Berkeley. Both Balsara and Thomas are internationally recognized experts
in the study and control of block copolymer microstructure. Thomas is also a
pioneer in the field of block copolymer microphotonics. Coates, Ober and Wiesner
are known for their ability to synthesize unique polymers and Gruner for
characterization expertise. Our partners (Rohm &amp; Haas and Wright Materials
Labs) are established centers for research in lithography and the optical
behavior of materials, respectively and will provide valuable expertise to this
NIRT.