* 0103227
* NER:  Investigation of Electronic Transport in Carbon Nanotubes Using an Ultrafast Photoconduction Technique
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/01/2001,12/31/2002
* Xianfan Xu, Purdue University
* Standard Grant
* Usha Varshney
* 12/31/2002
* USD 100,000.00

&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This proposal was received in response to NSE, NSF-0019.
Carbon nanotubes are of interest as electronic conductors because of their
unique properties, notably their behavior as 1-D conductors and their ballistic
nature over several microns at room temperature. A general picture of electronic
conduction in nanotubes is being developed by researchers in the field. Although
the transient response of current flow is expected to be quite rapid (picosecond
range), present experimental data for conduction properties of nanotubes is
primarily obtained at low frequencies or in static measurements. In order to
shed light on the fundamental current transport processes in nanotubes, an
experimental and theoretical effort is proposed to develop characterization
techniques which would allow the measurement of the transient current responses
through nanotube conductors. This work will address two issues: i) the
integration of nanotube conductors with appropriate high speed photoconductor
materials and ii) the development of characterization techniques for nanoscale
conductors based on pump/probe measurements using high speed pulsed laser
systems. It is expected that the proposed work will shed light on the conduction
processes of these interesting electronic materials and provide important
capabilities for integration of these materials with other electronic materials,
including semiconductor device structures.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;