* 0103068
* NIRT:  Semiconductor Nanowires: Building Blocks for Nanoscale Electronics
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2006
* Theresa Mayer, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* LaVerne D. Hess
* 06/30/2006
* USD 1,500,000.00

This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science
and Engineering" (NSF 00-119). The project addresses nanoscale effects on
synthesis and properties of semiconductor nanowires. A versatile, template-based
approach to the synthesis of metal/semiconductor/metal nanowires will be
developed, utilizing nanoporous membranes as substrates for nanowire assembly
using semiconductor vapor-liquid-solid growth and metal electrodeposition. This
approach provides the ability to synthesize single crystal semiconductor
structures sandwiched between contact metal segments in a single nanowire with
controlled diameters and lengths. After removal from the membrane, a field
assisted assembly method will be used to attract and align the nanowires
suspended in solution on to pre-patterned contact pads on a substrate. An
electric field is used to polarize the nanowires and induce alignment via
dielectrophoresis. Field assembly will be used to align and position large
numbers of nanowires on large area contact pads for electrical characterization.
Fabrication studies will focus on two materials, Si and GaAs, enabling a study
of nanoscale effects in indirect and direct gap semiconductors. Structures with
dimensions ranging from hundreds of nanometers to tens of angstroms will be
produced and characterized to study the impact of length scale on the physical
properties of nanowires. The development of vapor-liquid-solid growth methods in
nanoporous membranes will encompass a study of vapor phase transport, reaction
kinetics, nucleation and crystal growth in nanoscale cylindrical geometries. The
fabrication of metal/semiconductor junctions within individual nanowires will be
used to engineer nanocontacts in these structures and probe phase equilibria,
interfacial reaction kinetics, Fermi level pinning and ohmic and Schottky
contact characteristics in small dimensional structures. The ability to rapidly
position and measure large numbers of individual nanowires will be used to carry
out detailed measurements of electrical transport. Theoretical studies of band
structure and carrier scattering in restricted geometries will be carried out in
conjunction with the experimental work to provide insight into the experimental
findings. An interdisciplinary team with specific expertise in semiconductor
crystal growth, metal/semiconductor contacts, nanowire self-assembly and
characterization and the theory of nanostructure electronic properties will
carry out the research. The team includes faculty members from Materials Science
and Engineering, Electrical Engineering and Physics. The interwoven structure of
the research and the close physical proximity of the investigators will enable
co-advising of graduate students and the development of individual thesis
projects that encompass a range of topics in nanoscale synthesis, assembly,
characterization and theory. The project will also include the preparation of
educational modules, developed in conjunction with a high school physics
instructor, that are designed to introduce concepts in nanotechnology to a
general audience. The modules will be used by team members in their current K-12
education and outreach activities and in additional on-campus programs that
target minority and female recruitment in science and engineering.&lt;br/&gt;%%%
&lt;br/&gt;The project addresses basic research issues in a topical area of
materials science with high technological relevance. An important feature of the
program is the integration of research and education through the training of
students in a fundamentally and technologically significant area. The project is
designed to develop strong technical, communication, and
organizational/management skills in students through unique educational
experiences made possible by a forefront research environment. There will be
active involvement of undergraduates in the program and formal emphasis on
developing effective oral and written communication skills. The project is co-
supported by the DMR/EM, CTS/CRP, and CTS/FPH Divisions/Programs.&lt;br/&gt;***
&lt;br/&gt;