* 0103762
* RUI: Development of Frame Extensions and their Application
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Shidong Li, San Francisco State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2004
* USD 78,644.00

0103762 Li

A program of research related to the application of pseudoframes for subspaces
(PFFS) and relevant interpolation techniques is proposed. Theme 1 of the program
studies the contribution of PFFSs to artifact reduction in data/image
compression. Key observations lie in the fact that there are symmetric and
compactly supported biorthogonal wavelets, but not within an MRA (of compactly
supported wavelets). It shows the "lack of room" within the MRA subspace
structure. PFFS is a tool to explore the insight story of such a phenomenon.
Theme 2 focuses on a new construction approach of interpolatory multiresolution
analysis (I-MRA). The key observation is that an interpolatory sequence can be
defined by sampled reproducing kernel function of a subspace V of an MRA. It is
expected that such an interpolatory sequence can easily form a basis or frame of
V, giving rise to an interpolatory "interface" to the MRA, and a construction
methodology of I-MRA. Theme 3 studies applications of PFFSs in the Sinc-type
methods for interpolations and quadratures. The motivation is to explore the
advantage of fast decaying properties of PFFSs in the Sinc-type applications. In
theme 4, the P.I. expects to apply similar interpolation techniques as described
in theme 2 to study multi- band samplings using frames and/or PFFSs as
fundamental tools. The technique of PFFSs with their flexibility is expected to
play a role.

Each research topic is highly motivated by its applications in data/image
compression, sampling and interpolation for efficient numerical implementations.
PFFS is a tool to study a subspace V while "standing" outside of it. In doing
so, one is given the freedom and additional "room" to perform tasks in V by
using advanced tools not available in V. In signal/image processing, such
advanced properties of PFFS are extremely useful because it is known that
biorthogonal wavelets of finite length with symmetry are desirable for reducing
``blocking'' and ``ringing'' effects, and yet such biorthogonal wavelets do not
reside in its dual wavelet subspace. We believe that PFFS shall not only provide
a class of biorthogonal wavelet examples, the additional information (known from
the construction) contributed by PFFS will provide practical insight about
"blocking" and "ringing" artifacts, and thereby delivers new solutions and
enhanced signal/image compression rate and communication speed. Other
applications of PFFSs in irregular sampling (for multi-band functions) as well
as in the Sinc-type methods (for interpolation and quadratures) are all based on
applying flexible properties of PFFSs. The expectations include enhanced
practical efficiency and improved rate of convergence. The project on
interpolatory multiresolution analysis has practical applications in data
acquisition/sampling while simultaneously performing the wavelet transform. One
of the key ingredients of the study is to build an interpolatory "interface" to
a given MRA and still keep the underlying desirable wavelet properties.