* 0103140
* NER:  Molecular Dynamics Study of the Transverse Current During the Translocation of DNA Through a Fabricated Nanopore
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2003
* Hank Cochran, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Standard Grant
* Leon Esterowitz
* 05/31/2003
* USD 78,556.00

0103140 Cui This proposal was received in response to NSE, NSF-0019. A promising
new method for rapid DNA sequencing will be explored. Molecular dynamics
simulations will be performed to establish the potential feasibility of a
proposed method for resolving individual bases of single-strand DNA in aqueous
electrolyte medium being driven through an artificially fabricated channel of
nanometer cross section by an axial electric field. The magnitude and duration
of electrical current variations will be determined between a pair of biased
electrodes positioned transverse to the channel axis, as individual bases on the
fully-elongated DNA strand are driven between the electrodes. The crucial
feasibility issues to be explored in this calculation are the reproducibility of
the current signature of a given base, the distinguishability of one base's
signature from others', and the magnitude of the signature compared with random
fluctuations. If calculations demonstrate the feasibility of this approach,
there will be strong incentive to study it further both experimentally and
computationally, for it offers the potential to speed up DNA sequencing from ca.
0.3 bases per second using current technology based on the Sanger method to
perhaps millions to billions of bases per second. Such rapid sequencing could
enable sequencing of an individual genome within time scale and cost appropriate
for individual diagnostics and genome-based treatment. Techniques exist today
that, in principle, allow fabrication of channels of ca. 2 nm cross section with
embedded electrodes of dimensions comparable to those of a single base.
Experimental realization of such systems is expected within the next few years.
Already, experiments with DNA and RNA detection during electrically-driven flow
through nanometer scale protein pores in natural membranes have excited great
interest, but these systems fall far short of the promise of the fabricated
channels proposed for study and have many other disadvantages, as well. Success
in the proposed exploratory simulations is certain to stimulate and guide
efforts toward experimental realization and will provide the tools for
optimizing and understanding these future experiments.