* 0103282
* "Complex Manifolds with special Structures"
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Zhuang-dan Guan, University of California-Riverside
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2005
* USD 55,000.00

&lt;br/&gt; Complex Manifolds with special Structures,
Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; author: Zhuang-dan Guan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;My research has been largely in the area of complex
manifolds and have a &lt;br/&gt;number of problems to work on. Recently, I am
working on three major &lt;br/&gt;directions: (1) Classification of compact
hyperkahler manifolds, (2) &lt;br/&gt;Stability and extremal metrics, (3)
Classification of Complex homogeneous&lt;br/&gt;spaces. Our research was highly
concentrated on these directions for the last &lt;br/&gt;4 to 5 years. We expect
to work on extremal metrics and hyperkahler manifolds&lt;br/&gt;for some other
years since many breakthroughs are happenning in these &lt;br/&gt;directions.
The picture for extremal metrics is becoming clear after many &lt;br/&gt;years
of research. It can be described by the geodesic stability principles.
&lt;br/&gt;The uniqueness comes from the convex property of the modified Mabuchi
&lt;br/&gt;functional on Mabuchi moduli space of Kahler metrics and the
existence of &lt;br/&gt;geodesics between Kahler metrics [GM4]. The existence
should be the same as &lt;br/&gt;the geodesic stability [GM7]. I already test
these principles by both the &lt;br/&gt;examples in my dissertation and those in
[GM7]. For the toric manifolds, we &lt;br/&gt;already proved the uniqueness and
that existence implies the geodesic &lt;br/&gt;stability. We are trying to solve
the final part of the geodesic stability &lt;br/&gt;principles that geodesic
stable implies existence for toric manifolds. We also &lt;br/&gt;test the
geodesic stability for many toric manifolds, e. g., the manifold
&lt;br/&gt;obtained by blowing up two points in a 2 dimensional complex
projective space.&lt;br/&gt;This will eventually solve the historical problem of
existing Kahler-Einstein&lt;br/&gt;metrics and extremal metrics. The best
condidates of Hodge diamonds for the &lt;br/&gt;complex 4 dimensional compact
hyperkahler manifolds are described by the &lt;br/&gt;possible pairs of the
second and third Betti numbers (5,36),(7,8),(8,0),(23,0)&lt;br/&gt;([GHS4]). Now
it is the time to work on classification with many tools as
&lt;br/&gt;Lagrangian fibration, Rozansky-Witten invariants, geometric elliptic
genera. A&lt;br/&gt;sandwich inequality of Rozansky-Witten invariants suggests
further results for &lt;br/&gt;higher dimensional case. The classification of
compact complex homogeneous &lt;br/&gt;spaces is reduced to the better
understood manifolds as parallelizable &lt;br/&gt;manifolds, reductive spaces
and primary spaces in [GH7]. We will try to &lt;br/&gt;understand more about the
higher step primary spaces in the future. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research of
Kahler-Einstein metric has been pioneered by many well-known
&lt;br/&gt;mathematicians including several Fields Medal receivers. It turns out
that&lt;br/&gt;there are many similarity between this field and the Hitchin-
Kobayashi&lt;br/&gt;correspondence in the holomorphic vector bundles on compact
Kahler manifolds.&lt;br/&gt;Both fields are closed related to Physics Science,
e.g., Einstein equation,&lt;br/&gt;general relativity, Yang-Mills, Mirror
Symmetry, Calabi-Yau, etc. We will &lt;br/&gt;write up a textbook in Kahler
geometry describe a clear picture on both of &lt;br/&gt;these fields.
Hyperkahler manifolds and homogeneous manifolds are some &lt;br/&gt;important
manifolds which have some physics origin as that of Calabi-Yau
&lt;br/&gt;manifolds and are unsolved classical topics in complex geometry. The
pictures &lt;br/&gt;for these fields become clearer recently. &lt;br/&gt;