* 0103897
* Statistical Physics on Groups and Determinantal Probabilities
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2002
* Russell Lyons, Georgia Tech Research Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* K Crank
* 07/31/2002
* USD 42,720.00

The PI is investigating questions in several areas of discrete probability that
often have surprising interconnections. Most of these questions are set in a
group-invariant context and the goal is to understand how geometric or algebraic
properties of the group are reflected in probabilistic properties of the
processes. For example, in the random cluster model, there are 4 natural
critical values of p for each value of q. The PI is continuing his previous
investigations of the relations among these values on planar Cayley graphs of
groups. Two other models under investigation concern random spanning forests in
graphs. One of these is obtained from limits of minimal spanning trees in finite
graphs, while the other is from uniform spanning trees. The former is connected
to percolation, a special case of the random cluster model. The latter,
connected to random walks and potential theory, is much better understood. The
PI is working to bring the state of knowledge of the minimal spanning forest
closer to that for the uniform spanning forest. There are also many open
questions related to the uniform spanning forest that the PI is investigating.
When one views uniform spanning forests as determinantal probability measures,
there are a large number of new questions that open up. For example, the PI is
working to establish basic topological properties of higher-dimensional
analogues of random forests and to establish conjectures that arise by analogy
to percolation. Phase transitions and entropy of other determinantal dynamical
systems are also under investigation.

The field of statistical physics is concerned to a great extent with
mathematical models of phase transitions (e.g., water to ice). Typically the
model of space is a fixed lattice, for example, the square lattice in two
dimensions or the cubic lattice in three dimensions. This lattice is infinite
and possesses the mathematical properties of what is called a group. The
simplest model, known as percolation, originated in the study of fluid flow in
the ground and gas flow through a gas mask. One asks how far fluid can flow, in
particular, whether it can flow arbitrarily far. This, of course, depends on the
density of particles; there is a phase transition as the density increases,
whereby after a certain point, with probability 1, fluid can no longer flow
arbitrarily far. One would like to know where that point is and how the
probability changes as this critical point is approached. About a decade ago,
several researchers began investigating lattices that are quite different from
the usual Euclidean ones that are most familiar and that most closely correspond
to our physical world. These new lattices, called nonamenable, are also usually
based on groups. Such investigations began out of the usual scientific and
mathematical curiosity that drives fundamental research. Within the last 5
years, this area of research, statistical physics on nonamenable groups, has
seen an explosion of interest. This area of research turns out to be quite rich
and to contain a large number of important fundamental questions whose answers
remain unknown. Already, there have been applications to Euclidean lattices of
some of the new ideas that have arisen in response to the need to develop new
tools for nonamenable groups.