* 0103704
* Investigating Small-Scale Effects on Dynamic Properties of Polymers
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2006
* Jutta Luettmer-Strathmann, University of Akron
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 06/30/2006
* USD 141,000.00

0103704&lt;br/&gt;Leuttmer-Strathmann&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the relationship
between the structure of polymer chains and the properties of polymeric
materials has been a long-standing goal of polymer science. A case in point are
the transport properties of polymers in the liquid state (viscosity, thermal
conductivity, diffusion coefficients) which are important in polymer processing
and applications, but cannot typically be predicted from the structure of the
constituents and the thermodynamic state of the system. The purpose of this
theoretical research grant is to add to our understanding of the structure-
property relationship by investigating small-scale effects on the dynamic
properties of polymeric fluids. Local chain structure and environment affect
dynamic properties as different as viscoelasticity and thermodiffusion. They do
so most strongly in concentrated systems like polymer melts and blends, but even
in dilute solutions, signatures of the local structure can be detected. This
grant focuses on three aspects of this large area: the first two relate to the
friction experienced by chain segments while the third addresses heat transfer
between chain segments. The three parts of this project are steps toward a
consistent description of small-scale effects for all dynamic properties of
polymeric fluids. Furthermore, all three contribute towards a prediction of
these effects from the structure of the molecules and the thermodynamic
state.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Both local chain structure and local environment
affect the mobility of polymer chains in blends and melts. In this project,
local effects on polymer dynamics will be investigated through a small-scale
simulation approach. Expressed as local friction coefficients, the simulation
results can be combined with coarse-grained theoretical models to make
predictions about viscoelastic and diffusion coefficients. Several polymer
systems will be investigated in detail in this work and predictions for their
dynamics compared with experimental data. Experiments on a large number of
miscible polymer blends have shown that blends display complex dynamic behavior
resulting from differences in the local environment of the chain segments. The
nature of the local heterogeneities, however, is still under discussion and
different models for local environments have been proposed. In order to
investigate this problem, small-scale simulations will be evaluated based on
different models for local heterogeneity and the resulting predictions for
dynamic properties of miscible blends will be compared with experimental data.
The transport of thermal energy through a dense polymeric fluid is not well
understood and often treated independently from other dynamic processes. The
work proposed here extends a microscopic lattice network model for heat
transport through polymer melts in order to investigate heat transfer between
segments on different chains. The results will enable us to develop a coarse-
grained lattice model for dynamic properties that incorporates both chain
mobility and heat conduction in dense polymeric fluids.&lt;br/&gt;%%%
&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the relationship between the structure of polymer
chains and the properties of polymeric materials has been a long-standing goal
of polymer science. A case in point are the transport properties of polymers in
the liquid state (viscosity, thermal conductivity, diffusion coefficients) which
are important in polymer processing and applications, but cannot typically be
predicted from the structure of the constituents and the thermodynamic state of
the system. The purpose of this theoretical research grant is to add to our
understanding of the structure-property relationship by investigating small-
scale effects on the dynamic properties of polymeric
fluids.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;