* 0103843
* Low-Dimensional Geometry and Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Feng Luo, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2004
* USD 77,130.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0103843&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Feng Luo&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator will
focus on two problems in the&lt;br/&gt;Teichmuller theory and 3-manifold
topology. In Teichmuller&lt;br/&gt;theory, the aim of the investigation is to
understand the complex&lt;br/&gt;structure on the Teichmuller space by
constructing holomorphic&lt;br/&gt;functions arising from flat singular metric
uniformization of the&lt;br/&gt;Riemann surface. We have produced many naturally
defined complex&lt;br/&gt;valued functions on the Teichmuller space. The goal is
to show&lt;br/&gt;that they are holomorphic. This will give us a
better&lt;br/&gt;understanding of the complex structure which is of
vital&lt;br/&gt;importance to the Teichmuller theory. In 3-manifold topology,
we&lt;br/&gt;propose to show that any non-trivial 3-manifold group has
a&lt;br/&gt;non-trivial SL(2,F) representation for some field F. We
have&lt;br/&gt;translated the existence problem into a problem concerning
how&lt;br/&gt;simple loops propagate in a surface. With the recent advance
of&lt;br/&gt;our knowledge on surfaces, one may eventually solve the
problem&lt;br/&gt;using surface topology. The existence of SL
(2,F)&lt;br/&gt;representations will have many important consequences
in&lt;br/&gt;3-manifold topology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A 3-manifold is a space
in which every point has a small&lt;br/&gt;surrounding similar to our real
world. It is an important&lt;br/&gt;mathematical problem to classify all
3-manifolds. One of the main&lt;br/&gt;tool developed in recent decades in
3-manifolds theory is to use&lt;br/&gt;geometry. In particular, the geometry of
surfaces has been used&lt;br/&gt;very successfully in understanding the
3-dimensional spaces. The&lt;br/&gt;proposed work addresses the topology of
3-manifolds and the&lt;br/&gt;geometry of surfaces. We attempt to use the
symmetry theory&lt;br/&gt;(SL(2) representation theory) to understand the
fundamental group&lt;br/&gt;of 3-manifolds which is a vital invariant of
3-manifolds. The&lt;br/&gt;SL(2,C) representation theory has been used very
successfully in&lt;br/&gt;recent years by many topologists. Our approach seems
to be new&lt;br/&gt;and uses simple loops on surfaces. The second part of
the&lt;br/&gt;proposed work addresses the geometry of surfaces. One of the
main&lt;br/&gt;problems on surface geometry is the moduli space problem.
The&lt;br/&gt;moduli space problem asks for, for instance, what is the shape
of&lt;br/&gt;the space of all convex polyhedrons which look like a cube.
Many&lt;br/&gt;geometric problems are best expressed in terms of the
topology&lt;br/&gt;and geometry of the moduli space. The corresponding object
for&lt;br/&gt;high genus surface is the Teichmuller space. In contrasts to
the&lt;br/&gt;topology of the Teichmuller space which is well understood
for&lt;br/&gt;about 60 years, the geometry of it is much less understood.
Our&lt;br/&gt;proposed work is an attempt to understand explicitly the
complex&lt;br/&gt;analytic geometry of the Teichmuller space. The
explicit&lt;br/&gt;description of the complex geometry of the Teichmuller space
will&lt;br/&gt;have applications not only in mathematics but also in
physics,&lt;br/&gt;for instance in string theory.&lt;br/&gt;