* 0103814
* Stochastic Models for Queueing and Finance
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Steven Shreve, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2004
* USD 198,045.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;STOCHASTIC MODELS FOR QUEUEING AND FINANCE&lt;br/&gt;NSF
Proposal: DMS-0103814&lt;br/&gt;Principal Investigator: Steven E.
Shreve&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Work is proposed in
two areas. The first is the analysis of queueing&lt;br/&gt;systems with
deadlines under heavy traffic conditions. Consider a&lt;br/&gt;queueing system
with renewal process arrival streams. Suppose that&lt;br/&gt;upon arrival, each
customer is assigned a lead time, the amount of time&lt;br/&gt;until the
customer's deadline for service elapses. One can model the lead&lt;br/&gt;times
of the customers in queue at a station as a counting measure on
the&lt;br/&gt;real line, the location of the point masses corresponding to
customer lead&lt;br/&gt;times. Research will address the convergence of these
measure-valued&lt;br/&gt;processes under heavy-traffic scaling. Research will
also be directed to&lt;br/&gt;mathematical models for finance. On such model is
for an option on a&lt;br/&gt;traded account. For the simplest of these, an
account trading one&lt;br/&gt;underlying geometric Brownian motion and a
constant-interest-rate money&lt;br/&gt;market, there is a strikingly simple
optimal rule: hold the geometric&lt;br/&gt;Brownian motion long when the account
value is negative and short when&lt;br/&gt;the account value is positive. For an
option on two geometric Brownian&lt;br/&gt;motions, there is a conjectured
optimal rule, which is supported by&lt;br/&gt;numerical analysis. The proof
appears to require the development of new&lt;br/&gt;mathematics. A second
mathematical finance problem concerns the&lt;br/&gt;development of a unifying
model for risk-neutral pricing of
credit&lt;br/&gt;derivatives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research has two parts.
The subject of the first part, queueing&lt;br/&gt;systems with deadlines, arise
in communication networks, especially&lt;br/&gt;networks used to transmit
digitized video or audio signals. Data which&lt;br/&gt;are too long delayed can
cause unacceptable disruption of the signal.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
will provide a basis for performance analysis of&lt;br/&gt;heavily-loaded
communication networks which take deadlines into account.&lt;br/&gt;The subject
of the second part, mathematical models for finance, builds on&lt;br/&gt;the
revolution in finance begun by the Black-Scholes option pricing
&lt;br/&gt;formula. The particular work proposed here is concerned with
proper&lt;br/&gt;pricing and usage of financial instruments whose purpose is to
insure&lt;br/&gt;against loss, either due to drastic reduction in market value
(options on&lt;br/&gt;a traded account) or default (credit derivatives).