* 0103408
* NIRT: Multi-Scale Modeling and Simulation of Adhesion, Nanotribology and Nanofluidics
* ENG,CMMI
* 08/01/2001,12/31/2005
* Mark Robbins, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Clark Cooper
* 12/31/2005
* USD 1,025,000.00

0103408 Robbins This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation
"Nanoscale Science and Engineering" (NSF 00-119).

This Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team brings together investigators
from a research university (Johns Hopkins), the Naval Academy, and the Naval
Research Laboratory, with backgrounds in physics, chemistry, mechanical
engineering and materials science. Together they will develop new multiscale
modeling tools and apply them to problems in adhesion, nanotribology and
nanofluidics that are of both fundamental scientific interest and technological
importance.

One approach to multiscale modeling will be hierarchical. Results from different
scales will be calculated independently, and the outputs used to determine
inputs needed at other scales. For example, atomic scale calculations will
provide constitutive relations and boundary conditions for continuum
calculations, while continuum calculations determine contact geometries and
stresses for atomic calculations. The second approach will involve simultaneous
calculations at multiple scales. Specific strategies for linking tight-binding
simulations to classical molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, and for linking MD
to continuum solid and fluid calculations are described.

Studies of adhesion will examine how surface roughness, surface chemistry, and
capillary forces affect stiction. This is the major cause of failure in
micromachines and becomes more important as device size decreases. Research on
nanotribology will start from contact geometries determined in the adhesion
studies. Quantitative comparison between continuum mechanics and MD simulations
will be performed at different scales to determine how continuum mechanics
breaks down and at what scale. The effect of molecular structure of boundary
lubricants, surface roughness, and other factors on friction in nanocontacts
will be studied. Work on nanofluidics will focus on changes in flow as the mean
free path becomes comparable to some dimensions of the flow path, with an
emphasis on understanding lubricant transport to and around nanoscale contacts.

Participation in the project will give undergraduate and graduate students,
midshipmen and postdoctoral fellows a unique multidisciplinary educational
experience that will be strengthened by newly developed course sequences.
Modeling tools developed by the team will be designed for portability and to be
integrated into publicly available simulation tools. ***