* 0103626
* Geometry of Conformal and Quasiconformal Mappings
* MPS,DMS
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2005
* Christopher Bishop, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 05/31/2005
* USD 176,388.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract for DMS - 0103626&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI, Christopher
Bishop, will study the geometric properties&lt;br/&gt;of conformal mappings in
the plane and quasiconformal mappings in space,&lt;br/&gt;focusing on the
expansion properties of such maps and investigating&lt;br/&gt;various
applications to geometric function theory, dynamics and&lt;br/&gt;topology. The
PI has shown that a result of Dennis Sullivan's&lt;br/&gt;concerning the
geometry of convex&lt;br/&gt;bodies in hyperbolic three space implies a
factorization&lt;br/&gt;theorem for conformal mappings in the plane and this, in
turn,&lt;br/&gt;implies uniform bounds on the amount of&lt;br/&gt;contraction a
conformal map in the plane can have. Finding the best constants&lt;br/&gt;in the
factorization theorem has consequences for well&lt;br/&gt;known problems such as
dimension distortion, integral means and Brennan's&lt;br/&gt;conjecture. The PI
will continue his work on&lt;br/&gt;limit sets of Kleinian groups, a natural and
important class of fractal sets.&lt;br/&gt;The questions here are mainly to
estimate the fractal dimension of these sets&lt;br/&gt;and study the behavior of
the dimension as the group is deformed. &lt;br/&gt;The PI will also work on the
metric properties&lt;br/&gt;of harmonic measures, particularly results which
quantify the &lt;br/&gt;idea that harmonicmeasure cannot be concentrated on a
small set. Problems include the&lt;br/&gt;lower density conjecture, stability of
harmonic measure and the growth rate&lt;br/&gt;of diffusion limited aggregation.
A few other questions&lt;br/&gt;involving quasiconformal and biLipschitz maps
are also considered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conformal mappings are a
class of functions which are important&lt;br/&gt;in many area of mathematics and
which are closely related&lt;br/&gt;to mnay physical problems (fluid flow, heat
conduction, &lt;br/&gt;electric fields, random growth models, ...) and have been
&lt;br/&gt;intensively studied for many years. One of the fundamental
&lt;br/&gt;properties of such maps is expansion; they tend to push
&lt;br/&gt;points farther apart on average. Making this precise has
&lt;br/&gt;motivated much research in mathematical analysis.&lt;br/&gt;The PI
has discovered a new way of quantifying&lt;br/&gt;this expansion by
approximating conformal maps by (the more&lt;br/&gt;general class of)
quasiconformal maps and showing these&lt;br/&gt;approximations may be taken with
a very strong &lt;br/&gt;expansion property. This has given a clearer
understanding of some&lt;br/&gt;known results and has led to progress on new
problems.&lt;br/&gt;In particular, it implies new results about Kleinian
groups&lt;br/&gt;(these are important examples of conformal dynamical systems,
&lt;br/&gt;and hence a contribution to the more general area of
&lt;br/&gt;dynamical systems, fractals and chaos). The PI's approach
&lt;br/&gt;also ties the behavior of conformal maps to the geometry
&lt;br/&gt;three dimensional hyperbolic space; this connection seems
&lt;br/&gt;to be new and should lead to many interesting problems &lt;br/&gt;and
more interaction between the areas of complex &lt;br/&gt;analysis and three
dimensional topology (already connected &lt;br/&gt;in other ways). He will also
investigate the computational&lt;br/&gt;aspects of this connection which may
lead to new methods &lt;br/&gt;of computing conformal maps and Greens functions
(important&lt;br/&gt;for a variety of applications). The PI will also continue
&lt;br/&gt;his investigation of other problems including the geometry of
random&lt;br/&gt;paths such as Brownian motion, the stability
under&lt;br/&gt;perturbation of certain dynamical systems and
fundamental&lt;br/&gt;geometric properties of conformal and quasiconformal
mappings.&lt;br/&gt;