* 0103059
* Nanoscale Single-electron Switching Arrays for Self-evolving Neuromorphic Networks
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2001,12/31/2003
* Andreas Mayr, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 12/31/2003
* USD 599,980.00

The goal of this project is to carry out a detailed multi-disciplinary study of
single-electron&lt;br/&gt;latching switches and of possible use of 2D arrays of
such switches for hardware&lt;br/&gt;implementation of self-organizing (plastic)
neuromorphic networks. Preliminary estimates&lt;br/&gt;show that such networks
may provide unparalleled possibilities for complex
information&lt;br/&gt;processing. By these estimates, the networks may also have
remarkable scaling properties:&lt;br/&gt;if implemented using a 10-nm
technology, they may have density about 10 8 neurons per&lt;br/&gt;cm 2 at
manageable power dissipation below 100 W/cm 2 , and feature full learning cycle
time&lt;br/&gt;of the order of a few seconds. This scaling gives every hope that
the networks will be able,&lt;br/&gt;after initial (largely unsupervised)
learning, not only provide complex information processing&lt;br/&gt;including
complex image recognition, but possibly reproduce biological evolution of
the&lt;br/&gt;cerebral cortex at a time scale some 6 orders of magnitude
shorter.&lt;br/&gt;The objective of the proposed project is to carry out a
preliminary study of this&lt;br/&gt;remarkable opportunity, addressing all its
basic aspects at several structural levels. In&lt;br/&gt;particular, research
will include the following components:&lt;br/&gt;A. Single-electron switch node
design (D. Averin, K. Likharev, J. Wells).&lt;br/&gt;Detailed theoretical
analysis and modeling (on two basic levels of single-electron
transport&lt;br/&gt;theory) of statics, dynamics, and statistics of the proposed
single-electron latching switches.&lt;br/&gt;B. Low temperature prototyping (J.
Lukens). Fabrication and experimental&lt;br/&gt;study of Al/AlOx/Al prototypes
of single-electron latching switches, with the goal to scale&lt;br/&gt;single-
electron islands down to 100 nm and tunnel junctions to 10 nm, respectively,
which&lt;br/&gt;would bring the reliable operation temperature up to about 10
K.&lt;br/&gt;C. Molecular single-electron device development (B. Brunschwig, J.
Lukens,&lt;br/&gt;A. Mayr). Exploration of the opportunity to implement the
basic component of the switches,&lt;br/&gt;the single-electron transistor, by
chemical self-assembly of molecular components. The&lt;br/&gt;molecular
components will be deposited in solution on the prefabricated metallic
wire&lt;br/&gt;structures, and then characterized using a set of electrical,
electrochemical, and time-resolved&lt;br/&gt;laser-spectrometry
methods.&lt;br/&gt;D. Top level modeling and analysis (J. Barhen, M. Bender, K.
Likharev).&lt;br/&gt;Large-scale computer simulation and a partial analytical
study of the growth, dynamics, and&lt;br/&gt;self-adaptation of neuromorphic
networks based on these switches.&lt;br/&gt;Hopefully, the project will achieve
enough progress to justify a large-scale R&amp;D effort&lt;br/&gt;in this
exciting direction. In particular, a reliable evidence of self-organization of
adaptive&lt;br/&gt;neuromorphic networks during largely unsupervised learning
would certainly be followed by&lt;br/&gt;the first hardware implementations of
sizable networks (possibly, after an initial stage of&lt;br/&gt;purely-CMOS-
based prototyping using commercially available FPGA technology).&lt;br/&gt;The
project will have a substantial educational component. Specifically
(besides&lt;br/&gt;participating in general educational Stony Brook
initiatives), at least 4 FTE graduate&lt;br/&gt;students will be involved in the
project each year, and some 20 undergraduate and&lt;br/&gt;graduate students
will take part in the project during its full 4-year period. At least
one&lt;br/&gt;student will work in BNL and one in ORNL most of the time. Working
in a multi-disciplinary&lt;br/&gt;team will allow these students to overcome
inter-departmental barriers in their education.&lt;br/&gt;As another specific
educational initiative, we plan to organize a Web-based
undergraduate&lt;br/&gt;course on massively parallel supercomputing and neural
networks, using the IBM SP3&lt;br/&gt;computer at Oak Ridge.&lt;br/&gt;Work on
the inter-related aspects of this multi-disciplinary project will be
constantly&lt;br/&gt;coordinated by its P.I. (K. Likharev). In particular,
regular meetings of all Stony Brook and&lt;br/&gt;Brookhaven participants of the
team working on the project (including postdoctoral&lt;br/&gt;associates and
students), and annual meetings with Oak Ridge collaborators, are planned.