* 0103024
* Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Teams (NIRT):  Copolymer Templates - A Self-Assembling Route to High-Density Arrays of Functional Nanostructures
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/01/2001,02/28/2006
* Mark Tuominen, University of Massachusetts Amherst
* Continuing Grant
* george hazelrigg
* 02/28/2006
* USD 1,334,001.00

This Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Teams (NIRT) project it to develop
robust routes to produce high-density arrays of functional nanoscopic structures
using nanoporous templates derived from diblock copolymer thin films. The
diblock copolymer films used possess self-assembled cylindrical microdomains
oriented normal to the surface of the film, with cylinder densities in excess of
1.0 x 10^12 /in^2. Selective degradation of the minor polymer block and cross-
linking of the major block results in a polymer film having a high-density array
of nanopores that serves as a template for the fabrication of functional arrays
of nanoscopic structures. The project will expand the potential of this simple
process by developing methods that give pore diameters ranging from the
nanometer to the hundreds of nanometers. The research will advance the use of
these templates to produce functional arrays of nanoscopic structures. This
includes the use of metal electrodeposition in the template pores to produce
ultrahigh-density arrays of magnetic nanowires for magnetic storage
applications. The nanopore array can be patterned laterally using electron-beam
lithography, to create magnetic nanowires and nanoparticle electron-transport
studies. The nanoporous arrays will also be used as electrochemical
nanoelectrode arrays, as reactive-ion-etching masks for silicon technology, and
to produce glass nanopillars. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project provides several
unique educational opportunities including REU, RET, an interdepartmental
nanoscience course, biweekly interdisciplinary meetings, and a technology-
training program based on interactive digital video. This project integrates
efforts from the academic and industrial sectors, with collaborations from
national laboratories and international groups.&lt;br/&gt;