* 0103290
* NSE/NIRT:  Quantum Effects in Single Molecule Magnets
* MPS,DMR
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2006
* Nar Dalal, New York University
* Continuing Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 06/30/2006
* USD 1,940,000.00

This project is an interdisciplinary Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team
(NIRT) that will investigate the quantum properties of nanometer-sized single-
molecule magnets (SMMs). The miniaturization of magnetic devices to this size
using conventional fabrication techniques is a major scientific challenge. For
this reason, there is a growing interest in a bottom-up or molecule-based
approach whereby magnetic nanostructures are synthesized chemically using
solution methods at room temperature. These materials enable fundamental studies
of the properties intrinsic to magnetic nanostructures that have previously been
inaccessible. For instance, nanoscale magnets (including SMMs) are susceptible
to quantum tunneling of their magnetic moment (QTM), which could seriously
impair their usefulness in magnetic recording but, at the same time, could
provide a medium for quantum computation. This collaboration will address some
of the important open fundamental questions in nanomagnetism and QTM via a
concerted program in SMM synthesis and advanced characterization. Magnetic
interactions within SMM crystals will be varied chemically through modification
to the molecule site symmetry, intramolecular exchange interactions,
interactions between nuclear and electronic spins, and intermolecular dipolar
interactions. Parallel to these synthetic efforts, SMMs will be characterized
using quantum level specific Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR) and Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopies and high sensitivity micro-Hall effect
magnetometry. This program will provide the highest quality interdisciplinary
research training to a diverse group of graduate students and post-doctoral
scientists, which will include training in new chemical synthesis methods and
advanced magnetic measurement techniques. %%% This project is an
interdisciplinary Nanoscale Interdisciplinary Research Team (NIRT) that will
investigate the quantum properties of nanometer-sized single-molecule magnets
(SMMs). The miniaturization of magnetic devices to this size is critical to
advances in magnetic information storage, which is an important industry in the
United States. Conventional techniques used to fabricate magnetic nanostructures
have seriously limitations. For this reason, there is a growing interest in a
bottom-up or molecule-based approach whereby magnetic nanostructures are
synthesized chemically. These materials enable fundamental studies of the
properties intrinsic to magnetic nanostructures that have previously been
inaccessible. For instance, nanoscale magnets (including SMMs) are susceptible
to quantum tunneling of their magnetic moment (QTM), which could seriously
impair their usefulness in magnetic information storage, but, at the same time,
could provide a medium for a new and potentially much faster type of information
processing known as quantum computing. This collaboration will address some of
the important open fundamental questions in nanomagnetism and explore new
avenues for the implementation of SMMs in future devices. This will be
accomplished via a concerted program in SMM synthesis and advanced
characterization. This program will provide the highest quality
interdisciplinary research training to a diverse group of undergraduate
students, graduate students and post-doctoral scientists. Students will be
trained in cutting edge chemical synthesis and magnetic measurement techniques.
Their training will also include interactions with leading industrial
researchers in the magnetic recording industry.

