* 0103096
* NER:  Feasibility Studies on ZnO Nanostructures And Their Device Applications
* CSE,CCF
* 06/15/2001,12/31/2002
* Yicheng Lu, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Standard Grant
* S. Kamal Abdali
* 12/31/2002
* USD 100,000.00

PROPOSAL NO.: 0103096&lt;br/&gt;PRINCIPAL INVESTIGATOR: Lu,
Yicheng&lt;br/&gt;INSTITUTION NAME: Rutgers University New
Brunswick&lt;br/&gt;TITLE: NER: Feasibility Studies on ZnO Nanostructures And
Their Device Applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal addresses the
exploratory research on zinc oxide (ZnO) based nanoscale
structures&lt;br/&gt;and feasibility study of their device applications. ZnO is
a multifunctional material possessing unique&lt;br/&gt;electrical, optical,
acoustical, and mechanical properties. Semiconductor ZnO has a wide and
direct&lt;br/&gt;energy bandgap (~3.3eV). ZnO can be grown at low temperatures,
in contrast with the other wide&lt;br/&gt;bandgap materials, such as GaN and
SiC. Its ternary compounds, formed by alloying ZnO with CdO and&lt;br/&gt;MgO,
permit bandgap tuning from ~2.8 eV to ~4 eV. Doped ZnO ternaries can be made
magnetic or&lt;br/&gt;ferroelectric, extending its applications beyond the
traditional semiconductor confines. In this exploratory&lt;br/&gt;research, we
will study growth mechanisms and conduct substrate engineering for selective
growth of&lt;br/&gt;ZnO nanotips and nanotip arrays on various substrates,
including R-plane sapphire, Si, silicon-on-sapphire&lt;br/&gt;(SOS), and GaN-on-
sapphire. Feasibility studies of ZnO nanotip applications will focus on field-
emission,&lt;br/&gt;two-dimensional photonic bandgap (PBG), and fine
instrumentation such as atomic force&lt;br/&gt;microscopy and scanning tunneling
optical microscopy. We will also explore the feasibility to form
CdO&lt;br/&gt;quantum dots in ZnO using the activated alloy phase segregation
mechanism, which may be proved as a&lt;br/&gt;viable alternative to the
Stranski-Krastanov mechanism. These quantum dots have potential
applications&lt;br/&gt;in UV lasers and integrated UV optoelectronic chips. The
proposed work will extend the research on&lt;br/&gt;nanoscale structures and
devices into the field of wide bandgap semiconductor nanoscale science
and&lt;br/&gt;engineering. The research and development of nanoscale structures
in ZnO and its ternaries will lead to a&lt;br/&gt;fundamentally new class of
devices, which integrate multi-phenomena and posses unprecedented multi-
functional&lt;br/&gt;characteristics.&lt;br/&gt;