* 0103473
* NIRT:   Biologically Based Assemblies of Electronic Materials at the Nanoscale; Improving on Nature
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Karen Browning, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Judy A. Raper
* 08/31/2005
* USD 1,500,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;CTS-0103473&lt;br/&gt;Angela Belcher, University of Texas
Austin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal was received in response to Nanoscale
Science and Engineering (NSE) solicitation, NSF-00119, in the category Nanoscale
Interdisciplinary Research Teams (NIRT). &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Biological
systems efficiently and accurately assemble nanoscale building blocks into
complex&lt;br/&gt;and functionally sophisticated structures with high
perfection, controlled size and compositional&lt;br/&gt;uniformity. The self-
organizing processes found in these systems rely largely on non-covalent
interactions that enable elegant rearrangement between usable architectural
forms and self-correction. The research will take advantage of the atomic
composition and plane specific recognition that a biomolecule can exhibit for an
inorganic phase, and the nanostructural control and regularity that biomolecules
typically impose on crystal phases and crystallographic orientations to control
nanostructure formation. Furthermore, RNA templates will be used to direct the
parallel self-assembly of multiple electronic components with high precision.
Using combinatorial peptide evolution, peptide sequences will be identified that
select for and bind to specific nanocrystal and nanowire substrates, such as
magnetic and semiconductor quantum dots and silicon nanowires synthesized in
solution. The peptides provide recognition specificity between the biological
molecules and the inorganic substrate. The peptides couple the inorganic
electronic "building blocks" to the biological machinery that directs the
architectural "blueprints" for organization. In essence, genetically encoding
biological-electronic interactions are selecting the mRNA sequences that code
for specific amino acid sequences, but beyond that, specific secondary and
ultimately tertiary structures can be achieved; thus, leading to supermolecular
architectures. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An interdisciplinary effort will include
synthetic chemistry, electrical and materials engineering, and molecular
biology, which targets the development of specific recognition chemistries
between biological and inorganic substrates for the creation of nanostructured
materials and devices with novel applications. The proposed project offers
highly interdisciplinary educational and research opportunities for graduate
students. &lt;br/&gt;