* 0103543
* Engineered Nanoparticle Electronic and Photonic Device Materials
* ENG,ECCS
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2005
* Richard Flagan, California Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Lawrence Goldberg
* 06/30/2005
* USD 1,000,000.00

This proposal was submitted in response to the solicitation "Nanoscale Science
and Engineering" (NSF 00-119). We propose a joint Caltech/NASA-JPL/Agere Systems
research program to develop new materials for Si nanocrystal nonvolatile
memories and related nanoscale electronic devices. Under the
program:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;o New aerosol-based Si nanoparticle and nanowire
engineering methods will be developed to enable formation nanoparticle and
nanowire arrays with precise control of particle size, particle number and array
structure. These methods 'will be compatible with Si ultralarge scale integrated
(ULSI) circuit process technology.&lt;br/&gt;o Aerosol-synthesized and
colloidally processed silicon nanoparticle and nanowire arrays with novel
configurations will be integrated into Si-based metal-oxide-semiconductor (MOS)
devices at state-of-the-art device dimensions yielding nanometer-scale memory
devices.&lt;br/&gt;o A dielectric heterostructure layered tunnel barrier will be
developed to achieve simultaneous ultrafast chargc injection and extremely long
charge retention times, which are mutually exclusive for existing conventional
dielectric tunnel baffler designs.&lt;br/&gt;o Nanocrystal charging via
electrical injection and photoexcited carrier injection will be studied to
assess layered tunnel barrier performance and to determine whether quantum size
effects on the density of electronic states can be exploited for control of
electronic charging energy.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focal point of the work is
a recently demonstrated high-performance aerosol silicon nanocrystal memory
device, developed by the present nanoscale interdisciplinary research (NIRT)
team under prior NSF support. Silicon nanoparticles comprise the floating gate
that is the storage node of a nanocrystal nonvolatile memory. Aerosol synthesis
allows control of Si nanocrystal size and shape that are difficult to achieve by
other synthesis methods. Uniquely, our team has successfully integrated vapor-
synthesized aerosol nanoparticles into a high-performance silicon-based
electronic device, fabricated at 0.18 micron design rules on 200 mm substrates
by ultraclean processing at state-of-the-au device dimensions. Extensive
electrical characterization of transistor subthreshold and turn-on performance,
retention time, program-erase cycling, gate and drain disturb characteristics
indicated that these devices are high performance memory devices. The
Caltech/JPL/Agere NIRT team is unusual in its combination of basic research on
new electronic materials developed at Caltech followed by direct materials
integration into a flexible, state-of-the-au silicon device process carried out
at Caltech and Agere System's fabrication facilities.&lt;br/&gt;