* 0103208
* Geometric Group Theory
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2005
* Lee Mosher, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2005
* USD 104,961.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0103208&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Lee Mosher&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The motivating theme of geometric
group theory is that finitely&lt;br/&gt;generated groups can be studied using
topological and geometric&lt;br/&gt;methods. Starting around 1980, Gromov
proposed classifying&lt;br/&gt;groups geometrically using the relation of quasi-
isometry. He&lt;br/&gt;demonstrated that the quasi-isometry class of a group G
can often&lt;br/&gt;be described explicitly in simple algebraic or geometric
terms, a&lt;br/&gt;process now referred to as ``quasi-isometric rigidity''
or&lt;br/&gt;``QI-rigidity'' for the group G. The first part of this
project&lt;br/&gt;will be to investigate QI-rigidity problems for graphs of
surface&lt;br/&gt;groups and of abelian groups. An initial focus will be
those&lt;br/&gt;graphs of groups with the simplest algebraic structure,
namely&lt;br/&gt;semidirect products with free groups, determined by
a&lt;br/&gt;homomorphism from a free group into an appropriate
automorphism&lt;br/&gt;group such as the mapping class group of a surface.
General&lt;br/&gt;graphs of surface groups are determined by homomorphisms into
the&lt;br/&gt;commensurability mapping class group, a much more
mysterious&lt;br/&gt;object, and this point of view will be used to
investigate&lt;br/&gt;constructions of new and interesting examples. Also,
recent work&lt;br/&gt;on graphs of abelian groups has revealed a lot of rich
structure,&lt;br/&gt;suggesting a real possibility of obtaining QI-rigidity in
many&lt;br/&gt;new cases. In the second part of this project, the focus will
be&lt;br/&gt;to study geometric properties of free groups, motivated
by&lt;br/&gt;analogies between surface groups and free groups. In
particular,&lt;br/&gt;Thurston's ending lamination conjecture, an important goal
in the&lt;br/&gt;study of surface groups, has an analogue in the study of
free&lt;br/&gt;groups, in terms of classifying certain group actions up
to&lt;br/&gt;equivariant quasi-isometry. Pursuing this issue will
require&lt;br/&gt;generalizing many of the standard tools of surface groups,
such&lt;br/&gt;as geodesics in Teichmuller space, to the setting of free
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geometric group theory is the study of infinitely
symmetric&lt;br/&gt;patterns. Popular examples called ``surface groups''
are&lt;br/&gt;familiar from wallpaper symmetries and from the symmetries
of&lt;br/&gt;Escher's prints. Scientific examples occur in the
symmetry&lt;br/&gt;groups of crystalline arrays, and the symmetry groups of
field&lt;br/&gt;theories in particle physics. The development of
topology&lt;br/&gt;starting in the late 19th century, and the
concomitant&lt;br/&gt;development of combinatorial group theory, exhibited a
direct&lt;br/&gt;link between abstract groups and geometry. The need for
deeper&lt;br/&gt;understanding of this link has been demonstrated again and
again&lt;br/&gt;by different threads within 20th century
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;developments. Many of these threads were pulled together
around&lt;br/&gt;1980 by Gromov, whose proposed unification of geometric
group&lt;br/&gt;theory using the relation of ``quasi-isometry'' has been
very&lt;br/&gt;fruitful in the intervening twenty years. The focus of
this&lt;br/&gt;research project will be to investigate quasi-
isometric&lt;br/&gt;classification problems for several different types of
symmetry&lt;br/&gt;groups. In particular, by using a constructive technique
known&lt;br/&gt;as ``graphs of groups'', new symmetry groups can be
constructed&lt;br/&gt;out of familiar examples such as surface groups; these
and&lt;br/&gt;closely related constructions will be the subjects of
this&lt;br/&gt;research project.&lt;br/&gt;