* 0103668
* A Taxonomic Inventory of Marine Invertebrate-associated Microbes from the Microbial Culture Collection of Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institution
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2001,05/31/2006
* Jose Lopez, Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institution, Inc.
* Standard Grant
* Judith Skog
* 05/31/2006
* USD 224,681.00

DEB-0103668&lt;br/&gt;Jose Lopez&lt;br/&gt;Peter McCarthy&lt;br/&gt;Julie
Olsen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A grant has been awarded to Drs. Jose Lopez, Peter
McCarthy, and Julie Olson at Harbor Branch Oceanographic Institution (HBOI) to
perform a taxonomic survey and inventory of deeper water marine microorganisms
contained in HBOI's microbial culture collection. The approximately 9000
microorganisms within the collection were isolated from deep-water marine
invertebrates (primarily sponges). This project will survey about half of the
collection using a combination of descriptive and molecular genetic techniques,
provide access to this information via the Internet, creation of a Harbor Branch
Marine Microbe Database (HBMMD) and professional scientific publications, and
apply the knowledge gained to examinations of the genetic diversity within
preserved specimens of the host invertebrates. It is thought that the microbial
communities associated with marine invertebrates will differ with the species of
host invertebrate, geographic location, and water
depth.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Little is known about the biological and genetic
diversity of marine microorganisms. Due to the inherent difficulties associated
with gaining access to deep-water environments, even less is known about deeper
water marine microbes. There is an urgent need to study the diversity of marine
ecosystems, which are under increasing threats caused by tourism, recreational
use, nutrient overload, and general ocean warming. Understanding the balance of
biodiversity in marine ecosystems which are still relatively healthy will
enhance our ability to manage and conserve them, suggest possible goals in the
restoration of similar but less healthy marine systems, and help to foster a
greater global appreciation of microbial ecosystems. &lt;br/&gt;