* 0103738
* Completion of the Greater Sonoran Desert Lichen Flora Project
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2005
* Thomas Nash, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Judith Skog
* 07/31/2005
* USD 240,000.00

Lichens are poorly known symbiotic organisms that occur world-wide on bark,
rocks and soil. Outside of the Arctic there are no comprehensive identification
books available. The current investigation involves a 10-year collaboration
among over 70 scientists from 15 countries to develop a modern identification
book for northwestern Mexico and southwestern USA, a region covering 600,000
square miles and designated the greater Sonoran Desert region. Adjacent
mountains as well as the desert are included in the region. &lt;br/&gt; Although
the collecting phase involving over a dozen major scientific expeditions is now
concluded, analysis of specimens is still on-going. Current funding will allow
final analyses and development of appropriate classifications to go into the
second and final volume of the identification book (the first one is essentially
complete). In addition, current funding will allow development of an internet
identification system based on the almost 2000 species recognized from the
region.&lt;br/&gt; The final product will include two books covering the 2000
species and include species descriptions, distribution maps, keys for
identification of the species and an extensive introduction. An alternative
version will be available over the internet. The treatment will almost 50% of
the lichen species known from North America and as a consequence will have
significance beyond the immediate geographic region covered. Because lichens are
well known to be sensitive to air pollution and are important components of many
ecosystems, it is anticipated that the results will be of considerable interest
to land managers, air pollution specialists, scientists and public interest
groups concerned with natural ecosystems.&lt;br/&gt;