* 0103994
* RUI:  Some Problems in Percolation and Stochastic Dynamics of Ising Models
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Chris Wu, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 07/31/2004
* USD 77,952.00

The aim of this research is to study several random spatial models on various
infinite graphs. Four topics concerning stochastic dynamics of Ising spin
systems, the random cluster and Ising ferromagnetic model, and the contact
process are proposed to be studied. The first topic concerns stochastic dynamics
of an Ising spin system on an infinite lattice where spins evolve according to
the usual Glauber dynamics. Some typical questions are: does a spin flip
infinitely many times or only finitely many times? what is the probability that
a spin has not yet flipped at time t? The second topic is about Ising models on
hyperbolic lattices. Although Ising models on the hypercubic lattices have been
studied intensively and extensively since they were introduced, these models on
hyperbolic lattices have just started to receive attention from physicists and
mathematicians. They are found, by both numerical studies and mathematical
proofs, to exhibit a phenomenon of multiple phase transitions. Although some
results have been rigorously proved, many statements suggested by numerical
studies are to be proved, and many more are to be explored. Some GHS type
inequalities in the random cluster model and a related question of uniqueness of
the random cluster measure are the contents of the third topic. The final topic
deals with phase transitions of models with low-dimensional inhomogeneity. These
models include percolation, Ising ferromagnetic systems and contact
processes.&lt;br/&gt; Models of the sort to be studied in this research arise
naturally from physical sciences. Percolation is a probabilistic model of
studying flow through a discrete disordered system, such as particles flowing
through the filter of a gas mask, or fluid seeping through the interstices of a
porous medium, while the contact process can be regarded as modeling the spread
of an epidemic through a population.&lt;br/&gt;