* 0103223
* Fundamental Experimental Properties of Mesoscopic Systems
* MPS,DMR
* 11/01/2001,06/30/2004
* Richard Webb, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* H. Hollis Wickman
* 06/30/2004
* USD 390,000.00

This research is focused on investigations of the quantum mechanical phase
coherence properties of mesoscopic devices. At low temperatures, most mesoscopic
circuits only exhibit coherence times between 0.05 to 10 ns and it is believed
that much longer times will be required to make functional quantum devices. This
work will systematically explore the phase coherent transport and magnetic
properties of mesoscopic systems on time scales much shorter and much longer
than the phase coherence time. Studies of the effect of 0 to 26 GHz measurement
currents on decoherence in metals (with and without magnetic impurities) and
semiconductors will be made. Measurements of the thermodynamic electron
temperature in a variety of mesoscopic samples will be made using SQUID based
noise thermometer techniques in order to check the recent theoretical prediction
that thermodynamics may break down in small devices. The goal of all this work
is to understand how the high frequency, material, and geometrical properties
effect the quantum coherence properties of small systems. The graduate students
involved with this program will learn how to fabricate a variety of quantum
devices using modern fabrication techniques, measure these devices using state-
of-the-art techniques, and will comprehend a wide body of solid state theory.
All these skills are necessary in order to become successful in an industrial,
government, or university career.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The low temperature
properties of all electrical circuits can be significantly changed when the
dimensions of the elements are reduced below a few microns. Quantum effects such
as electron interference and charge quantization are responsible for many of the
large conductance fluctuations observed in these devices and have kindled hope
that a revolutionary new class of fast coherent quantum devices can be built to
help fuel the continuing progress in the microelectronics industry. Many of the
proposed new devices require long electron coherence times in order to maximize
the signal, yet most nano-scale circuits only exhibit coherence times between
0.05 to 10 nanoseconds. This proposed research is focused on understanding the
underlying physics that controls the phase coherence time in small electrical
circuits with the expectation that we will be able to discover ways to increase
this time. We will systematically explore the phase coherent transport
properties of small quantum systems on time scales much shorter and much longer
than the phase coherence time in an attempt to understand if we can manipulate
the quantum state without causing decoherence. The graduate students involved
with this program will receive the training necessary to become a future
generation of microelectronic scientists. They will learn how to fabricate a
variety of quantum devices using modern fabrication techniques and measure these
devices using state-of-the-art techniques. All these skills are necessary in
order to become successful in an industrial, government, or university career.
&lt;br/&gt;