* 0103487
* Lower Tail Probabilities and Limit Theorems in Probability and Statistics
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Qi-Man Shao, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* K Crank
* 07/31/2004
* USD 97,000.00

This project is devoted to the study of two topics: (i) limit theorems in
probability and statistics, and (ii) lower tail and small ball probabilities of
Gaussian processes. Limit theorems play a fundamental role in the development of
probability and statistics. The principal investigator continues his study in
this direction in general, focusing on self-normalized limit theorems in
particular. The investigator intends to systematically study moderate deviations
for self-normalized sums of independent random variables, for Hotelling's
t-statistic and for studentized $U$-statistic. The objective is to establish a
Cramer type moderate deviation theorem under a finite third moment condition.
Since the self-normalized moderate deviations require few moment conditions,
they not only extend classical limit theorems but also provide much wider
applicability to other fields, particularly to statistics. The study should also
help us better understand the behavior of large classes of statistical
functionals since the t-statistic and U-statistic are their building blocks.
Another area where limit theorems prove useful is the study of the real zeros of
random algebraic and trigonometric polynomials. Such polynomials with random
coefficients arise in many disciplines and their behavior is of interest to
statisticians, engineers, economists, and mathematicians. The primary focus of
the second topic is on estimating lower tail and small ball probabilities for
Gaussian processes. These types of probabilities often arise in estimating the
chances of rare events occurring in areas where such events are of fundamental
importance such as weather prediction, natural disaster prediction and economic
indices. One of the objectives is to develop new methods of estimating small
ball and lower tail probabilities. The focus is specifically on small ball
probabilities of the Brownian sheet in high dimensions and lower tail
probabilities for stationary Gaussian processes. The investigator also intends
to study basic sample properties for a newly introduced family of Gaussian
processes which have the same scaling and time inversion properties as the
Brownian motion but are infinitely differentiable. It is believed that this new
family of Gaussian processes would prove useful in many other fields as
mathematical models. This project is devoted to the study of two topics: (i)
limit theorems in probability and statistics, and (ii) lower tail and small ball
probabilities of Gaussian processes. Limit theorems play a fundamental role in
the development of probability and statistics. It is hoped that the first part
of this research may lead to the development of a self-normalized limit theory
in probability and statistics, while the second part of the research could
provide significant new knowledge about Gaussian random processes as well as
about our random environments.