* 0103468
* NER:  Synthesis and Characterization of Genetically Engineered Protein Polymers: Effects of Sequence Disorder on Structure-property Relationships
* ENG,CBET
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2003
* Susan Muller, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 06/30/2003
* USD 99,825.00

Nanostructured molecular sensors will report high-resolution spatial and
temporal system data during industrial processes, health care diagnostics, and
other applications without significantly affecting the systems they monitor.
These nanosensors require specialized elements for sensor attachment to the
target, assembly of a structural framework, sensing a particular physical or
chemical state of the environment, and transducing this state into an output
signal. Protein receptors offer a paradigm for nanosensor development as they
have developed domains that perform each of these functions. It is proposed to
develop a protein-based nanosensor based on the paradigm of cell adhesion
complexes. Upon receiving the appropriate environmental stimulus the sensor will
self-assemble subunits for supporting structural roles, sensing signals, and
generating chemical messages.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The initial aim of the
project is to optimize adhesion of a sensor subunit to an inert solid matrix.
Glutathione-S-Transferase (GST) will be employed to adhere GST-fusion proteins
to glutathione, a GST ligand, covalently linked to a glass surface. The next
project goal is to demonstrate detection of an enzymatic modification of the GST
fusion protein on the surface. A GST fusion of a tyrosine kinase ligand will be
attached to the surface and activation, or phosphorylations, of the ligand will
be detected using radioactive phosphate or antibodies that specifically
recognize phosphorylated proteins. The final stage of the project will
investigate detection of sensor activation based on recruitment of structural
and signaling components to an activated sensor subunit. Phosphorylated tyrosine
residues bind to SH2 protein domains. An SH2 domain will be fused to a
fluorescent protein, enabling detection of sensor activation by a simple
fluorescence measurement.&lt;br/&gt;