* 0103915
* Dynamical Systems Approaches to Partial Differential Equations
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Clarence Wayne, Trustees of Boston University
* Continuing grant
* Henry A. Warchall
* 07/31/2004
* USD 171,000.00

NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0103915 Mathematical Sciences: Dynamical Systems
Approaches to Partial Differential Equations

Abstract

DMS-0103915 Wayne

This project explores the long-time behavior of partial differential equations
using tools from the theory of dynamical systems. The equations to be studied
include both dissipative and Hamiltonian systems. As an example of the former,
Professor Wayne will study the long-time behavior of the Navier-Stokes equations
in the neighborhood of vortex solutions. He will construct finite dimensional
invariant manifolds in the phase space of these equations and use them to study
both the long-time asymptotics of solutions of the equations and the existence
of vortex solutions for which no explicit formulas exist. In related work he
will derive and rigorously justify approximate equations for the motion of waves
on the surface of a fluid, studying in particular the interaction of colliding
waves. In addition, by using ideas first developed to study finite dimensional,
nearly integrable, Hamiltonian systems, he will investigate the validity of
commonly used beam and plate models for motion of elastic materials in thin
domains. Finally, in collaboration with a mathematical biologist at Brown
University, Professor Wayne will study the existence and stability of pulses in
models of neural tissue.

The systems under study arise in many applications, including materials science,
fluid mechanics, and biology. Even though it is impossible to solve the
equations that govern their motion explicitly, applications require at least a
qualitative understanding of the behavior of their solutions. For instance, the
equations that describe vibrations of elastic materials are so complicated that
their solution remains very time consuming, even with modern computational
tools. Consequently, engineers have derived many approximate models for the
behavior of such systems, particularly in situations where one dimension of the
system is much smaller than others, as is the case for beams and plates. Very
little is known rigorously, however, about how well these models actually mimic
the true behavior of the beam or plate. This research aims both to provide
accurate estimates of the errors that occur in using such models and to develop
an algorithm that permits one to systematically improve the models. In a similar
vein, Professor Wayne will also investigate models for waves on the ocean.
Recently it has been realized that the wake of high-speed ferries can produce
solitary waves of sufficient magnitude to cause significant damage at the shore.
The mechanism by which these waves are created in the wake is not yet
understood. Understanding the relationship between the solitary waves of the
model problem and the solutions of the actual water wave problem may shed light
on the creation and propagation of this type of wake.