* 0103809
* 100 Years of Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt) - A Paradigm for Transgenic Organisms: A Critical Scientific Assessment to be held March 30-April 1, 2001, in Tucson, Arizona
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2001,04/30/2002
* Linda Thomashow, American Society For Microbiology
* Standard Grant
* Christopher A. Cullis
* 04/30/2002
* USD 15,000.00

100 Years of Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt)- A Colloquium One of the major issues
in the public domain today is the controversy regarding the cultivation of
modified plants. This issue is international in scope and involves farmers,
consumers, pesticide manufacturers, environmentalists, and multinational
corporations. Heated debates on the Internet and demonstrations on the streets
outside meeting rooms have ensured that these issues receive daily press
coverage.

Perhaps the single trait most vigorously discussed is the use of the toxin of
the bacterium Bacillus thuringiensis (Bt). The gene for this toxin has been
cloned and introduced into a wide variety of plants, including cotton, corn, and
wheat. Previously, the toxin has been sprayed on crops- apparently without ill
effects-protecting primarily against Lepidopteron insects.

A major controversy has not erupted with the demonstration that, under certain
conditions, the toxin will kill monarch butterflies. The use of Bt to improve
plants serves as the paradigm for all genetic engineering of plants.

The primary objective of the proposed colloquium is to consider all aspects of
Bt, but focus on modified plants. We will analyze the scientific background of
Bt and consider such questions as its mode of action, mechanism of insect
resistance to the toxin, and its effect on nontarget organisms. Other questions
that will be considered are questions of food safety of modified plants, threats
to biodiversity from the use of Bt, and the effect on the use of chemical
pesticides resulting from these modifications. We plan to convene this
colloquium March 30-April 1, 2001, in Tucson, Arizona.

Although the toxic properties of Bt were discovered a century ago, this is the
first far-ranging colloquium that has been held on this subject. The colloquium
will bring together scientists with broad expertise to consider the science of
an issue with broad political and social implications. Participants will have
expertise in the following scientific disciplines: microbiology, entomology,
ecology, population biology, risk assessment, and plants. Following the
colloquium, a report will be developed-in both print and electronic formats-that
will be analytical and comprehensive, yet offer practical recommendations.