* 0103723
* Next Generation Software: A Framework For Developing Complex Applications On High-End Petaflop-Class Machines
* CSE,CNS
* 11/01/2001,10/31/2005
* Keshav Pingali, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Frederica Darema
* 10/31/2005
* USD 1,100,000.00

0103723-University of Delaware-Guang R. Gao &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A Framework
for Developing Complex Applications On High-End Petaflop-Class
Machines&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research proposes to develop novel software
technologies for supporting the design and implementation of complex
applications on next-generation high-performance computers such as the IBM Blue
Gene machine, the teraflop-class systems of the ASCI program, and the
architecture (s) proposed in the NSF peta-flops point-design
studies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Future high-performance computers such as these
will have large numbers of processors (from a few thousand to several hundred
thousands, or even more), and a complex multilevel memory hierarchy with
memories physically distributed across different parts of the machine. To use
such machines effectively, enormous amounts of parallelism must be exposed in
user programs, and careful attention must be paid to the latency and bandwidth
of access to different levels of the memory hierarchy. The applications enabled
by such high-end machines are also expected to be significantly more complex and
dynamic than applications in the past. Therefore, supporting the development of
such applications on next-generation high-end computers is a major software
challenge.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;