* 0103037
* NER:  Detection of Specific Biomolecule Adsorption in Ionically Self-Assembled Monolayers via Second Harmonic Generation
* ENG,CBET
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2003
* Kevin Van Cott, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Fred G. Heineken
* 05/31/2003
* USD 99,999.00

Nanotechnology has had a profound impact on biosensor development. The
understanding and exploitation of specific biomolecular interactions has led to
new applications in medical diagnostics, environmental monitoring, and genomic
science. The objective of this research is to use second harmonic generation
(SHG) to detect specific adsorption of unlabeled biological molecules (e.g.,
proteins, DNA) at a surface, and thus develop a new biosensor platform that will
have significant advantages over conventional sensor platforms. SHG is the
creation of light at twice the frequency of the light with which the material is
being irradiated, and occurs only in materials that are noncentrosymmetric -
that is, materials comprised of molecules arranged in a non-random fashion. It
has been shown previously that ionically self assembled monolayers (ISAMs) of
polyelectrolytes can be used to make nanometer-thick, noncentrosymmetric
monolayers that exhibit a large SHG signal. The ISAM technique involves the
alternant adsorption of oppositely-charged polyelectrolyte layers via
electrostatic attraction. During the course of those investigations, it was
found that adsorption of a 'capping' layer of a polyelectrolyte of opposite
charge onto an SHG-active monolayer results in a dramatic decrease in the
measured SHG signal. This indicates a change in the net orientation of the
molecules in the pre-adsorbed film towards a more centrosymmetric configuration.
This project will extend this concept to the development of a sensor that
detects specific adsorption of biomolecules. Nanoscale ISAM films will be
designed and fabricated in which specific adsorption of an unlabeled target
biomolecule will induce a substantial change in the net orientation of molecules
in the film. Important parameters will be determined that control how the sensor
is constructed, the sensitivity, the dynamic range, the effect of non-specific
adsorption of sample contaminants and results will be evaluated in order to
compare with other biosensor systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;