* 0103957
* Alexandrov's Geometry and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2004
* Anton Petrunin, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Alexandre Freire
* 05/31/2004
* USD 65,588.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract DMS-0103957:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project contains the
following main topics: &lt;br/&gt;1. Approximation of Riemannian
&lt;br/&gt;manifolds by polyhedral metrics and generalization of Alexandrov
embedding&lt;br/&gt;theorem. The PI has proved that approximability by
polyhedral metrics&lt;br/&gt;implies a new kind of curvature bound which appears
naturally but has never been&lt;br/&gt;considered in geometry before. The proof
is interesting in its own right,&lt;br/&gt;as it uses a Lemma closely resembling
the Alexandrov embedding theorem&lt;br/&gt;(which states that any positively
curved metric on a 2-sphere is isometric&lt;br/&gt;to a convex surface in a
Euclidean space). This brings us back to a more&lt;br/&gt;geometrical point of
view on Riemannian Geometry, according to which&lt;br/&gt;``interesting''
curvature bounds should arise from properties of&lt;br/&gt;embeddings of
manifolds into Euclidean space. This circle of ideas also&lt;br/&gt;gives a new
approach to the old conjecture that every simply connected&lt;br/&gt;Riemannian
manifold with positive curvature operator is diffeomorphic to
a&lt;br/&gt;sphere; &lt;br/&gt;2. Collapsing with lower curvature bound. The
general goal of this topic&lt;br/&gt;is to understand how collapsing with lower
curvature and diameter bounds&lt;br/&gt;happens and, in the very best case, to
construct a structure analogous to&lt;br/&gt;the one obtained by Cheeger-Fukaya-
Gromov for the case of bounded&lt;br/&gt;curvature.&lt;br/&gt;3. Gate spaces.
Gate spaces are related to a circle of problems arising&lt;br/&gt;from the
question of K.Grove of whether there is an Alexandrov space that&lt;br/&gt;has
two different smoothings into Riemannian manifolds of the
same&lt;br/&gt;dimension and lower curvature bound;&lt;br/&gt;4. Applications of
megafolds to collapsing with bounded curvature and to &lt;br/&gt;Ricci flow.
Megafolds are a generalization of Riemannian manifolds and&lt;br/&gt;orbifolds
that has already proved it usefulness for collapsing with&lt;br/&gt;bounded
curvature; in particular, they were used by the PI to prove,
in&lt;br/&gt;coloboration with W.Tuschmann, the main part of the Klingenberg-
Sakai&lt;br/&gt;Conjecture. Such a collapsing also arises naturally from the
rescaling of&lt;br/&gt;the Ricci flow; it can be used to construct singularity
models for the&lt;br/&gt;Ricci flow with no injectivity radius estimates;
&lt;br/&gt;5. Theory of Alexandrov spaces. Alexandrov spaces appear naturally
as&lt;br/&gt;limits of Riemannian manifolds with lower curvature bound. Most
geometric&lt;br/&gt;results which are true for Riemaninan manifolds with lower
curvature bound&lt;br/&gt;are also true for Alexandrov spaces; however, there
are several such&lt;br/&gt;results that cannot be generalized. For example, it
is not known whether a&lt;br/&gt;convex hypersurface in an Alexandrov space is
also an Alexandrov&lt;br/&gt;space. Such problems are mostly due to the lack of
local analysis, and&lt;br/&gt;that is what the PI proposes to
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Riemannian manifold, which could be
considered as a simplified version of&lt;br/&gt;space-time, is a way too
complicated object. The first topic in this&lt;br/&gt;proposal is aimed at
studing Riemanian manifolds by means of approximation&lt;br/&gt;by simpler
objects. These objects are polyhedral spaces, i.e. spaces glued&lt;br/&gt;of
Euclidean polyhedra. The other topics considers a different approach
to&lt;br/&gt;studing Riemannian manifolds. It is based on considering extremal
metrics,&lt;br/&gt;in an appropriate sense, for example how Riemannian manifolds
collapse to&lt;br/&gt;lower dimenssional objects. This method makes possible to
get new results&lt;br/&gt;in the main stream direction of Riemannian geometry:
how to make&lt;br/&gt;conclusions about global structure of space basing on
local properties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;