* 0103385
* Cracking in Brittle Films on Ductile Substrates
* MPS,DMR
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2004
* Ivar Reimanis, Colorado School of Mines
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 05/31/2004
* USD 226,971.00

0103385&lt;br/&gt;Reimanis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our current understanding of
surface cracking phenomena is too limited to adequately predict conditions for
fracture in sophisticated, inhomogeneous structures. Recent advances in
mechanics modeling of graded structures, as well as advances in the micro- and
nano-scale control over the fabrication of specific film structures have opened
new doors for developing a better understanding of the connection between crack
growth and performance in brittle films. Work proposed here will examine how
surface cracking depends on 1) surface architectural characteristics, including
the gradation architecture, and the associated residual stress distributions, 2)
the elastic and plastic properties of the substrate, 3) the strength of the
film/substrate interface, and 4) microstructural features of the film. Surfaces
will be prepared by depositing films of chromium nitride (CrN and Cr2N), which
have been extensively studied at Colorado School of Mines, as well as CrxCy,
TixN, and TixC. Cartridge brass (Cu-30wt. % Zn), and Ni alloys will be utilized
as model substrate systems, while steel substrates will provide a connection to
technological systems, offering comparison to data in the literature.
Conventional layered and novel architectures will be fabricated, and their
mechanical behavior will be characterized using fundamental fracture
experiments. A comprehensive set of experiments will elucidate the generic
behavior among the different films, and this behavior will be compared to
existing theoretical models for the purpose of extracting mechanics effects from
material behavior effects. The inherent complexity in these systems dictates the
need for numerical methods to model the mechanical response. Thus, finite
element analysis will be employed to evaluate residual stress states and crack
tip stress fields. &lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;Brittle films serve a wide variety
of purposes: corrosion, radiation and thermal protection, and wear resistance.
In applications such as high temperature superconductors and for many
microelectronic components, the film is the device, engineered to conduct
current or respond to photons, electrons or ions. The performance of a film
depends in large part on its structural integrity. In the case of high
temperature superconductor tape, a surface crack dramatically reduces the
current density; in the case of turbine engine components, cracking may result
in enhanced oxidation; in the case of tools and dies, surface cracking decreases
the wear resistance. In some applications, such as turbine engines for land
based power generation, a limited amount of cracking may actually be desired in
order to increase the film compliance. Clearly, it is technologically extremely
important to understand how cracking occurs in engineered surfaces. The proposed
work is designed to advance understanding in the fracture behavior of hard,
brittle films with complex structures so that it may ultimately be applied to
design new, high performance surfaces.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;