* 0103711
* Anatomy of a Biodiversity Hotspot: Marsupial, Rodent, and Bat Diversity in Northwestern Argentina
* BIO,DEB
* 10/01/2001,03/31/2008
* Michael Mares, University of Oklahoma Norman Campus
* Standard Grant
* Maureen Kearney
* 03/31/2008
* USD 249,962.00

ANATOMY OF A BIODIVERSITY HOTSPOT: MARSUPIAL, RODENT, AND BAT DIVERSITY IN
NORTHWESTERN ARGENTINA&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A three-year survey of marsupials,
rodents, and bats in northwestern Argentina will be conducted. This is the
southernmost part of the Tropical Andes Hotspot designated by Conservation
International as the biologically richest area in the world when data on plants,
amphibians, mammals, birds, and reptiles are considered together, supporting an
exceptional concentration of endemic species. The region also is considered
"Vulnerable," "Regionally Outstanding" biologically, and has been given the
Highest Priority at both an International and Regional Scale by the World Bank.
This biogeographically significant region is largely unexplored biologically.
The study area, 469,000 km2, encompasses the high- and low-elevation Andean
region and the pre-Andean foothills of the provinces from Jujuy to La Rioja.
Major habitats include puna, prepuna, Yungas forest, montane grasslands, Chaco,
montane Chaco, and Monte desert. Microhabitat diversity is high and numerous
isolated valleys and montane islands exist. The area is a natural corridor for
north-south migration of biota and has been hypothesized as a center of
diversity for many taxa. It is an ideal area for geographic isolation and
subsequent speciation. While the region is being recognized as the most
biologically diverse in the world, it also is undergoing exceptional rates of
loss of habitat. Economic development activities involving agriculture,
overgrazing, tourism, deforestation, mining, dam construction, and oil and gas
exploration are placing considerable stress on all habitats.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Marsupials, rodents, and bats will be surveyed at numerous
localities in northwestern Argentina and voucher specimens will be collected and
deposited in museum collections. Data on habitat use, habits, molting,
reproduction, and natural history will be recorded. A project database,
accessible through the SNOMNH web site, will provide information on
identifications, localities, and specimen data. Surveys, checklists, and
identification keys will be produced in print and electronic format. New taxa
will be described. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Research will examine phylogenetic
relationships, biogeography, and conservation. Data will aid in choosing sites
for preservation and provide baseline information on habitat selection,
reproduction, and species composition for major habitats in this threatened
region. Related projects include the development of an expedition website,
submission of a proposal for an REU supplement, and submission of a proposal for
an ISE (Informal Science Education) supplement. The project will include
collaborators from the US and Argentina. Argentine and US students will be
supported and trained in the field and in the
laboratory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;