* 0103922
* The Topology of Quantum Invariants
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Justin Roberts, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2005
* USD 107,529.00

DMS-0103922&lt;br/&gt;Justin D. Roberts &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this
project is to try to understand &lt;br/&gt;the topology underlying quantum
invariants in three &lt;br/&gt;dimensions. The current state of knowledge seems
inadequate &lt;br/&gt;for explaining what kind of topological information the
&lt;br/&gt;invariants carry, and therefore what kind of applications
&lt;br/&gt;in three-dimensional topology they might have. However
it&lt;br/&gt;has revealed (through the frameworks of TQFT and Vassiliev
&lt;br/&gt;theory) a wealth of very interesting algebraic structures,
&lt;br/&gt;which seem to be specifically related to topology in three
&lt;br/&gt;dimensions, and so should be thought of as kind of &lt;br/&gt;``new
algebraic topology'' in three dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;Roberts intends to try to
bridge the gap between this new &lt;br/&gt;topology and classical algebraic
topology. There are three &lt;br/&gt;main areas of investigation. The first is
K-theory, which &lt;br/&gt;could help to explain the relationship between
quantum knot &lt;br/&gt;invariants and Vassiliev invariants (for example, why
the &lt;br/&gt;Jones polynomial is a polynomial). The second is Rozansky-Witten
theory, a very interesting new example of a TQFT which &lt;br/&gt;provides new
hints about intepretation of the invariants, &lt;br/&gt;and could have
additional applications in complex or &lt;br/&gt;hyperkaehler geometry. The
third is the hyperbolic volume &lt;br/&gt;conjecture of Kashaev, Murakami and
Murakami. This conjecture &lt;br/&gt;seems to fit into a general pattern of
ideas relating &lt;br/&gt;quantization (and specifically, 6j-symbols) to
classical&lt;br/&gt;geometry; ideas which might provide a conceptual context
&lt;br/&gt;for the conjecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To a mathematician, a knot
is what you get by tangling up a &lt;br/&gt;piece of string and then gluing its
ends together. It is clear &lt;br/&gt;that there are qualitatively different
ways of doing this; &lt;br/&gt;trying to describe and understand these ways
forms a branch &lt;br/&gt;of topology, which might be thought of as what remains
of &lt;br/&gt;geometry when quantitative questions are ignored. The main
&lt;br/&gt;tools of knot theory are "topological invariants", numbers
&lt;br/&gt;which can be associated to knots and which encode
some&lt;br/&gt;information about their structure. During the last sixteen
&lt;br/&gt;years, ideas borrowed from the physics of quantum field
&lt;br/&gt;theory have led to the discovery of many new and beautiful
&lt;br/&gt;invariants called "quantum invariants", but because of this
&lt;br/&gt;unusual origin, their meaning remains very mysterious, and
&lt;br/&gt;their potential unfulfilled. The goal of the project is to
&lt;br/&gt;use some new ideas to try to explain this mystery and
to&lt;br/&gt;bridge some of the gaps between geometry, topology, and
&lt;br/&gt;physics. The work should contribute to the healthy exchange
&lt;br/&gt;of ideas between these disciplines, and stimulate new work in
each.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;