* 0104350
* Analysis and numerical computations of moving boundaries in fluid dynamics and materials science
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Michael Siegel, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Henry A. Warchall
* 07/31/2005
* USD 87,906.00

0104350 Siegel

This proposal is concerned with the analysis and numerical computation of moving
boundaries in problems from fluid dynamics and materials science. The proposed
problems are motivated by different applications but are remarkably similar from
a mathematical point of view. One class of problems concerns the deformation and
breakup via tip streaming of drops and bubbles in extensional flows. Tip
streaming refers to the phenomenon where a bubble develops a deformed shape
featuring cusplike ends, from which fine filaments or small bubbles are emitted
into the exterior fluid. Experiments suggest that interfacial tension gradients
such as those produced by surfactants are important for the onset of this
instability. The PI shall continue his development of an analytical theory for
the deformation and evolution of slender bubbles with surfactant, focusing on
the effects of soluble surfactant and its influence in tip streaming.
Mathematical difficulties in the analysis are associated with a jump in boundary
conditions at "stagnant caps" of surfactant on the free surface. Techniques
employed to address these difficulties include singular perturbation theory,
theory of singular integral equations and Riemann-Hilbert problems, and complex
variable theory in moving boundary problems. The theory will be complemented by
accurate numerical computations. The PI also proposes to investigate tip
streaming and air entrainment in simple models of fiber coating, as well as cusp
formation and a possible analogue of tip streaming which may occur during the
diffusion controlled evolution of voids in a stressed solid. The mathematical
statements of these free boundary problems are similar, and the PI expects that
there will be a certain synergism between them.

Moving boundary problems, such as the evolution of waves on water, the
propagation of flame fronts, or the growth of crystals, continue to challenge
applied scientists and engineers. The PI proposes to study a class of
fundamental moving boundary problems that are important in technological
applications. A common feature among the proposed problems is that the moving
interface develops very small-scale features, such as cusps or very fine
filaments, which can then greatly influence the properties of the material or
fluid. One application of the proposed work is in the coating of materials (such
as optical fibers) by pulling at high speed through a liquid bath. Air filaments
produced during the coating process can snap off, leaving voids or other
blemishes that adulterate the coating. A second application is in the failure of
materials. Small pores present in materials evolve (via atomic diffusion) when
the material is stressed. Cusp development in the pores can initiate cracks or
dislocations (misalignment of atoms); this has been implicated as a prominent
cause of failure in microelectronic circuits. Other applications include
emulsion formation and mixing in multi-component fluid systems.