* 0104415
* The Role of Heating and Enrichment in the Formation of Large-Scale Structure
* MPS,AST
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2004
* Evan Scannapieco, Scannapieco             Evan           S
* Fellowship Award
* Dana Lehr
* 06/30/2004
* USD 122,772.00

MPS-0104415 Evan Scannapieco

Dr. Scannapieco will carry out a program of research as an MPS Distinguished
International Postdoctoral Research Fellow at the Osseratorio Astrofisico di
Arcetri, Italy, and the Institut d'Astrophysique, Paris. His theoretical and
observational program will examine heating and enrichment processes in the
Universe and their impact on the formation of large-scale structure. The
observational program will carry out the most accurate spectroscopic examination
of distant outflows yet undertaken, as well as a search for heated gas around
distant galaxies in the Hubble Deep Field. The observational research will be
complemented by three closely related theoretical projects: 1) a detailed
numerical study of galaxy outflows that will help to better quantify the role
outflows play in the thermal and enrichment history of the diffuse gas from
which all galaxies form, 2) a study of how this enrichment history can be
related to the metal distribution in the stars of our own galaxy, and 3) a
numerical study of the impact of outflows on the cosmic microwave background
radiation, one of the most sensitive probes of the heating and ionization
history of the Universe. This research is funded through the Office of
Multidisciplinary Activities in the Directorate for Mathematical and Physical
Sciences. ***



