* 0104864
* Dissertation Research: Evolution and Development of Left-Right Asymmetry in Echinoderms
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2003
* Gregory Wray, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Dona Boggs
* 05/31/2003
* USD 9,724.00

Dissertation Research: Evolution and Development of Left-Right Asymmetry in
Echinoderms&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Gregory Wray and Margaret
Pizer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most active areas of research in
evolutionary biology today concerns the origin of the unique morphological
features seen in the different animal phyla. The members of the phylum
Echinodermata (sea urchins, sea stars, sea cucumbers and their relatives)
exhibit a number of features whose evolutionary origin has been the topic of
extensive speculation among biologists for over a century. Perhaps the most
striking of these characteristics involve echinoderm body symmetry. Echinoderm
larvae are bilaterally symmetrical, while the adults show five-fold radial
symmetry. The transition between these very different body symmetries occurs
when adult structures develop on the left side of the larva, producing a left-
right asymmetrical intermediate stage. Several scenarios have been proposed to
explain the developmental transitions from bilateral symmetry to left-right
asymmetry to pentaradial symmetry that occur during the echinoderm life cycle,
but little testing of the predictions of these theories has been done using
developmental data. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves a systematic
study of the development of adult structures in echinoderms. The goals of this
study are to investigate 1) the evolution of left-right asymmetry within
echinoderms and 2) the developmental mechanism of left-right asymmetry in
echinoderms and the evolutionary origin of this mechanism. To achieve these
goals a variety of embryological techniques will be used, and results will be
compared between different groups of echinoderms and between echinoderms and
their relatives. A detailed study of the evolution and development of left-right
asymmetry will result in a better understanding of the origin and evolution of
echinoderm morphology. In addition, this study will provide insights into the
evolution and development of left-right asymmetry in other phyla of animals and
the evolution of metamorphosis in other marine invertebrates. &lt;br/&gt;