* 0104998
* Dissertation Research: Linking Individual Behavior to Population Processes at the Landscape Level
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2003
* David Carr, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Standard Grant
* Pamela O'neil
* 06/30/2003
* USD 9,892.00

Landscapes, both natural and human-altered, are a mosaic of habitat types. The
success of an individual in finding high quality habitat within this mosaic will
affect both its survival and the dynamics of whole populations. This
investigation examines the interaction between individual behavior and
population dynamics across a landscape by studying the eastern painted turtle.
The researchers ask how pond quality, size, and location and the types of
intervening habitat influence the movement of turtles between ponds. Measuring
growth rates and reproductive output will assess the impact of movement on
individuals. The effects of these movements on population processes (birth,
death, immigration, and emigration rates) for each pond and across the landscape
will then be determined. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the consequences of
current land use practices is an increase in the fragmentation of habitat.
Habitat areas suitable for supporting wildlife are becoming smaller and more
distant from each other. Information on how species react to and cope with
small, isolated habitats embedded in unfavorable landscapes is needed in order
to conduct proper management. This research is one of the most detailed
examinations into individual behavior at the landscape level yet to be
conducted. It will provide concrete evidence for the importance of integrating
behavior and population dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;