* 0104919
* Dissesrtation Research:  A Cophylogenetic Analysis of Avian Hosts and their Parasites: Toucans (Aves: Piciformes) and Chewing Lice (Insecta: Pthiraptera)
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Frederick Sheldon, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 08/31/2003
* USD 8,067.00

A cophylogenetic analysis of avian hosts and their parasites:
toucans&lt;br/&gt;(Aves: Piciformes) and chewing lice (Insecta:
Pthiraptera)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; I am using nuclear and mitochondrial DNA
sequences to reconstruct the phylogenetic history of an avian host group
(Ramphastos toucans) and two of its parasitic chewing louse genera
(Austrophilopterus and Menecanthus), which differ in life history
characteristics. The object of this study is to determine how parasite groups
with different ecological, behavioral and morphological characteristics respond
to identical geographical and habitat perturbations (diversification and
speciation of the host group). I will compare host and parasite histories by
superimposing the phylogenies of the parasites and their hosts to determine
whether or not parasite lineages with differences in ecology, behavior, and
morphology respond similarly to speciation events in their hosts. If differences
in the life history of the chewing lice are important, the different parasite
lineages should vary in their degrees of cospeciation (parallel speciation).
However, if&lt;br/&gt;parasite lineages respond to host isolation events
similarly, then one would expect the phylogenetic trees of the two parasite
lineages to be congruent.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Insights gained via this simple
system should shed light on patterns of speciation in more complex systems of
free-living organisms. Phylogenetic studies can answer important questions about
speciation. However, one problem faced by phylogeneticists is that, when
studying free-living organisms, they often lack nformation about the history of
the study organism's habitats and geographic distribution. Thus, a
useful&lt;br/&gt;first step in phylogenetic studies is to reconstruct this
history. Cophylogenetic studies of hosts and their parasites do this by
superimposing the parasite phylogeny onto the phylogeny of the host. Speciation
events in the host group are analogous to biogeographic vicariant events (e.g.,
when geographic barriers islolate opulations leading to speciation). Speciation,
or lack thereof, in the parasites represents a response to geographic and
ecological changes caused by host speciation events (vicariant events). By
comparing parasites with different ecological, morphological, and behavioral
characteristics we will begin to understand how these different life history
characteristics affect the process of speciation.