* 0104443
* Statistical Distances, Estimating Functions, and Mixture Models
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2005
* Bruce Lindsay, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Continuing Grant
* Grace Yang
* 07/31/2005
* USD 270,000.00

The principal investigator and his colleagues study important topics in three
major areas of statistics. The work on statistical distances, the first area, is
focused on developing understanding of distances as measures of loss when one is
building a statistical model. Important considerations in developing this theory
include the tradeoff between statistical sensitivity and robustness of
interpretation. The results have wide implications in model building. The
research on estimating equations, area two, targets the development of the
generalized method of moment methodology into wider statistical contexts than
current knowledge allows. A second topic in this area concerns the
reconciliation of fixed and random effects modeling. The final area is mixture
models, where a number of important applications in bioinformatics are leading
to demands for improved mixture model tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research
work focuses on both theoretical and applied problems. Statistics has always
relied heavily on the building of appropriate statistical models. The use of
computational power has allowed statisticians to handle larger and larger data
sets with increasingly sophisticated models. In the process, there is increased
need for understanding the extent to which a simplified but restrictive model
might be a very good description of reality without being strictly correct; this
is the basis for the investigation of statistical distances. Although
theoretical in nature, this has implications throughout statistics and could
lead to a more meaningful use of models. A second investigation is focused on a
class of statistical methods that allow one to reduce the restrictiveness of
model building assumptions; the goal is to expand the range of applicability of
these methods. There are many potential applications in social sciences and
medicine. The final subject of investigation springs from an increased demand
for statistical tools in the area of biology, especially in genomic research;
the principal investigator is applying expertise in his modeling area to three
different applications. In each application the statistical model used, the
mixture model, has direct scientific meaning as a tool for measuring the
heterogeneity in biological processes.