* 0104162
* Representation of Galois groups and descent in algebraic K-theory
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2006
* Gunnar Carlsson, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2006
* USD 305,007.00

DMS-0104162&lt;br/&gt;Gunnar Carlsson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project includes
several different directions of &lt;br/&gt;research. Carlsson will study a
homotopy theoretic model &lt;br/&gt;he has constructed for the algebraic
K-theory spectrum of &lt;br/&gt;a field, which is built out of the
representation theory of &lt;br/&gt;the absolute Galois group of the field. He
will try to prove &lt;br/&gt;that the model is indeed equivalent to the K-theory
of the &lt;br/&gt;field, as well as to work out the consequences of this result
&lt;br/&gt;for the Quillen-Lichtenbaum conjectures and the relationship
&lt;br/&gt;between this result and the Bloch-Kato conjecture. He will
&lt;br/&gt;also investigate potential applications of algebraic topology
&lt;br/&gt;in high dimensional data analysis. He expects to improve
&lt;br/&gt;software which he and V. De Silva have developed for homology
computation, with the goal of identifying features such as &lt;br/&gt;singular
points as well as global topology for data sets of &lt;br/&gt;dimension greater
than three. He also plans to study homotopy &lt;br/&gt;theoretic issues which
arise in computational questions, &lt;br/&gt;relating to sampling subcomplexes
from large simplicial &lt;br/&gt;complexes. Kiem plans to compute intersection
numbers for &lt;br/&gt;singular moduli spaces of curves. This is an important
&lt;br/&gt;problem since the intersection numbers in this case are
&lt;br/&gt;related to well-known geometric invariants, such as the
&lt;br/&gt;Casson invariant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the great themes in
mathematics over the last two &lt;br/&gt;centuries is the strong relationship
between arithmetic &lt;br/&gt;and geometry. The study of this theme was
initiated by &lt;br/&gt;Abel and Galois in the early 19th century, and in this
&lt;br/&gt;century its further development has resulted in our
&lt;br/&gt;obtaining very precise information concerning sets of
&lt;br/&gt;integer or rational solutions to systems of equations. &lt;br/&gt;The
goal of this project is to explore another manifestation &lt;br/&gt;of this
theme, in the form of the so-called algebraic &lt;br/&gt;K-theory of fields.
Algebraic K-theory is a geometric &lt;br/&gt;construction attached to arithmetic
objects, called fields. &lt;br/&gt;Fields are arithmetic objects in which one
can add, &lt;br/&gt;multiply, and divide. Algebraic K-theory attaches
&lt;br/&gt;geometric objects to these fields, and in such a way &lt;br/&gt;that
already well understood invariants of fields can &lt;br/&gt;be extracted easily.
Algebraic K-theory also contains &lt;br/&gt;many less well understood invariants
as well, and the &lt;br/&gt;goal of understanding these invariants has been one
&lt;br/&gt;toward which topologists have been striving since the
&lt;br/&gt;early 1970's, when Quillen defined higher algebraic
&lt;br/&gt;K-theory. Two important conjectures have been &lt;br/&gt;formulated
concerning algebraic K-theory, the &lt;br/&gt;Quillen-Lichtenbaum and Bloch-Kato
conjectures. &lt;br/&gt;They would relate the algebraic K-theory of a field
&lt;br/&gt;to properties of its "absolute Galois groups", an &lt;br/&gt;object
which incorporates all possible symmetries of &lt;br/&gt;sets of solutions of
sets of equations over the field &lt;br/&gt;in question. This project aims to
understand very &lt;br/&gt;clearly how algebraic K-theory is built out of
&lt;br/&gt;information of this large group of symmetries, &lt;br/&gt;and to use
this understanding to approach the &lt;br/&gt;two central conjectures mentioned
above. &lt;br/&gt;