* 0104111
* RUI: Polygonal Knot Theory, Controlled Topology and Topology of Homology Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Heather Johnston, Vassar College
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2004
* USD 93,588.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0104111&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Heather M. Johnston&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Polygonal knot theory
studies the isotopy classes of embedded&lt;br/&gt;polygons in three space where
the number and length of edges are&lt;br/&gt;fixed throughout the isotopy. The
PI and co-author have found&lt;br/&gt;the first examples of polygons which are
topologically unknotted,&lt;br/&gt;but for which the isotopy class of embeddings
is nontrivial. The&lt;br/&gt;PI and student collaborators will investigate
questions such as&lt;br/&gt;whether or not there are any such examples for
equilateral&lt;br/&gt;polygons. Surgery theory studies the set of manifold
structures&lt;br/&gt;within a given homotopy type. The Bryant-Ferry-Mio-
Weinberger&lt;br/&gt;surgery exact sequence for homology manifolds has been used
by&lt;br/&gt;the PI to prove that up to s-cobordism many of the
geometric&lt;br/&gt;properties of manifolds also hold for homology manifolds.
The&lt;br/&gt;Novikov conjecture and related coarse Novikov conjecture are
keys&lt;br/&gt;to our understanding of surgery theory. The PI has
developed&lt;br/&gt;some techniques for attacking the coarse Novikov conjecture
for&lt;br/&gt;unusual non uniformly contractible spaces. Controlled and
bounded&lt;br/&gt;surgery theory will be used to further investigate
homology&lt;br/&gt;manifolds and the coarse Novikov
conjecture.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Up to now, topologists have studied well-
behaved spaces such as&lt;br/&gt;manifolds. Yet singular spaces arise more and
more frequently in&lt;br/&gt;subjects such as analysis, algebraic geometry and
physics. The&lt;br/&gt;non-resolvable homology manifolds studied in this project
are so&lt;br/&gt;singular that they have no points whatsoever with
Euclidean&lt;br/&gt;neighborhoods. Perhaps these strange spaces will someday
account&lt;br/&gt;for the extra dimensions of the universe predicted by
string&lt;br/&gt;theory. Coarse geometry, and the coarse homology of John Roe
are&lt;br/&gt;ways of separating the large scale behavior of spaces from
the&lt;br/&gt;local information. The invariants of coarse geometry
and&lt;br/&gt;topology depend only on the large scale behavior of
the&lt;br/&gt;space. Better understanding of these objects and their
invariants&lt;br/&gt;will help topologists to classify the different types of
singular&lt;br/&gt;spaces, which appear throughout modern physics. In polygonal
knot&lt;br/&gt;theory, a new twist on the classical study of knots, a
different&lt;br/&gt;type of singular spaces is studied. This new theory is
modeled by&lt;br/&gt;sticks joined end to end by universally flexible joints
(rubber&lt;br/&gt;tubing perhaps) to form a closed loop. The PI has produced
the&lt;br/&gt;first examples of configurations which are stuck (cannot
be&lt;br/&gt;unraveled), but only because they are made of sticks. If
the&lt;br/&gt;same configurations were made of string they could be
unraveled.&lt;br/&gt;Knot theory of strings has been applied to the study of
protein&lt;br/&gt;and DNA molecules. For a small number of atoms each bond can
be&lt;br/&gt;represented by a stick in the model discussed here, This is
a&lt;br/&gt;richer and more appropriate model for small molecules than
the&lt;br/&gt;string which has been used in the past.&lt;br/&gt;