* 0104489
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH: Balance Laws Modeling Heat Propagation in Solids at Low Temperature
* MPS,DMS
* 02/01/2002,01/31/2005
* Ralph Saxton, University of New Orleans
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 01/31/2005
* USD 70,225.00

Abstract

DMS-0104489 Ralph Saxton

This project concerns modeling of heat propagation in materials at low
temperatures (including superconducting regions) which are characterized by fast
processes whose properties cannot be explained simply through the use of
Fourier's law. The models under study are applicable to a wide class of
materials for which heat waves, or "second sound," can be detected, and they
accommodate important hyperbolic/parabolic phase transitions between two
temperature regions, which are not included in other general theories. Under
study are qualitative properties of the long-time behavior of both smooth
solutions and solutions having shocks. Free-boundary problems modeling phase
transitions are also studied.

Conventional models of heat conduction involve infinite speed of propagation.
The approximations that lead to this counterintuitive situation work well in
most practical settings. Experimental studies of heat propagation in systems at
very low temperatures, however, show the need for a theory with finite speed of
propagation. This research project concerns development of such a theory of heat
propagation in crystalline materials at low temperatures and mathematical
analysis of the resultant partial differential equations. The project, carried
out with the participation of undergraduate students, will lead to an efficient,
generally applicable theory of heat propagation in solids, with possible
eventual application to high-temperature superconducting materials and fast
process laser heating.