* 0104898
* Dissertation Research: The Evolution and Diversification of Bursera subgenus Bullockia (Burseraceae).
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2003
* Beryl Simpson, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 06/30/2003
* USD 9,974.00

Common Summary for non-specialists: (217 words)&lt;br/&gt;Biologists have
claimed that hybridization between species is an important evolutionary
phenomenon in plants, yet the vast majority of corroborating evidence derives
from research using herbs growing in temperate climates. As a consequence, we do
not know how accurately this assertion describes the evolutionary biology of
tropical woody plants. To address the applicability of this idea to tropical
plants, we will examine a group of tropical trees touted for its propensity to
hybridize at the species and population level. The group, Bursera subgenus
Bullockia (family Burseraceae), consists of over 40 species that range from
Arizona to Bolivia. It is purported to include a handful of stabilized hybrid
species and multiple, localized hybrid swarms. We will construct phylogenies or
evolutionary hypotheses of relationships of the species using nuclear DNA
sequences and chloroplast restriction site data to determine whether "hybrid"
species indeed exist in this group. We will also genetically fingerprint a
potential hybrid swarm of Bursera species located in the Galapagos to test for
hybridity and to elucidate the geographic component of gene flow between species
of these long-lived trees. The results of this study will contribute new
information to our generalized understanding of hybridization in tropical, woody
plants while they augment the systematic knowledge of Bursera and the
exclusively tropical family of trees to which it belongs.&lt;br/&gt;Significance
summary: (197 words)&lt;br/&gt;This project will examine a commonly held belief
in plant evolutionary biology using a group of tropical trees. This assessment
is significant because the premise that interspecific hybridization is a potent,
relatively common evolutionary phenomenon is based primarily on information from
temperate, herbaceous plants and need not necessarily apply to tropical woody
plants, which have radically different life histories. We will increase our
generalized understanding of the extent and evolutionary consequences of
interspecific hybridization by testing purported stabilized hybrid species in a
tropical, woody plant genus, Bursera (family Burseraceae). We will also improve
our understanding of the formation of hybrid swarms and gene flow between
tropical, woody plants by testing the isolated, geologically young populations
of Galapagos Bursera for reported evidence of introgression. Additionally, the
hypotheses of evolutionary relationships generated by this project will
contribute new information to the systematics of Bursera and the Burseraceae, a
family mostly unstudied at the molecular level. This project will help answer
not only longstanding questions about the evolutionary history of this
particular group such as whether stabilized hybrid Bursera species exist and
whether Bursera can form interspecific hybrid swarms but also whether Bursera
and Commiphora, its African relative, are congeneric. &lt;br/&gt;