* 0104995
* Dissertation Research: The Scale of Predator-Prey Interactions: Gene Flow and the Geographic Mosaic
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Edmund Brodie, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2004
* USD 10,425.00

0104995&lt;br/&gt;Brodie &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Coevolution is the process by
which two participants reciprocally affect the evolution of traits in each
other. Typically, coevolution is considered to be a process that occurs between
different species. The geographic mosaic theory of coevolution predicts that
coevolutionary interactions will vary across geographic locales. Furthermore,
this theory states that processes that differentially affect the genetic makeup
of individual locales (e.g. migration, extinction, recolonization) will play a
role in the outcome of the coevolutionary interaction globally and locally. The
current research will test how migration between populations affects the
dynamics of a predator-prey coevolutionary interaction on different geographic
scales. The target species for the project are the toxic newt Taricha granulosa
and its resistant garter snake predator Thamnophis sirtalis. Data on toxicity in
newts and resistance in garter snakes will be collected to evaluate the strength
of the coevolutionary interaction in populations. Tissue samples will be
collected for genetic analyses that will estimate migration between
populations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will test the geographic mosaic
theory of coevolution in a predator-prey system, thereby giving a better
understanding of coevolutionary interactions. Understanding how species interact
is important to the understanding of ecosystems and important to the
conservation of ecosystems. Migration of animals between populations can play a
critical role in the balance and persistence of populations. This project has
implications for the release of captive bred animals into natural populations
(simulating large scale migration). Additionally, tetrodotoxin (the toxin found
in Taricha) is widely used in neurobiology as a sodium channel blocker. Studying
garter snake resistance sheds light on natural sodium channel variation and
function in the nervous system. &lt;br/&gt;