* 0104977
* Dissertation Research: The Evolution and Development of Abdominal Pigmentation Patterns in Natural Populations of Drosophila polymorpha
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2001,12/31/2003
* Alan Templeton, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 12/31/2003
* USD 9,997.00

0104977 Templeton

Abdominal pigmentation pattern varies widely in the genus Drosophila. In
particular, the South American species D. polymorpha exhibits a range of
abdominal pigmentation patterns, with light, intermediate, and dark morphs. The
frequency of these morphs varies with time and space, indicating that this trait
is under natural selection and thus important in the ecology of the species. The
proposed research aims to understand this pigmentation pattern polymorphism from
both developmental and population genetic perspectives by: 1) examining the
developmental processes leading to pigmentation differences within the species;
2) correlating pigmentation differences with variation at candidate gene loci;
and 3) examining the microevolutionary forces affecting current geographic
distributions of the trait by determining the spatial distribution of genetic
variation in natural Brazilian populations. Only a few similar studies have
investigated the general question of morphological evolution at such a
microevolutionary level, and only a subset of these have addressed the
evolutionary forces shaping the fate of a variable trait. Finally, this proposal
is unique in that it is a multidisciplinary approach, uniting investigators and
integrating methods from both developmental biology and population genetics in
both the United States and Brazil.