* 0104928
* Dissertation Research: The Effects of Light and Arbuscular Mycorrhizae on Oak Savanna Plant Community Composition
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2001,04/30/2003
* Thomas Givnish, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Susan Mopper
* 04/30/2003
* USD 5,224.00

Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (AMF) are the most common kind of beneficial fungi
associated with plant roots. This study tests the hypothesis that light
availability and AMF interact to influence the composition of the remarkably
diverse plant communities in Midwestern oak savannas. Plants in sunnier areas
have greater needs for soil nutrients, and so may benefit more from AMF (or from
highly active AMF species) than plants in shady sites. Plants in shady sites
should either lack AMF or be associated with species having lower metabolic
rates. Shifts in the kinds and numbers of fungal species along sun-to-shade
gradients may thus have a profound effect on the identity and diversity of
savanna plants. To test these ideas, we will first measure the distributions of
plant species and AMF species as a function of light availability and soil
texture in three Wisconsin savannas. The effects of AMF on understory plants
will then be evaluated by applying fungicide to experimental field plots and
documenting changes in plant composition over a two-year period relative to
untreated plots. Finally, we will conduct experiments under greenhouse
conditions to determine the effects of different AMF species on the growth of
individual plant species when they are grown alone, and on the competitive
ability of those same species when grown together.