* 0104087
* Applications of Nonlinear Dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2006
* James Yorke, University of Maryland, College Park
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2006
* USD 540,000.00

NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0104087&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical Sciences: Applications
of Nonlinear Dynamics&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DMS-
0104087&lt;br/&gt;Yorke&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project concerns
the theory of chaotic dynamical systems. The research explores mathematical
phenomena that are relevant to the modeling of nonlinear physical systems and
the analysis of experimental data. We consider the method commonly used by
scientists to "reconstruct" the dynamics of a nonlinear physical system from
experimental data, and we study the mathematical relationship between the
reconstructed dynamics and the true dynamics. We will also develop methods for
forecasting the behavior of spatiotemporally chaotic systems, such as the
Earth's weather, given limited measurements of the state of the system. Further,
we will study fractal measures that arise in chaotic fluid flow and their
application to problems of mixing and magnetic field generation.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Chaotic dynamics has been observed in many aspects of
nature; in weather, it has been called the "butterfly effect." Chaos can be an
obstacle in some cases (limiting the predictability of the weather) and an asset
in others (such as industrial mixing applications). Our research concerns the
mathematics behind the methods scientists use to model and forecast chaotic
systems. Our intent is both to examine the validity of apparently useful but
unproven methods, and to develop new and improved methods. Long-term benefits
may range from better weather forecasts to more efficient procedures for mixing
chemicals. &lt;br/&gt;