* 0104911
* Conference: Post-transcriptional Control of Gene Expression in Plants to be held May 10-13, 2001 at the Iowa State Univ., Ames, IA
* BIO,MCB
* 04/01/2001,03/31/2002
* W. Allen Miller, Iowa State University
* Standard Grant
* Joanne Tornow
* 03/31/2002
* USD 17,500.00

0104911 W. Allen Miller&lt;br/&gt;Significant regulation of gene expression
occurs at many levels after transcription of genetic information into messenger
RNA. This meeting will focus on mechanisms of RNA regulation, from transcription
in the nucleus until the encoded genetic information has been converted to
protein via translation. Until recently, post-transcriptional events, such as
mRNA processing, mRNA decay, and translation have not been studied extensively
in plants. However, exciting new discoveries have revealed a plethora of post-
transcriptional control events ranging from the subtle (e.g., mRNA stability) to
the sublime (e.g., post-transcriptional gene silencing). The plenary speakers
will cover diverse biological functions such as host-pathogen interactions,
abiotic stress response, chloroplast function, and plant development. The
following specific topics will be covered: RNA-mediated, post-transcriptional
gene silencing; suppression of gene silencing; mRNA turnover; pre-mRNA splicing;
novel viral mRNA translation mechanisms; translational control of plant genes;
and bioinformatics and genomics. Attendees of this meeting will come away with
an increased awareness of the amazing diversity of gene expression mechanisms.
Furthermore, this meeting will highlight the need for further research into
understanding post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression as more
eukaryotic genomes are nearing completion and new genes are discovered.