* 0104989
* Dissertation Research: Determinants of Annual Breeding Productivity of a Neotropical Migrant Bird, the Black-throated Blue Warbler
* BIO,DEB
* 05/15/2001,04/30/2003
* Richard Holmes, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 04/30/2003
* USD 9,872.00

Annual reproductive output has been shown to be a major factor affecting the
recruitment, and hence the abundance, of Neotropical migrant birds. This study
will identify and evaluate the mechanism(s) driving reproductive output that are
critical to understanding current and future population trends of these species,
many of which are declining. A review of the literature and analysis of breeding
data on Black-throated Blue Warblers (Dendroica caerulescens) reveals that an
important factor affecting the number of breeding attempts, and hence
productivity, is territory level-food availability. This study will test to see
if food is a causal factor using a food supplementation experiment.
Additionally, observational data will be collected to test the alternative
hypotheses that nest site availability, male assistance/protection, or female
quality drives the number of breeding attempts and therefore annual reproductive
output.

This research contributes to current knowledge by examining population-level
questions from the perspective of the individual female. Using a mechanistic
approach, coupled with modeling this study will provide information necessary to
assess how species respond to perturbations, which is especially import in light
of proposed changes in species abundance due to global warming, habitat
fragmentation, and other anthropogenic effects.