* 0104680
* U.S.-Portugal-Switzerland Cooperative Research: Multiscale Models of Blood Flow in the Cerebral Vasculature
* O/D,OISE
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Giovanni Galdi, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Jeanne E. Hudson
* 08/31/2005
* USD 48,810.00

0104680&lt;br/&gt;Robertson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three-year award for
U.S.-Italian-Portuguese-Swiss cooperative research involves Anne Robertson of
the University of Pittsburgh and Alfio Quarteroni of the Ecole Polytechnique
Federale de Lausanne, Switzerland and Adelia Sequeira of the Instituto Superior
Tecnico in Lisbon, Portugal. Alessandro Veneziani of the Politecnico di Milano
in Italy is a member of Professor Quarteroni's group and will also participate.
The multinational and multidisciplinary team proposes to develop multiscale
models of blood flow in the human vascular system. Specifically, they plan to
evaluate multiscale models from the perspective of mathematics, numerical
analysis, and physics/engineering.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Italian group brings
expertise in mathematical fluid mechanics for Newtonian and non-Newtonian
fluids; the Swiss group will contribute expertise in finite and spectral element
methods, numerical simulation of blood flow in human cardiovascular systems,
fluid-structure interactions, and multiscale modeling; the PI has experience in
continuum mechanics, including fluid mechanics and numerical simulation; and the
Portuguese group is knowledgeable in mathematical analysis and numerical methods
in fluid mechanics. The goal of the collaboration is to develop a more
sophisticated numerical simulation tool, using a newer fluid dynamics model,
that can be used for understanding and evaluating clinical treatment strategies
for vascular disease. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;