* 0104100
* Determination of the electron neutrino rest mass via tritium decay
* MPS,PHY
* 08/01/2002,07/31/2005
* Manfred Fink, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* Bradley D. Keister
* 07/31/2005
* USD 453,398.00

The experimental determination of the mass of the neutrinos (orantineutrinos) is
a slow and increasingly more complex process. The electron antineutrinos are the
favored object. They are produced during beta-decay, and electrons are ejected
at the same time. Their properties link directly to the spin and mass of the
escaping neutrino through fundamental conservation laws. The preferred beta
decay source is tritium since the electrons have only 18.56 KeV energy at the
endpoint of the beta spectrum. This is a value, which is technologically
achievable even with meV resolution. However one is dealing with the endpoint of
the beta spectrum, where the intensities of the electron fluxes per eV energy
interval are down by 10 order of magnitudes. This is the quintessential problem
for all experiments aimed at the direct determination of the neutrino mass. All
neutrino rest mass experiments must include electron spectrometers with high
resolution; ultralow dark count detectors, excellent calibration procedures, and
superstabilities for all experimental parameters to collect data for very long
times to cope with the statistical uncertainties. A new effort is under way at
the Physics Department of The University of Texas at Austin, in cooperation with
the University of Nebraska, Brandeis University, Michigan Tech University,
Pomona&lt;br/&gt;College, and The University of Texas at Arlington. Our approach
is based on a series of electrostatic electron analyzers, which are designed to
record the beta electron energies with about 1 eV resolution. The source is
gaseous, molecular tritium at 30K. The detectors are easily accessible and can
be shielded from unwanted cosmic radiation to 1 dark count per day. There is no
magnetic field inside the whole apparatus. Furthermore we will use the gas cell
as a target for electron diffraction in order to calibrate the voltages at the
spectrometers with the de Broglie wavelenghts of electrons produced by a
telefocus electron gun. This is possible since the bond length of T2 is very
well known from Raman spectroscopy. The beam electrons will also give us laso
the spectrometer function to about .2 eV resolution. In summary, when all units
work as designed our experiment will lead to a determination of the mass of the
elctron antineutrino at the .5 eV level.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;