* 0104937
* Quantitative Genetics of Social Behavior
* BIO,IOS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Penelope Kukuk, University of Montana
* Standard Grant
* John A. Byers
* 08/31/2006
* USD 357,785.00

Title: Quantitative Genetics of Social Behavior&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI:
Penelope F. Kukuk&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Social behavior is found in all types of
organisms and is a characteristic&lt;br/&gt;of ecologically dominant species.
The study of how social evolution came&lt;br/&gt;about has concentrated on
selection. To date, theoretical and&lt;br/&gt;empirical work has focused on how
group life and social cooperation influence&lt;br/&gt;survival and reproduction.
This work began in the nineteen sixties and&lt;br/&gt;continues today. The other
side of the evolutionary coin, the study of the&lt;br/&gt;genetic mechanisms
underlying social cooperation, has been neglected. Even&lt;br/&gt;in the social
Hymenoptera there is very little information concerning the&lt;br/&gt;most basic
issues. It is not known to what extent differences in social&lt;br/&gt;behaviors
among individuals in a species are based on differences in
their&lt;br/&gt;genetic makeup. In species where females all have the potential
to be&lt;br/&gt;competent reproductives, we do not know if there are enough
genetic&lt;br/&gt;differences between individuals underlying any given social
behavior to&lt;br/&gt;suggest that the behavior has the potential to evolve. Due
to this lack of&lt;br/&gt;knowledge it is not possible to predict the
evolutionary trajectory of&lt;br/&gt;social behaviors or to examine how
inheritance of a suite of socially&lt;br/&gt;relevant traits may be correlated.
This one-sided approach to social&lt;br/&gt;evolution is based on methodological
constraints. Appropriate social&lt;br/&gt;species have neither the large
reproductive output nor the ease in&lt;br/&gt;laboratory rearing needed to use
the powerful methodology of quantitative&lt;br/&gt;genetic research, a
methodology that can best address these questions. This&lt;br/&gt;limitation is
changing. Due to new but well tested methods for obtaining&lt;br/&gt;information
rich genetic fingerprints for individuals, based on multiple&lt;br/&gt;highly
variable marker genes such as microsatellites, in combination
with&lt;br/&gt;conceptual and statistical advances it is now possible to apply
the methods&lt;br/&gt;of quantitative genetics to social behavior in a field
setting for the first&lt;br/&gt;time.&lt;br/&gt; A collaboration between a
quantitative geneticist (Allen Moore) and a&lt;br/&gt;behavioral ecologist
(Penny Kukuk) will apply new methodologies in a field&lt;br/&gt;based
quantitative genetic study of social behaviors for a group
living&lt;br/&gt;halictine bee species Lasioglossum (Chilalictus) hemichalceum.
This&lt;br/&gt;communal species, in which all group members reproduce, is an
ideal species&lt;br/&gt;for such a study. In this species, individuals differ
from one another in&lt;br/&gt;social behaviors and microsatellite markers are
available to produce precise&lt;br/&gt;genetic fingerprints for individuals.
Information on similarities&lt;br/&gt;between individuals in their
microsatellite based genetic fingerprints&lt;br/&gt;and easily observed social
behaviors will be used to determine components of&lt;br/&gt;inheritance for a
suite of behavioral characteristics that are known to have&lt;br/&gt;important
effects on survival and reproduction. The research will pioneer&lt;br/&gt;the
quantitative genetic study of social behavior and pioneer the use
of&lt;br/&gt;quantitative genetic methodology for behavioral traits in a natural
setting.