* 0104598
* Dissertation Research: Dispersal, Breeding Patterns, and Genetic Structure of an Epiphytic Orchid
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2003
* James Hamrick, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 06/30/2003
* USD 10,000.00

Hamrick&lt;br/&gt;0104598&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In plants, gene movement is
mediated either via pollen or seeds. In most flowering plants, pollen can
potentially travel much greater distances than seeds. Orchids, however, are
capable of considerable long-distance seed dispersal while pollen flow is
limited to the range of pollinator movement. What is the relative contribution
of pollen and seed dispersal to overall partitioning of genetic variation? How
much gene movement occurs in disturbed habitats and what is the spatial scale of
that movement? To address these questions, the distribution of genetic diversity
in the neotropical, epiphytic orchid, Laelia rubescens, will be examined at
multiple spatial scales using biparentally inherited nuclear markers (allozymes)
and maternally inherited chloroplast sequence markers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Genetic diversity is crucial for the long-tern survival of
species, particularly in fragmented and disturbed landscapes which are becoming
increasingly ubiquitous. It increases the likelihood that a species can survive
environmental fluctuations and natural catastrophes that invariably occur over
time. By better understanding how pollen and seed dispersal impact the
distribution of genetic diversity in this orchid, insights will be gained into
how forest fragmentation influences genetic viability and how species with long-
distance seed dispersal capabilities may preserve genetic variation and thereby
facilitate their long-term survival in highly disturbed habitats.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;