* 0104727
* Topology of Algebraic Hypersurfaces
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2004
* Grigory Mikhalkin, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 06/30/2004
* USD 115,800.00

DMS-0104727&lt;br/&gt;Grigory Mikhalkin&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will
study complex and real algebraic&lt;br/&gt;hypersurfaces from a topological
perspective. In&lt;br/&gt;particular it will study the interrelation of
their&lt;br/&gt;topological and algebraic properties. This
subject&lt;br/&gt;recently got a new powerful tool, the so-
called&lt;br/&gt;theory of amoebas. Mikhalkin will work on
further&lt;br/&gt;developing this theory and will make use of
amoebas&lt;br/&gt;for investigating algebraic varieties. Amoebas
have&lt;br/&gt;already proved to be an extremely useful tool
in&lt;br/&gt;several areas of Mathematics, including
Algebraic&lt;br/&gt;Geometry, Topology and Complex Analysis.
Earlier&lt;br/&gt;Mikhalkin used this tool in the proof of
topological&lt;br/&gt;uniqueness of maximal arrangements of plane
real&lt;br/&gt;algebraic curves (in the context of Hilbert's
16th&lt;br/&gt;problem). A part of the project is to obtain
a&lt;br/&gt;generalization of this result in higher dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;The
other part of the project is based on the same&lt;br/&gt;technique but will
investigate complex algebraic&lt;br/&gt;hypersurfaces by constructing and
analyzing certain&lt;br/&gt;singular Lagrangian fibrations over PL-
complexes.&lt;br/&gt;Such fibrations give a hope to extract
topology&lt;br/&gt;hidden in the Hodge structure of algebraic
varieties.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Algebraic varieties and, in particular, real
algebraic&lt;br/&gt;varieties are fundamental mathematical objects
naturally&lt;br/&gt;occuring in modern-day Physics, Optics, Mechanics
and&lt;br/&gt;Robotics. For instance, all possible positions of
a&lt;br/&gt;mechanical linkage (e.g. an arm of a robot) form a
real&lt;br/&gt;algebraic variety. The question of topological
classification&lt;br/&gt;of plane real algebraic curves (1-dimensional
varieties)&lt;br/&gt;posed by Hilbert over 100 years ago is still open.
A&lt;br/&gt;recent advance by Mikhalkin in this problem relied on&lt;br/&gt;a
new mathematical notion, that of amoeba, introduced&lt;br/&gt;by Gelfand,
Kapranov and Zelevinski. Algebraic amoebas&lt;br/&gt;are regions in space which
are associated to varieties.&lt;br/&gt;These concave regions with "tentacles"
and "vacuoles"&lt;br/&gt;resemble in shape biological amoebas.&lt;br/&gt;