* 0104114
* Postdoc: Integrating Soft Segmentation With Intensity-Based Matching for 2D/3D Image Data Registration
* CSE,IIS
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2003
* John Adler, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Kenneth Whang
* 09/30/2003
* USD 66,000.00

0104114&lt;br/&gt;Shahidi, Ramin&lt;br/&gt;Stanford
University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;CISE Postdoctoral Associates in Experimental
Computer Science: Integrating Soft Segmentation with Intensity-Based Matching
for 2D/3D Image Data Registration&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;'Soft' segmentation is a
recent innovation in image processing which attempts to preserve the maximum
amount of information possible in an image while classifying various image
elements. Soft segmentation produces flexible (e.g., fuzzy or probabilistic)
labels for individual pixels in an image as opposed to forcing a decision about
each pixel. Soft segmentation is an effective method for noisy images, such as
intra-operative fluoroscopic x-ray images, where preservation of information is
critical. In recent years, a variety of promising voxel-property or intensity-
based matching algorithms have been developed for three-dimensional (3D) medical
image registration, but these algorithms are inadequate in the presence of
significant noise. Spine images contain rigid elements (vertebrae) within a
deformable structure (spine). Registration is performed on a single vertebra,
therefore, spine images contain both structured and unstructured noise. Research
is proposed to apply soft labels to the segmentation of two-dimensional (2D)
images of the spine for 2D/3D image registration. The postdoctoral associate
will assist in 1) adapting an existing fiducial-based clinical spinal navigation
system to use image-based fine registration using pre-segmented images, 2)
developing a semi-automated segmentation of fluoroscopic images growing a
bounding-box around the region of interest, 3) developing both fuzzy and
probabilistic 'soft' labels for segmenting the fluoroscopic images, and 4) the
convolution of soft labels into gradient and mutual information-based intensity-
based matching algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;