* 0104818
* Dynamics of High-Speed Machining
* MPS,DMS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2004
* Emily Stone, Utah State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2004
* USD 85,500.00

NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0104818 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical Sciences:
Dynamics of High-Speed Machining &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract
DMS-0104818 &lt;br/&gt;Stone &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
grant supports collaboration between a mathematician at Utah State University
and an engineer at The Boeing Company to investigate chatter instability in
drilling. Chatter is a self-excited oscillation between the machining tool and
the work piece that limits productivity of machining operations, reduces the
quality of the product, and shortens machine tool life. Drilling itself is one
of the least well understood machining processes due to the complex geometry of
the cutting surface, and simple linear models of drilling have had limited
success. We are developing nonlinear models that incorporate information from
finite element models for metal cutting as well as information about vibrational
modes of the drill. The resulting models take the form of delay differential
equations. We use a combination of conventional engineering techniques and
techniques from nonlinear dynamics (e.g. center manifold reduction) to analyze
these systems. We will utilize new capabilities in large-scale simulation
software and build on previous theoretical work done at Boeing to perform
dynamic stability analysis. The award is co-funded by the Dynamic Systems and
Control Program and Grant Opportunities for Academic Liaison with Industry
(GOALI) Program in the Directorate for Engineering and by the GOALI program
through the Office of Multidisciplinary Activities of the Mathematical &amp;
Physical Sciences Directorate.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Drilling is a crucial
machining process in aircraft manufacture: over a million holes may be drilled
during the construction of a commercial airplane, and production errors
resulting in out-of-tolerance holes can be extremely costly. Improving the
precision with which holes may be drilled depends on a detailed understanding of
instabilities such as chatter. Beyond the technological importance of this work
is the synergy it promotes by supporting collaboration between academic
mathematicians and industry engineers. The connection with The Boeing Company is
a central part of Utah State University's industrial mathematics program, which
provides mathematics students with enhanced training by exposing them to real
applications, encouraging group work, and honing communication skills. Another
aspect of this project is the development of an active collaboration between
researchers at Boeing-Seattle and Dr. Stone and those at Boeing-St. Louis and
Dr. Philip Bayly of Washington University. The capabilities of these two groups
mesh in a unique way, providing a strong research environment with interlacing
thrusts of theory, experiment, and direct numerical simulation. The projects
supported by this grant are part of this collaboration, which combines the
expertise and facilities of both groups, and will lead to state-of-the-art
results capable of enhancing high-speed drilling practices. &lt;br/&gt;