* 0104982
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Playback Experiments to Examine Contextual Usage of Shared Whistles by Allied Male Bottlenose Dolphins, Tursiops Truncatus
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2002
* Peter Tyack, Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
* Standard Grant
* stephen vessey
* 05/31/2002
* USD 9,975.00

PLAYBACK EXPERIMENTS TO DEMONSTRATE CONTEXTUAL USAGE OF SHARED WHISTLES BY
ALLIED MALE BOTTLENOSE DOLPHINS, TURSIOPS TRUNCATUS. &lt;br/&gt;Peter L. Tyack
and Stephanie L. Watwood&lt;br/&gt;Biology Department, Woods Hole Oceanographic
Institution. Woods Hole MA 02543.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dolphins and whales
(known to biologists as the cetaceans) constitute one of the few mammal groups
that demonstrate highly developed vocal learning abilities. Dolphins not only
learn to produce an individually distinctive signature whistle as infants, but
adults retain the ability to imitate sounds. There has been growing interest in
the role of vocal matching during the formation of social bonds in birds and
humans, and dolphins provide an opportunity for studying this issue in a mammal
that independently evolved abilities of vocal learning (Tyack 2000). Call
imitation is used in bird species primarily between individuals with close
social relationships or between territorial competitors. Most evidence suggests
dolphins match calls either to initiate an interaction with another individual,
or as a "badge" of group membership. When dolphins are interacting, they may
imitate the individually distinctive whistle of an animal with whom they share a
strong bond. Smolker and Pepper (1999) described whistle convergence in socially
interacting male dolphins which formed a close-knit alliance, suggesting that
whistle sharing is important for individuals with close relationships.
&lt;br/&gt;This study proposes to examine the use of convergent or imitated
whistles by allied male bottlenose dolphins in naturally occurring reproductive
contexts or other social contexts. Playback experiments will test whether allied
male bottlenose dolphins use shared whistles to attract potentially receptive
females or to guard females from competitor non-alliance males. It has been
difficult to study the individual vocal responses of free-ranging animals until
recently. This study uses a small, towed linear array that can determine the
direction from which sounds are produced in the water column, allowing for the
identification of individual signalers (Tyack and Miller 1998). The research
will be carried out in Sarasota Bay, Florida, where a community of individually
identifiable dolphins has been studied for 30 years. Playback stimuli will be
generated from high-quality recordings from a variety of age-sex classes
recorded during temporary capture-release events during the last 15 years.
Analyses of these recordings for alliance males demonstrated a high degree of
similarity between the whistles of alliance partners. &lt;br/&gt;This proposal
makes use of recent developments in acoustic localization to obtain identified
whistles from free-ranging, socially interacting bottlenose dolphins. The
combination of focal behavioral sampling, acoustic localization, and playback
experiments presents a new way to understand the role of imitation in social
communication. Playback experiments have been invaluable in deciphering the use
of specific vocalizations in birds and primates. The proposed research presents
an opportunity to examine acoustic social behavior in cetaceans on a much finer
scale than previously attempted with free-ranging animals. The results from this
study will be much more comparable to similar studies in terrestrial
species.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;