* 0104712
* Tune In To Math
* EDU,DRL
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2006
* Alexander Quinn, Education Development Center
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 07/31/2006
* USD 3,035,866.00

Education Development Center (EDC) is developing and implementing a three-year
project to promote the informal learning of key basic mathematical concepts and
skills among undereducated adults throughout the country. The effort will be
part of EDC's Adult Literacy Media Alliance (ALMA). The principal components of
the project will be:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ten new, half-hour episodes of the
television series, TV411, which is currently carried by approximately 100 public
television stations. The new programs will shift the emphasis of the series from
reading literacy to mathematics skills. In addition to covering a broad array of
mathematical concepts, procedures and vocabulary, the programs will have an
explicit focus on problem-solving strategies and attitudes about
mathematics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A multi-level national outreach and marketing
campaign to attract viewers and users to the materials and to increase carriage
of the series. An in-depth implementation effort will be conducted with outreach
partners is six large metropolitan areas. EDC will adapt the outreach, marketing
and promotion aspects of this focused effort so that it can be used by all
television stations that commit to carry the series.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Formative and summative evaluation to enhance the quality
and effectiveness of the materials and to inform the understanding of the impact
on viewers and users of these types of materials. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;