* 0104820
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Supply-Side Regulation of Herbivore-Induced Phenolics in Plants
* BIO,IOS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2003
* Jack Schultz, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* William E. Winner
* 06/30/2003
* USD 10,000.00

DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Supply-side Regulation of Herbivore-Induced Phenolics in
Plants&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jack Schultz and Toni
Schaeffer&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Phenolics are carbon-based chemicals synthesized
within all plants. Lignin, the major component of wood, is a phenolic. In
addition to the structural role of lignin, many other phenolics play diverse
roles in the lives of all plants as both structural and defensive elements.
Changes in phenolic production comprise the most-studied class of "defenses" in
research on plant pests. Much ecological theory on how plants allocate their
carbon and nutrient resources presumes that plants, in response to changes in
their environment, are able to vary the proportion of their resources that they
use to synthesize phenolics. The majority of the world's carbon passes through
the biosynthetic pathways leading to phenolic synthesis (once it is taken from
the atmosphere by the plant during photosynthesis). Hence, these pathways are
critical components of global carbon cycling. All evidence to date suggests that
global change will enhance the importance of these biosynthetic pathways.
However, plant regulation of phenolic production is still poorly understood.
This may be partly because the two biosynthetic pathways that plants use to
synthesize phenolics have traditionally been studied separately. The shikimate
pathway (SP) has been studied as the source of aromatic amino acids, and the
phenylpropanoid pathway (PP) as the source of defenses and lignin.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Most plant scientists have focused on the detailed
regulation of the PP, the second pathway in this pipeline, ignoring earlier
steps in these pathways. The core hypothesis of the proposed research is that
regulation of phenolics is accomplished at the "supply-side" of synthesis within
the SP, the first pathway, as well as downstream within the PP. Using a series
of greenhouse experiments, this research aims to determine how plants
coordinately regulate the "top" and "bottom" of this synthetic pipeline, namely
two regulatory enzymes (DAHPS and PAL). Also being explored is the idea that
plants are able to exploit stored pools of carbon-based pathway intermediates
when they change their phenolic production. By comparing the phenolic regulation
strategy of a model herbaceous plant, tobacco, to a model woody plant, poplar,
this research will help explain how carbon resources are allocated to these
important pathways and products in very different plants. The results will
clarify the regulation and evolution of carbon allocation patterns in plants.
This information will point to ways in which plants may be bred or engineered to
maximize carbon allocation for various purposes, and will facilitate better
understanding of plant growth, defense, and productivity.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;