* 0104198
* Polishing Glass-Ceramics with Ceria
* MPS,DMR
* 02/15/2002,01/31/2006
* C Carter, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 01/31/2006
* USD 378,000.00

Dramatic increases in data-storage capacity have changed how we use computers.
Ceramic platters offer significant advantages over current Aluminum-based
technology. They are more rigid, while still light, and can be rotated faster,
or simply moved, without increased fluctuations normal to the platter that would
cause a head crash and drive failure. Glass platters are now in production but
glass-ceramic platters would offer even greater performance. Polishing ceramic
platters is difficult because the material is hard, and in the case of glass-
ceramics, it is chemically inhomogeneous. Chemical-mechanical polishing (CMP)
involves fracturing the material at the surface while not creating subsurface
damage and smoothing the surface to produce a finish that is 100 times smoother
than the size of the particles in the polishing medium. Ceria currently give the
best results when polishing glass, not because it is particularly hard, but
because it gives the best combination of hardness and chemistry. It is known
that the chemistry at the point of contact is a critical factor-ceria polishing
always involves water. Methods for polishing glass-ceramics are still being
developed with ceria being the primary candidate. In this program, students work
with cutting-edge techniques including electron microscopy, atomic-force
microscopy and spectroscopy at the near-atomic scale. They apply their training
in chemistry and mechanics to today's critical
technology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Actually, there are many aspects of device
fabrication which involve producing a smooth flat surface. For example, CMP is
also used to planarize layers while building multilayer chips and to prepare the
ends of optical fibers for optimizing interconnections. In the new high-speed
hard-drives, the glass platters which support the magnetic storage media must be
polished so flat that bumps are less than 10's of atoms high on a three-inch
disk; compare this to smoothing the USA so no hill is higher than a few inches!
Polishing has developed as an art but we need now to understand the science and
to train students in both the art and the science. Our program addresses two
problems: a lack of basic knowledge and the shortage of trained scientists who
understand the art and science of CMP. This project shows students in materials
science why they need those basic courses in chemistry, mechanical engineering
and electrical engineering and how these disciplines combine in an industrial
setting, not just for this project but for many applications of CMP. Our
interdisciplinary research program brings together a diverse group of graduate
and undergraduate students from different disciplines. The students meet our
industrial colleagues, and visit the companies working with this technology.
Skilled scientists who understand CMP and can fuller utilize the state-of-the-
art instrumentation are a national need in the industrial workplace.&lt;br/&gt;