* 0104349
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Starburst Galaxies from the Local Group to the Hubble Deep Field
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Daniel Zucker, Zucker                  Daniel         B
* Fellowship Award
* John Tsapogas
* 09/30/2005
* USD 93,700.00

0104349 Zucker

The International Research Fellow Awards Program enables U.S. scientists and
engineers to conduct three to twenty-four months of research abroad. The
program's awards provide opportunities for joint research, and the use of unique
or complementary facilities, expertise and experimental conditions abroad. This
award will provide twenty-four months of support to Dr. Daniel B. Zucker to do
research with Dr. Eva Grebel at Max-Planck-Institut fur Astronomie in Heidelberg
(MPIA), Germany on starburst galaxies from the local group to the Hubble Deep
Field. Support for this project is provided by NSF's Math and Physical Science
Directorate's Office of Multipdisciplinary Activities. Starburts - intense
episodes of star formation - have been observed within our own galaxy and in
other nearby galaxies. Observations of high-redshift galaxies suggest that local
starbursts are reasonable analogs of the star formation modes in their more
distant cousins. An understanding of the physical properties of nearby
starbursts, covering a range of metallicities, is therefore essential for
interpreting data from galaxies at earlier epochs. During this project, the PI
will work to construct a coherent database of the observational and derived
physical parameters of nearby dwarf starburst galaxies, including existing data
as well as new observations, and to apply this database to a study of starburst
galaxies at moderate to high redshift. At MPIA, the PI will have access to
ground-based telescopes with state-of-the-art optical and infrared instruments
which are critical to this research. Dr. Grebel has extensive experience working
on stellar populations and the dynamics of nearby galaxies.