* 0104118
* Microstructure and Symmetry Breaking Phase Transition:  Analysis and Numerical Simulation
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2004
* Georg Dolzmann, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 06/30/2004
* USD 81,497.00

DMS Award Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Award #: 0104118&lt;br/&gt;PI: Dolzmann,
Georg&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Maryland, College
Park&lt;br/&gt;Program: Applied Math&lt;br/&gt;Program Manager: Catherine
Mavriplis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Microstructure and Symmetry Breaking Phase
Transition: Analysis and Numerical
Simulation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to
understand macroscopic properties of materials undergoing solid to solid phase
transitions through modern methods in the calculus of variations. A main
objective is to investigate the possible patterns that can form and their impact
on the elastic behaviour of the material.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;On the analytical
side, virtually all methods to attack this problem are connected to the deep
mathematical concept of quasiconvexity. Even 50 years after Morrey's seminal
work, quasiconvexity is despite its fundamental importance still poorly
understood, and any progress in this program will contribute to the unraveling
of its mysteries.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The numerical simulation of
microstructure poses a wealth of challenging problems. New insight into the
underlying theoretical concepts will enhance the performance of algorithms and
lead to their rigorous verification. Successful computations will help to
develop new experiments that allow to identify optimal properties of
materials.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed integrated analytical and numerical
approach is designed to advance the understanding and the optimization of new
materials which play a crucial role in emerging technological applications, for
example of microactuators based on shape memory materials or light guiding
devices and bifocal contact lenses made of nematic
elastomers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Date: May 11, 2001&lt;br/&gt;