* 0104797
* Models for Kerogen Oxidation, the Carbon Cycle,  and Atmospheric Oxygen over Phanerozoic Time
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2004
* Robert Berner, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 06/30/2004
* USD 208,180.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Models for Kerogen Oxidation, the Carbon
Cycle,&lt;br/&gt;and Atmospheric Oxygen over Phanerozoic
Time&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Change over geologic time in the level of atmospheric
oxygen is both a principal cause and principal effect of biological evolution,
and, thus, study of such change is of interest to both the earth and biological
sciences. One the four basic processes controlling the level of atmospheric O2
over time is the removal of O2 by the oxidative weathering of organic matter
(kerogen) in sedimentary rocks. We propose to construct theoretical models to
quantitatively evaluate the role of O2 in the rate and mechanism of kerogen
weathering and help decide whether or not the rate limiting step in such
weathering is simply the exposure of fresh kerogen by physical erosion. As a
check on the modeling we will turn to the field measurements of kerogen
weathering that have been done under our previous NSF grant.&lt;br/&gt; In
addition, we propose to combine already existing simple models for the evolution
of atmospheric O2 over the past 550 million years (Phanerozoic time) with an
already published much more complex model for the evolution of atmospheric CO2
that considers such processes as mountain uplift, continental drift, and climate
change. Combined with our model results on kerogen weathering, we hope to be
able to construct a complete model for the evolution of both atmospheric oxygen
and carbon dioxide and to relate changes in the two gases to biological
evolution and climate change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;