* 0104288
* Superfluid Turbulence in the Low Temperature Regime
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Paul Roberts, University of California-Los Angeles
* Continuing grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2005
* USD 171,300.00

SUPERFLUID TURBULENCE IN THE LOW TEMPERATIRE REGIME

The two most common approaches to study of superfluid turbulence are the HVBK
theory and the classical theory of vortex filaments. There are many shortcomings
in these models that make them unrealistic and ad hoc. The main objective of our
proposal is to use a third approach based on certain forms of nonlinear
Schroedinger equation (NLS) for two closely related purposes: to provide
microscopically realistic parameters for HVBK theory and the classical theory of
vortex filaments and to elucidate superfluid turbulence using new variants of
the NLS that are more faithful to real helium II. More specifically we plan: (1)
use NLS equations to study the process of vortex line reconnection in sufficient
detail to characterize quantitatively the accompanying radiation of sound and
Kelvin waves. The results will allow us to define reconnection rules that could
be used when classical theory is applied to superfluid turbulence. (2) Use NLS
theory to simulate superfluid turbulence in the low temperature regime to study
the transition between weak and strong turbulence states in the superfluid. (3)
Analyze dissipative NLS models that include damping from the mutual friction
between superfluid and normal fluid. (4) Study and classify attractors,
bifurcation sequences, and routes to chaos in solutions of forced and
dissipative NLS equations. Our main goal is, however, to elucidate superfluid
turbulence in the low temperature regime in which experiments are currently in
the planning stage.

Superfluid turbulence has been studied experimentally for many years and has by
now become a major branch of cryogenic physics. In addition to the intrinsic
intellectual challenges of the subject, there are several reasons for this.
Helium is used as a coolant for superconducting magnets and for infrared
detectors, to name just two of several engineering applications. The flow
commonly becomes turbulent in these contexts. The subject also has implications
beyond the field of helium research, such as in the study of high temperature
superconductivity, systems of magnetic spins, melting transitions of crystals,
and the origin of glitches in neutron star rotations. Superfluid turbulence may
also provide insights into classical fluid turbulence, especially at high
Reynolds numbers, where the vorticity has an intermittent, fractal character.