* 0104282
* Second-order Cone Programming : Algorithms and Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Donald Goldfarb, Columbia University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2005
* USD 240,018.00

Large Second-order Cone Programming: Algorithms and
&lt;br/&gt;Applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI. Donald Goldfarb and Garud
Iyengar.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Second-order cone
programs (SOCPs) are convex optimization &lt;br/&gt;problems in which a linear
function is optimized over the &lt;br/&gt;intersection of an affine linear
manifold with the Cartesian &lt;br/&gt;product of second-order (Lorentz) cones.
Linear programs (LPs), &lt;br/&gt;convex quadratic programs (QPs), and
quadratically constrained &lt;br/&gt;convex quadratic programs can all be
formulated as SOCPs, as &lt;br/&gt;can many other problems that do not fall into
these three problem &lt;br/&gt;classes. On the other hand, since a second-order
cone constraint &lt;br/&gt;is equivalent to a linear matrix inequality,
semidefinite &lt;br/&gt;programs (SDPs) include SOCPs as a special case.
Computationally &lt;br/&gt;speaking, an SOCP falls between an LP or a QP and an
SDP. Interior &lt;br/&gt;point methods solve all of these problems in polynomial
time. &lt;br/&gt;Although, the computational effort required to solve an SOCP is
&lt;br/&gt;greater than that required to solve an LP or a QP, it is
&lt;br/&gt;substantially less than that required to solve an SDP of similar
&lt;br/&gt;size and structure. However, in many ways, an SOCP is closer to
&lt;br/&gt;an SDP than an LP or QP since its feasible set is non-polyhedral.
&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research focuses on several aspects of SOCPs,
&lt;br/&gt;including the development of numerically stable algorithms for
&lt;br/&gt;SOCPs that take advantage of sparsity in the data, the study of
&lt;br/&gt;SOCP-based approximation algorithms for hard combinatorial
optimization &lt;br/&gt;problems, the study of computational aspects of cut
generation methods &lt;br/&gt;for mixed 0-1 SOCPs and the applications of SOCPs
in robust financial &lt;br/&gt;optimization. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SOCPs are
excellent models for applications that arise in a broad range &lt;br/&gt;of
fields from engineering, control, and finance, to robust and
&lt;br/&gt;combinatorial optimization. The wide applicability of SOCPs and the
&lt;br/&gt;need for efficient, numerically stable algorithms to solve them makes
&lt;br/&gt;their study worthwhile. &lt;br/&gt;