* 0104796
* Dissertation Research:  The Evolution of Duplicated Genes in Zea mays and Arabidopsis thaliana
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2003
* Brandon Gaut, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2003
* USD 9,600.00

0104796&lt;br/&gt;Gaut&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This work will study the divergence
of duplicated genes in two plant model organisms: Arabidopsis thaliana and Zea
mays (corn). The Arabidopsis work will use computational tools to examine
differences among 271 duplicated gene pairs found within the Arabidopsis genome.
The purposes of the Arabidopsis study are to infer the processes of
diversification after gene duplication and also to search for sequence-based
clues for shifts in gene function. The second part of the research uses a unique
population-based approach to examine divergence of duplicated genes. For this
part of the project, DNA sequence data will be generated from several
individuals from each gene of several duplicate gene pairs. This population-
based approach will provide additional information about the forces governing
gene divergence and may also yield insights into the function of several
agronomically important genes.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The genomics revolution has
produced whole-genome sequences from myriad organisms ranging from bacteria to
humans. Genomic sequences provide a blueprint of genetic architecture, but the
more difficult work is just beginning - i.e., to infer gene function and gene
origin. One surprise gleaned from genome data is that all organisms have a very
high proportion of duplicated genes. It is not yet clear if the two (or more)
duplicate copies retain the same gene function as the ancestral gene or instead
diverge to fulfill new functional roles. Knowing how genes diverge after gene
duplication is essential for understanding genome evolution and will in turn
help us understand the basis of genetic differences among
organisms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;