* 0104042
* Metric Differential Geometry and Mathematical Gravity
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2004
* Gregory Galloway, University of Miami
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 06/30/2004
* USD 94,858.00

DMS-0104042&lt;br/&gt;Gregory G. Galloway&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Research under
this award will be conducted in the areas of&lt;br/&gt;Lorentzian and Riemannian
geometry, with applications to General&lt;br/&gt;Relativity and String Theory.
One of the specific aims of this&lt;br/&gt;project is to investigate the global
structure of asymptotically&lt;br/&gt;locally anti-de Sitter spacetimes,
especially in connection with&lt;br/&gt;the AdS/CFT correspondence. We continue
investigations into the&lt;br/&gt;relationship of the topology of an
asymptotically locally&lt;br/&gt;anti-de Sitter spacetime and that of its
conformal&lt;br/&gt;boundary-at-infinity, and undertake a study of
certain&lt;br/&gt;topological and geometrical properties of higher
dimensional&lt;br/&gt;black holes, and related objects arising in string
theory,&lt;br/&gt;including certain solitions conjectured to be least
energy&lt;br/&gt;configurations. Another aim of this project is to
continue&lt;br/&gt;investigations into spacetime rigidity phenomena associated
with&lt;br/&gt;the occurence of timelike lines and null lines. Applications
of&lt;br/&gt;the null splitting theorem will be considered, and a
new&lt;br/&gt;approach to well-known conjectures concerning the rigidity
of&lt;br/&gt;the singularity theorems is proposed for
study.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Modern theories of gravity are geometrical in
nature. The&lt;br/&gt;gravitational field and other fields, black holes and
related&lt;br/&gt;objects, may be described and analyzed using geometric
methods.&lt;br/&gt;In more general terms, this project is concerned with the
study&lt;br/&gt;of certain features of gravity of current scientific
interest&lt;br/&gt;from this geometric point of view, utilizing the tools
of&lt;br/&gt;Riemannian geometry, a mathematical theory of space,
and&lt;br/&gt;Lorentzian geometry, a mathematical theory of spacetime.
These&lt;br/&gt;theories provide a method for studying the relationship
among&lt;br/&gt;three fundamental aspects of the spacetime universe:
curvature&lt;br/&gt;(i.e., the bending of space or spacetime), topology (i.e.,
the&lt;br/&gt;global shape and complexity of space or spacetime) and
causal&lt;br/&gt;structure (i.e., the large scale behavior of light rays
and&lt;br/&gt;light cones).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;