* 0104788
* Dissertation Research: An Analysis of Diversification in Neritopsine Gastropods: Evidence from Phylogeography and Paleontology
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2004
* David Lindberg, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 06/30/2004
* USD 10,272.00

Understanding the processes that shape biodiversity requires multiple lines of
evidence, including those from paleobiology, ecology, population genetics,
biogeography, and phylogenetics. I will use a powerful technique, known as
phylogeography, that employs many of these lines to investigate which processes
have been most important in generating diversity in a group of gastropods known
as the Neritopsina. I will be testing whether or not species that are
distributed in space with geographic barriers separating them show more genetic
divergence between populations than species that have no barriers between
populations. I will then combine this information with data from their
evolutionary relationships and fossil record to test whether or not this
divergence at the population level is manifested as significant diversity at the
species level. As biodiversity is a dynamic process, with populations and
species in a constant state of flux, it is necessary to understand how diversity
is generated in order to make informed conservation decisions. By understanding
how geographic distribution has affected the evolutionary history of these
gastropods, we may better understand which processes need to be conserved in
order to ensure that diversity remains relatively stable through time. Instead
of focusing solely on the current state of these gastropod species, I will be
examining how we might better ensure that they are allowed to continue to
maintain and generate diversity in the millennia to come.

