* 0104047
* Complex Analysis and Geometry
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Daniel Burns, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Alexandre Freire
* 07/31/2004
* USD 78,600.00

Abstract NSF Proposal DMS-0104047&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Speaking more
technically, the proposal aims to treat four research&lt;br/&gt;lines in complex
geometry and analysis. We are studying the Grauert&lt;br/&gt;tube construction
for its rigidity and uniquesness properties for&lt;br/&gt;large (maximal) radius
or domain, and examining whether this point of&lt;br/&gt;view adds to old
questions in representation theory and automorphic forms.&lt;br/&gt;Second, we
will study a Kaehler-Einstein version of Min-Oo's rigidity&lt;br/&gt;theorem
which we conjecture to hold. We will continue work with&lt;br/&gt;X. Gong on
Levi flat hypersurfaces with singularities, especially&lt;br/&gt;algebraic ones
with isolated singularities. Their importance is&lt;br/&gt;suggested by recent
work of Siu and others proving the conjecture of&lt;br/&gt;Camacho on the non-
existence of smooth, Levi-flat hypersurfaces in&lt;br/&gt;the complex projective
plane. Finally we propose to study the rigidity&lt;br/&gt;of special classes of
Schubert cycles on flag manifolds, following&lt;br/&gt;upon the work of the PI's
former student M. Walters and,&lt;br/&gt;independently, R.
Bryant.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposal addresses several questions
in complex analysis and&lt;br/&gt;geometry. Most people are familiar with
Descartes' analytic geometry&lt;br/&gt;from high school: in most respects, this
line of investigation is the&lt;br/&gt;modern descendent of those early ideas.
We will study the relationship&lt;br/&gt;between a geometric locus, sometimes
defined by equations as in&lt;br/&gt;Descartes' original case, and its analytic
properties, those&lt;br/&gt;properties influenced by the calculus of Newton and
Leibniz. In&lt;br/&gt;particular we study a complexification of geometric locus,
that is, we&lt;br/&gt;add "imaginary points" to the geometry, related to the
imaginary unit&lt;br/&gt;"i", and study the influence of the imaginary points on
the real&lt;br/&gt;points and their geometry. Another portion of the project
seeks to&lt;br/&gt;understand the asymptotic, or long range properties of
special metric&lt;br/&gt;geometries related to the Einstein equations. It is
well known that&lt;br/&gt;both of these properties can be influential in
physical applications,&lt;br/&gt;and there is recent work to lead one to hope
that both this&lt;br/&gt;complexification construction and the asymptotics of
Einstein metrics&lt;br/&gt;can be used to understand parts of the so-called
Maldacena&lt;br/&gt;correspondence in theoretical physics.&lt;br/&gt;