* 0104167
* Studies in Perfect Simulation and Combinatorial Probability
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2001,12/31/2004
* James Fill, Johns Hopkins University
* Continuing grant
* Wen Chen Masters
* 12/31/2004
* USD 219,000.00

One focus of the research is perfect simulation. Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC)
approximate sampling methods have become extremely popular for Bayesian
inference problems and for problems in other areas, such as spatial statistics,
statistical physics, and computer science as a way of sampling approximately
from a complicated probability distribution. For some problems, it is now
possible to use more sophisticated MCMC techniques to sample perfectly (that is,
without error) from the distribution of interest. The investigator and his
colleagues work on creating, improving, analyzing, and applying efficient
perfect simulation algorithms; these algorithms include the Fill-Machida-
Murdoch-Rosenthal algorithm and the new Randomness Recycler technique pioneered
by the investigator and his colleague Mark Huber. The second focus concerns
probability and combinatorial structures, especially trees. The investigator and
his colleagues study such problems as characterizing the "shape" of random
multiway search trees (via fundamental research in the area of analytic
combinatorics known as singularity analysis); generalizing the analyses of the
height of a random incomplete digital search tree, of the move-to-front rule for
self- organizing lists, and of recursive trees; and extending the so-called
generalized smoothing transformation to distributions on the entire real line.

One focus of the investigator's research is perfect simulation from probability
distributions. Standard "Markov chain Monte Carlo" (MCMC) methods for
approximate simulation from complicated probability distributions have proved
extremely useful for problems in statistics (including image analysis), physics
(including models for magnetism and for phase changes), and computer science as
a way of sampling approximately from a complicated probability distribution. But
there are problems with the MCMC approach -- most notably that for many problems
it is unknown for how long the simulations must be run in order to come close to
the distribution of interest. For some problems, it is now possible to use more
sophisticated MCMC techniques to sample perfectly (that is, without error) from
the distribution of interest. The investigator and his colleagues work on
creating, improving, analyzing, and applying efficient perfect simulation
algorithms, including two different algorithms pioneered by the investigator.
The second focus concerns interplays between probability and combinatorial
structures, especially trees, which are fundamental structures for the storage
of computer data. This second focus of research has applications to the modeling
of epidemics, family trees of ancient manuscripts, and pyramid schemes and to
the election of multiple leaders in a multiprocessor computer network.