* 0104422
* Early Urban Landscapes:  Early Bronze Age Urban Society on the Kerak Plateau, Jordan
* SBE,BCS
* 05/01/2001,04/30/2002
* Meredith Chesson, University of Notre Dame
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2002
* USD 19,960.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. Meredith S. Chesson will conduct
one field season of archaeological research on the Kerak Plateau of Jordan. Dr.
Chesson's research project combines archaeological methods and social
anthropological models of "heterarchy" to investigate the social, political and
economic structures of the earliest urban settlements in the Southern Levant.
Focusing on the third millennium urban communities on the Kerak Plateau in
central Jordan, survey and test excavations of eight Early Bronze Age (EBA)
settlements will collect data to assess the applicability of this alternative
model for reconstructing the nature of this early urban society. Over the last
century, researchers have proposed many models for understanding the process of
EBA urbanism and the nature of urban society. Recent excavations at several
sites, including Zeraqon, Yarmuth, Arad, Megiddo, and Handaquq South,
demonstrate a surprising diversity in scale of settlement, nature of economic
base, settlement in environmental zones, and life history of the EBA community.
In this investigation of EBA walled towns, researchers are uncovering a
diversity of expression of urban life that challenges the normative boundaries
of traditional models of secondary state formation, chiefdoms, and the nature
and role of ritual and elite institutions. This diversity of social, political
and economic structures of EBA life presents researchers with an intriguing
theoretical puzzle: is it possible to encompass the variation of EBA urban
lifeways, economic bases, social networks, and political structures into an
explanatory model? Can any reconstruction accommodate the range of cultural
expression that we define as EBA society? In attempting to answer this question,
Dr. Chesson's research seeks to test the applicability of heterarchy in
reconstructing the nature of EBA urban society. Dr. Chesson's project combines a
macroscale (regional) and microscale (site by site) approach, investigating the
nature of economic, social, and political structures and ties of communities in
the region by gathering data at eight EBA urban settlements on the Plateau. In
pedestrian surveys at these eight EBA urban communities, and test excavations at
two of these sites, the team will document the scale of settlement, classes of
material culture, specific forms of artifacts, and materials from which they
were fashioned to provide insights into the complex connections between modes in
EBA urban society, and the nature of cultural links between these settlements.
The Kerak Plateau research project emerges from the reevaluation of models for
understanding urban society, and contributes to archaeological investigations of
social complexity and urbanism at local, regional and global levels. The
project's documentation of site chronologies, material culture, and settlement
size data, and the preliminary understanding of the nature of economic,
political and social structures, will produce a database for comparing other EBA
urban communities in both marginal and rich ecological zones, facilitating site
to site comparisons, as well as regional comparisons. On an even broader level,
this research offers comparative data in examining the development of social
inequality, the rise of urban societies, and the links between ecology and
society. The Kerak Plateau Project will offer more data and ideas to this
broader anthropological dialogue on the development of social complexity and the
growth of an urban society.

