* 0104847
* Dissertation Research: The Evolution of Reproductive Isolation in Neotropical Costus (Costaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2001,12/31/2001
* Douglas Schemske, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 12/31/2001
* USD 8,749.00

0104847&lt;br/&gt;Schemske&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
investigates the mechanisms that contribute to species boundaries in two closely
related, Neotropical gingers. The study species live in the same tropical
forests in Central America, flower at the same time and are pollinated largely
by the same species of hummingbird. Yet they differ in a number of leaf and
flower characters, and never produce hybrid offspring. What keeps these species
distinct? The research will use experimental crosses, field observations and
molecular genetic techniques to answer this question. The information gathered
thus far suggests that crosses in one direction fail because pollen growth is
inhibited, while reproductive failure in the other direction is caused by the
inability of the pollen to grow far enough to produce seeds. The research
findings will ultimately show the subtle, but effective means that allow
different species to coexist. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the great mysteries
of Nature is how species retain their distinctive characteristics. Without
mechanisms to prevent interbreeding, the diversity of species would be far less
than what we see today. Understanding how these reproductive barriers function
in natural populations provides insights useful for both the development of new
agricultural varieties and for the conservation and management of biodiversity.
&lt;br/&gt;