* 0104644
* Dissertation Research:  Differences in Foraging Behavior among Multiple Predator Species:  Implications for Prey Communities
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2003
* Daniel Soluk, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Standard Grant
* Saran Twombly
* 05/31/2003
* USD 5,244.00

Proposal: DEB-0104644 PIs: Daniel A. Soluk and Heather D. Vance Title:
Dissertation Research: Differences in foraging behavior among multiple predator
species: Implications for prey communities

By studying isolated subcomponents of complex systems, many assume that the
processes observed in such small subsets can be added together to predict
phenomena in the larger system. This assumption is inherent in predation theory,
yet many recent studies report that the impacts of particular predators in
isolation with their prey cannot be added together to predict the impact of
multiple predator species simultaneously. The ability to predict conditions
under which higher or lower rates of predation than expected will occur is
crucial to determining patterns of mortality in prey populations. A lab
experiment involving predators that use similar foraging behaviors and those
that use different foraging behaviors will be used to test hypotheses about the
combined effects of predation by multiple predator species. This experiment will
provide knowledge about the level of predation risk that prey face and has
implications for biodiversity by demonstrating the factors influencing the
distribution and abundance of species in nature. This study will improve our
ability to predict the effect of invasive predator species on native
communities.