* 0104606
* MRPG:  Word Domains in Athabaskan
* SBE,BCS
* 01/01/2001,01/31/2002
* John Alderete, Swarthmore College
* Standard Grant
* Cecile Mckee
* 01/31/2002
* USD 17,760.00

The purpose of this planning grant is to provide infrastructure for long-term
research on Athabaskan languages, with a focus on Tahltan, a critically
endangered language of northwest British Columbia. A set of data collection,
organization and analysis activities are proposed to study the structure of
verbs. Verb forms are fundamental in the study of Athabaskan languages because
they provide crucial information about the structure and interpretation of
sentences (i.e., the syntax and semantics). They are also important in the
description of sound structure (or the phonology) because the different domains
in an Athabaskan verb represent different sound systems. Verbs are thus
fundamental to subsequent documentation of Tahltan, i.e., dictionaries, texts,
grammars, and theoretical hypothesis testing, all of which fall within the scope
of this long-term research program.

Verbs in Athabaskan languages are made up of a stem, which contributes the
principal meaning of the word, and two classes of prefixes, namely the disjunct
and conjunct prefixes. The disjunct prefixes form a class with stems because
they are lexical items and have the full range of phonological structures. These
properties distinguish disjunct prefixes and stems from the conjunct prefixes,
which are not lexical items and have a highly restricted set of phonological
structures. One chief aim is to give a natural account of the differences
between these two morphological classes, for both the lexical/non-lexical
distinction and their different phonologies. A set of hypotheses are developed
in Optimality Theory that explain this correlation in terms the adherence of
different morpheme types to their underlying representation. A host of
predictions are made concerning the range of possible phonological structures
and the types of processes expected in each word domain.

The research plan begins with the study of Navajo verbs, both to evaluate the
optimality theoretic analysis in a well-documented Athabaskan language, and as a
way to provide a framework for primary linguistic documentation of Tahltan.
Existing sound recordings of Tahltan will be digitized, and the fieldnotes and
word lists associated with them will be incorporated in a database of large
corpora that can be searched electronically. This database will clarify specific
research questions and provide a guideline for additional data collection. Three
trips in the field are planned to confirm the data and generalizations of
previous work and to supplement the study of verb forms. The resulting
relational database and grammatical sketches will provide the first complete
description of verbs and materials for testing specific hypotheses about the
morphological and phonological structures of verb forms. In addition, the
lexical database will make possible a variety of other research and teaching
activities that extend beyond the scope of verb structure.