* 0104163
* Differential Geometry and Partial Differential Equations
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2007
* Richard Schoen, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2007
* USD 838,649.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract for DMS-0104163&lt;br/&gt;PI: Richard M.
Schoen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Professor Schoen is proposing to study the existence
of an extremal metric&lt;br/&gt;which defines the Bartnik quasilocal mass for a
domain in a spacetime of&lt;br/&gt;general relativity. This would yield an
existence theorem for&lt;br/&gt;asymptotically flat solutions of the static
vacuum Einstein equations with&lt;br/&gt;suitable boundary conditions. It is
part of a variational approach for&lt;br/&gt;constructing three dimensional
geometries. Schoen's second project&lt;br/&gt;involves the construction of
special lagrangian, and more generally&lt;br/&gt;minimal lagrangian,
submanifolds in Calabi-Yau and Kaehler-Einstein&lt;br/&gt;manifolds. The
approach is to construct hamiltonian stationary&lt;br/&gt;submanifolds by direct
volume minimization among lagrangian submanifolds,&lt;br/&gt;and to obtain
sufficient regularity to show that they are minimal&lt;br/&gt;lagrangian.
Schoen's third project is to further develop the harmonic map&lt;br/&gt;approach
to prove the rigidity of smooth actions of lattices in semisimple&lt;br/&gt;Lie
groups on compact manifolds. Professor Mutao Wang proposes to
study&lt;br/&gt;the mean curvature flow for special classes of submanifolds
of&lt;br/&gt;codimension greater than one. The major thrust is to obtain
stability and&lt;br/&gt;regularity properties of the flow. Dr. Baozhang Yang
will study singular&lt;br/&gt;behavior of Yang-Mills connections in arbitrary
dimension. This study will&lt;br/&gt;include an investigation into the structure
of blow-up sets and asymptotic&lt;br/&gt;behavior near
singularities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This research project concerns
the study of geometric shapes which&lt;br/&gt;optimize certain physical and
geometric energies. For curved spacetimes in&lt;br/&gt;general relativity, there
is no natural mass-energy density which can be&lt;br/&gt;assigned to the
gravitational field, so Bartnik proposed to measure the&lt;br/&gt;gravitational
mass of a region in a spacetime by minimizing the total mass&lt;br/&gt;of all
physical spacetimes which contain this region as a subset.
This&lt;br/&gt;minimal mass spacetime, if it can be shown to exist, will be a
static&lt;br/&gt;solution of Einstein's equations. One of the goals of this
project is to&lt;br/&gt;find a way to construct such static solutions, and to
use them to study&lt;br/&gt;three dimensional geometry. It is expected that
three dimensional spaces&lt;br/&gt;have natural geometries on them which are
uniquely characterized by their&lt;br/&gt;curvature properties. Another goal of
this project is to construct certain&lt;br/&gt;special surfaces in Calabi-Yau
manifolds, the spaces of string&lt;br/&gt;theory. These (three dimensional)
surfaces, called special lagrangian&lt;br/&gt;submanifolds, are analogous to
soap films in that they are surfaces of &lt;br/&gt;least possible area. Finally,
it is proposed to study the evolution&lt;br/&gt;problem for surfaces which is
called the mean curvature evolution. This is&lt;br/&gt;an evolution problem
which moves a surface in space in such a way that its&lt;br/&gt;area is
decreased most rapidly. Understanding the behavior of this&lt;br/&gt;evolution
is important for simplifying and smoothing complicated surfaces&lt;br/&gt;in an
optimal way. Mathematically this is a difficult problem because
the&lt;br/&gt;surfaces may develop singularities such as cone points and tears
which&lt;br/&gt;must be accounted for. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;