* 0104503
* U.S.-Brazil Cooperative Research:  Cross Cultural and Cross Linguistic Investigations of Deduction and Quantification
* O/D,OISE
* 06/01/2001,09/30/2004
* David O'Brien, CUNY Baruch College
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 09/30/2004
* USD 78,000.00

O'Brien&lt;br/&gt;0071808&lt;br/&gt;This US-Brazil proposal provides support for
Drs. David P. O'Brien and Patricia J. Brooks of CUNY Baruch College to work with
Professors Antonio Roazzi and Maria G. Dias at Universidade Federal de
Pernambuco in Recife and Dr. Wany Sampaio of Universidade Federal de Rondonia in
Brazil, on cross cultural and development perspectives on the language of
thought. NSF's Developmental and Learning Sciences Program is providing co-
funding.&lt;br/&gt;This project involves the investigation of reasoning skills
of people of different ages, in the U.S. and Brazil, who speak English,
Portuguese, and Tupi Kawahib dialect. It also will examine the reasoning skills
of speakers who have learned language in diverse ways - oral literate, oral
illiterate, and deaf. Of particular importance is the planned investigation of
members of a recently discovered indigenous tribal group in the southwestern
Amazon Basin, the Amondawa, which had its first contact with the outside world
in 1986. Before that, it was a stone-age hunter/gatherer group. (This portion of
the research will be possible because of the participation of Dr. Wany Sampaio
of the Federal University of Rondonia, who has been studying the language of
this group for the past six years.)&lt;br/&gt;