* 0104333
* Dissertation Research: Species Recognition in Brood Parasites
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2001,12/31/2002
* Paul Sherman, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* stephen vessey
* 12/31/2002
* USD 9,551.00

TITLE: Dissertation Research: Species Recognition in Brood Parasites FACULTY
SPONSOR: Paul W. Sherman STUDENT: Mark E. Hauber

Most birds and mammals are reared among family members. Therefore, learning the
characteristics of siblings and parents results in appropriate species
recognition. Because brood parasites lay their eggs in nests of other birds,
imprinting on foster parents would lead their young to misidentify their own
species. How does recognition develop in parasites? This project investigates
species recognition in the brown-headed cowbird (Molothrus ater), a common brood
parasitic bird of North America. By combining continuous observations at
naturally parasitized nests, selective removals of female parasites to limit
early social experience of fledgling cowbirds, DNA parentage analyses, playbacks
of conspecific vocalizations throughout parasitic offspring development, and
plumage manipulations of hand-reared juveniles, this study evaluates the
relative importance of social learning and self-referent phenotype matching in
the development of cowbird species recognition. This study will be informative
for research on species-, kin-, and mate-recognition mechanisms in general. In
addition, because species recognition is a poorly known aspect of the biology of
most host-parasite systems, findings from this work will also increase our
understanding of host- and self-recognition.

