* 0104946
* Dissertation Research: The Ecological and Evolutionary Significance of Interaction Modification in Ant-phorid Interactions
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* Donald Feener, University of Utah
* Standard Grant
* Susan Mopper
* 07/31/2003
* USD 10,000.00

0104946 - D. Feener and Edward LeBrun&lt;br/&gt;The factors that determine which
species live in a particular area and the relative abundance of those species
are only partially understood. Much of our knowledge is derived from studying
pairs of species interacting. Indirect effects, a second category of species
interactions in which one species affects a second via its interactions with a
third, can also influence community structure. Parasitism of worker ants by
phorid flies changes the outcome of competitive interactions between the ant
species attacked by the fly and other ant species. The result of parasitism is
that the species that would normally lose to the parasitized species wins. This
change in the outcome of competitive interactions constitutes an indirect effect
that potentially has a strong influence on the structure of the community of
competing ants. Preliminary investigation has already revealed additional
indirect effects relevant to this process. The proposed research, to be
conducted in Southeastern Arizona, will quantify the indirect effects that
parasitism by phorid flies has on the host ant and determine how the indirect
effects change the outcome of interactions between competing ants. The goals are
to: 1) quantify the effect of parasitism on the ability of the host ant to
compete with non-parasitized species; 2) determine whether competitors benefit
from food resources lost by the host as a result of parasitism; 3) test the
validity of a theory predicting how strongly the outcome of competitive
interactions will be modified by parasitism. This effort is important because it
will provide the first detailed investigation into how strongly indirect effects
that modify interactions between species effect the identity and abundance of
competing groups of species. It will directly address the predictability of this
impact. It will expand our understanding of how locally co-existing groups of
ant species, an extremely ecologically important group, are assembled and how
phorid parasitoids impact this process. Finally, it will increase our ability to
predict the efficacy of using phorid flies in efforts to biologically control
invasive species of ants. &lt;br/&gt;