* 0104073
* Spin Systems on Graphs, Critical Percolation and Scaling Limits
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2007
* Yuval Peres, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 07/31/2007
* USD 533,738.00

The Principal Investigator will study several problems in Probability Theory
concerning random processes on general graphs and networks, in particular
certain Markov processes (Glauber dynamics) that have natural Gibbs measures as
stationary distributions. The investigator and his collaborators have shown that
for the Ising model on trees, (and on other "hyperbolic" graphs), the mixing
time for Glauber dynamics is polynomial in the volume, at any temperature.
Moreover, on a finite regular tree, the critical temperature for rapid mixing is
lower than the critical temperature for uniqueness of Gibbs states on the
corresponding infinite tree. The investigator intends to study precisely which
aspects of the geometry of a graph (e.g. spectra, Cheeger constants) are most
relevant to the mixing rate of Glauber dynamics. Modern approximation schemes
for "hard" combinatorial problems (e.g., counting matchings in a graph) use
processes related to Glauber dynamics, so new insights on these dynamics will
have an impact on randomized approximation algorithms. Large networks of
interacting particles have been studied for decades in statistical physics, as
models of magnetism, freezing, and other physical processes. In these models,
each particle interacts only with its immediate neighbors, yet from this local
interaction, global structure can emerge. The evolution of these systems over
time is called "Glauber dynamics". In the last twenty years, these dynamics have
been used in image analysis, approximate counting algorithms, and communication
networks. While most of the mathematical results and physical predictions
available are restricted to quite special networks (where the particles are
arranged in a regular lattice), they have motivated applications where the
underlying network has completely different structure. The investigator intends
to analyze Glauber dynamics on a variety of networks, with attention focussed on
the effect of the network geometry on the dynamics. He is collaborating with
several computer scientists on the algorithmic aspects of Glauber dynamics.