* 0104049
* Regularity and Singularity in Geometric Variational Problems and in Geometric Flow Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2006
* Leon Simon, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2006
* USD 312,738.00

&lt;br/&gt; Abstract for NSF proposal DMS 0104049 &lt;br/&gt; (Leon Simon \&amp;
Brian White joint P.I.'s)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Leon Simon plans to pursue
various questions related to the structure&lt;br/&gt;of the singular sets of
minimal submanifolds and energy minimizing&lt;br/&gt;maps, including the
extension of his recent work on construction of&lt;br/&gt;singular examples of
minimal hypersurfaces. A current aim is to&lt;br/&gt;construct examples of
minimal submanifolds with singular sets which&lt;br/&gt;include ``gaps'' and
other phenomena, the possibility of which is left&lt;br/&gt;open by his previous
general work on the structure of the singular&lt;br/&gt;set. He is also
proposing to complete work on the singular set of&lt;br/&gt;mod-2 currents to
show that, in all dimensions, the top-dimensional&lt;br/&gt;part of the singular
set locally lies in a finite union of&lt;br/&gt;continuously differentiable
submanifolds. Simon also proposes to&lt;br/&gt;pursue several questions related
to asymptotics on approach to&lt;br/&gt;singularities. Brian White plans to
study how regularity properties&lt;br/&gt;and singular structure for minimizing
chains with coefficients in a&lt;br/&gt;metric group depend on the group and its
metric. This includes study&lt;br/&gt;of immiscible fluid interfaces as a
special case. He also plans to&lt;br/&gt;investigate singularities in the mean-
curvature flow. He will&lt;br/&gt;continue his investigations of 2-dimensional
minimal surfaces, in&lt;br/&gt;particular concerning branch points and
concerning total boundary&lt;br/&gt;curvature.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An
understanding of singularities, and how singularities are formed,&lt;br/&gt;is a
fundamental element in our overall understanding of many physical&lt;br/&gt;and
geometric phenomena. For example, in cosmology singularities of&lt;br/&gt;space-
time (e.g. ``black holes'') play a fundamental role. Likewise&lt;br/&gt;in the
study of the ``canonical'' objects which arise naturally in&lt;br/&gt;topology
and geometry, singularities arise in a very natural and&lt;br/&gt;unavoidable
manner, and the understanding of these singularities is an&lt;br/&gt;absolutely
fundamental problem. As with most non-linear phenomena,&lt;br/&gt;there is not a
single general theory which applies in a wide range of&lt;br/&gt;different
contexts. Rather, each different context has its own&lt;br/&gt;collection of
effective techniques, and it is the development and&lt;br/&gt;application of
such techniques in the context of the geometric&lt;br/&gt;calculus of variations
which is the focus of the present research&lt;br/&gt;proposal. Specifically,
Simon and White propose to continue their&lt;br/&gt;efforts toward a complete
understanding of singularities, and how they&lt;br/&gt;are formed, in the
context of area minimizing submanifolds and energy&lt;br/&gt;minimizing maps.
Such techniques are likely to be applicable to the&lt;br/&gt;study of other
objects of geometric and physical significance---for&lt;br/&gt;example to the
study of immiscible fluid interfaces, soap-films, and&lt;br/&gt;the equilibrium
free surfaces of fluids.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;