* 0104016
* Complex Statistical Models: Theory and Methodology for Scientific Applications
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2004
* Robert Kass, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Continuing Grant
* Xuming He
* 06/30/2004
* USD 390,000.00

Complex Statistical Models: Theory and Methodology&lt;br/&gt;for Scientific
Applications&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Larry Wasserman, Christopher Genovese, Robert
E. Kass&lt;br/&gt;and Kathryn
Roeder&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed
at developing statistical theory and methodology for highly complex, possibly
infinite dimensional models. Although the methodology and theory will be quite
general, we will conduct the research&lt;br/&gt;in the context of three
scientific collaborations. The first is ``Characterizing Large-Scale Structure
in the Universe,'' a joint project with astrophysicists and computer scientists.
The main statistical challenges are nonparametric density estimation and
clustering, subject to highly non-linear constraints. The second project is
``Locating Disease Genes with Genomic Control.'' We aim to locate regions of the
genome with more genetic similarity among cases (subjects with disease) than
controls. These regions are candidates for containing disease genes. Finding
these regions ina statistically rigorous fashion requires testing a vast number
of hypotheses. We will extend and develop recent techniques for multiple
hypothesis testing.&lt;br/&gt;The third projects is ``Modeling Neuron Firing
Patterns.'' The goal is to construct and fit models for neuron firing patterns,
called spike trains. The data consist of simultaneous voltage recordings of
numerous neurons which have been subjected to time-varying stimuli. The data are
correlated over time and a major effort is to develop a class of models, called
inhomogeneous Markov interval (IMI) process models, which can adequately
represent the data.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Statistical methods for simple
statistical models with a small number of parameters are well
established.&lt;br/&gt;These models often do not provide an adequate
representation of the phenomenon under investigation.&lt;br/&gt;Currently,
scientists are deluged with huge volumes of high quality data. These data afford
scientists the opportunity to use very complex models that more faithfully
reflect reality. The researchers involved in this proposal are developing
methodology and theory for analyzing data from these complex models. The methods
are very general but they are being developed for applications in Astrophysics,
Genetics and Neuroscience.