* 0104244
* Dissertation Research: Evaluating Habitat Change and its Influence on the Decline of Middle Eocene primate Communities in North America
* SBE,BCS
* 04/15/2001,12/31/2003
* David Rasmussen, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 12/31/2003
* USD 8,500.00

The North American Eocene primates have been the subjects of numerous scholarly
studies regarding their adaptive diversity and phylogenetic relationships.
However, these primates show a distinctive pattern of community evolution during
the Eocene epoch. During the early Eocene intervals, morphological diversity and
species richness increased rapidly and by the middle Eocene, primate diversity
was at its peak. Yet, during the latter half of the middle Eocene, species
numbers began to decrease, it seems, quite rapidly. This decline of primate
diversity in North America has been attributed to changes in climate and
habitat. While these hypotheses of climate and habitat change have been put
forth, they have never been rigorously tested. The purpose of this research is
to explore the factors that led to the decline in primate diversity during the
later intervals of the middle Eocene. Specifically, the researchers will
evaluate the effects of habitat change on the decline of primate species during
the latter intervals of the middle Eocene using a case study of North American
western interior fossil localities.

The researchers will combine methods of habitat reconstruction with the
assessment of changing primate community structure in order to investigate how
local habitats have influenced the decline of primate communities in the western
interior during the middle Eocene. Analyses of North American Middle Eocene
mammalian faunas and extant Neotropical mammalian faunas will be used to
determine: 1) the habitat characterizations for middle Eocene western interior
localities using ecological diversity analysis, 2) the structure of mammalian
communities containing primates from the middle Eocene, in terms of these
functional variables: diet, body size and locomotion (or substrate preference),
and 3) the ecomorphological variation over time in primate and co-occurring
arboreal mammal communities in relationship to the habitats in which they are
found.