* 0104935
* Spreading Problems in Fluid Mechanics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2006
* Michael Miksis, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2006
* USD 268,800.00

0104935&lt;br/&gt;Miksis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this proposal, it is planned to
investigate both the problem of the &lt;br/&gt;spreading of a liquid along a
solid substrate and the spreading of a liquid &lt;br/&gt;along a liquid
interface. The Navier-Stokes equations will govern the &lt;br/&gt;motion of the
fluids. The investigation of the spreading of a liquid along a &lt;br/&gt;solid
substrate is interesting and difficult because of the singularities that
&lt;br/&gt;can occur at the contact line. Spreading along a liquid interface is
a &lt;br/&gt;challenging problem where multiple free boundaries can exist. Here,
in &lt;br/&gt;addition to the liquid/liquid and liquid/gas boundaries, a triple
junction can &lt;br/&gt;exist at the liquid/liquid/gas line of intersection.
Predicting the dynamics &lt;br/&gt;of these three phase lines is one of the aims
of this proposal. We will be &lt;br/&gt;interested in situations where the
interfaces are clean and situations where &lt;br/&gt;surfactants are present.
Mathematically we are faced with problems having &lt;br/&gt;coupled moving
interfaces along which singularities can exits. Both &lt;br/&gt;asymptotic and
numerical methods will be used to study these complex &lt;br/&gt;free boundary
problems. For example, we will consider the thin film limit &lt;br/&gt;where the
complete three-dimensional system of equations can be reduced &lt;br/&gt;to a
coupled system of nonlinear evolution equations. We will also apply
&lt;br/&gt;the level-set numerical method to solve the complete nonlinear system
of &lt;br/&gt;equations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When a liquid drop is resting on a
solid surface, the free boundary of the &lt;br/&gt;drop is characterized by the
gas/liquid interface, and the line of contact &lt;br/&gt;between the
liquid/gas/solid phases. This three-phase line is usually &lt;br/&gt;referred to
as the contact line. It occurs whenever three phases come into
&lt;br/&gt;contact. It is a familiar phenomena of everyday life, and can be
observed &lt;br/&gt;when one pours oil into a frying pan or in a partially
filled wine glass. It &lt;br/&gt;also occurs in many areas of practical
interest. Examples are industrial &lt;br/&gt;coating processes, the transport of
gas/liquid mixtures in pipes, the &lt;br/&gt;spreading of droplets of medication
in the lungs and the spreading of &lt;br/&gt;liquid wastes (e.g. oil or
chemicals) on the sea. The latter problem is an &lt;br/&gt;example of a
situation where the contact line (refereed to as the triple &lt;br/&gt;junction
in this case) occurs at the intersection of a liquid/liquid/gas
&lt;br/&gt;interface. Even though the contact line occurs in these many areas,
our &lt;br/&gt;understanding of it is very limited. Models are still being
developed and &lt;br/&gt;because of the mathematical singularities associated
with the behavior of &lt;br/&gt;the solutions in the neighborhood of the contact
line, solution techniques, &lt;br/&gt;both analytical and numerical, need to be
identified.&lt;br/&gt;