* 0104399
* Electronic Structure of Condensed Matter
* MPS,DMR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* David Ceperley, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* G. Bruce Taggart
* 07/31/2005
* USD 525,000.00

0104399 Ceperley The long range goal of this research program is to develop
practical, efficient theoretical methods to accurately predict the properties of
many-electron systems. The methods and computational algorithms so generated can
be applied to important idealized systems, such as the homogeneous electron gas,
as well as to realistic problems in condensed matter. The rapid development of
these computational quantum methods will have a qualitative impact upon the
course of many fields of science including physics, materials science, chemistry
and even biology.

The approach is a combination of quantum Monte Carlo (QMC) simulations and
density functional theory (DFT). QMC can provide exact results for some many-
body problems, the principle goal is to extend the range of problems for which
the method can be applied. On the other hand, DFT is the only current method
feasible for accurate large-scale simulations of real systems. The research
concerns both the basic theory, as well as tests of approximate forms using QMC.

Continued development of QMC methods, with emphasis upon more accurate
wavefunctions and improved boundary conditions and upon developing new methods
able to use much larger computational facilities will be undertaken.
Applications of QMC methods to physical problems will include nanoscale quantum
devices and two-dimensional electron systems in the presence of disorder, where
there is much experimental and theoretical controversy concerning the possible
metal-insulator transition. General theoretical methods for studying dielectric
polarization and functionals in correlated systems will be developed. We will
extend the lattice model calculations to continuum systems that can serve as the
basis for improved universal density-polarization functionals. We will also
continue work started recently using time-dependent DFT to predict excitation
spectra of materials, nanostructures and quantum dots. The first system studied
will be silicon clusters, where intense blue light emission has been recently
discovered. A long range goal is to develop both many-body methods and imporved
functionals that can go beyond DFT approximations for ground state energies and
excitation spectra. %%% The long range goal of this research program is to
develop practical, efficient theoretical methods to accurately predict the
properties of many-electron systems. The methods and computational algorithms so
generated can be applied to important idealized systems, such as the homogeneous
electron gas, as well as to realistic problems in condensed matter. The rapid
development of these computational quantum methods will have a qualitative
impact upon the course of many fields of science including physics, materials
science, chemistry and even biology. ***