* 0104622
* Collaborative Research:  GLOBEC 2000: Feeding, Growth, Condition and Energetics of Juvenile Pink Salmon
* GEO,OCE
* 02/01/2001,07/31/2006
* Lewis Haldorson, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Phillip R. Taylor
* 07/31/2006
* USD 759,995.00

&lt;br/&gt;The goal of this project is to determine how pink salmon in the
northern Gulf of Alaska are affected by variation in the plankton production
system during their first months at sea. This will be accomplished through an
integrated project that includes field sampling, laboratory analyses and
modeling. Pink salmon occupy surface waters of the continental shelf in the
summer and fall after entering marine waters in the spring. In that period they
grow rapidly and their feeding changes from small zooplankton in the summer to
large zooplankton in the fall. This project will document temporal and spatial
variation in prey use and availability, it will assess the effects of the shelf
environment by measuring condition of pink salmon, and it will use spatially-
explicit foraging/bioenergetic modeling to understand observed patterns in
feeding, growth and condition. Fish of hatchery origin, identified by thermal
otolith marks, will be of particular interest, as the marine survival of each
hatchery cohort will be available a year after those fish enter the marine
environment.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Spatial and temporal variation in pink salmon
diets and surface zooplankton will be described through laboratory analyses of
field samples, and the basis for diet shifts to larger prey will be determined
by calculations of prey selectivity. Standard length/weight condition measures
will be calculated, and the energy content of salmon will be measured by
calorimetry. The relationship between condition, growth and the environment will
be examined. Habitat quality over the continental shelf will be assessed with
spatially explicit models with foraging and bioenergetic components that produce
weight- specific estimates of growth potential. Bioenergetic modeling will also
be used to estimate daily ration and seasonal consumption by pink salmon. The
relationship between diets of pink salmon and other planktivorous fishes will be
assessed.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research will contribute directly to
accomplishment of the GLOBEC program goal of understanding how production of
upper trophic level species is linked to variation in oceanographic conditions.
It is widely accepted that production of salmon in the GOA is determined by
planktonic production. Detailed descriptions of spatial and temporal variation
in diet, prey availability, temperature, and fish condition will substantially
enhance our understanding of the connections between the marine environment and
salmon production.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;