* 0104683
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Ecological Selection and the Evolution of Reproductive Isolation in a Marine Copepod
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2001,04/30/2003
* Daniel Promislow, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* stephen vessey
* 04/30/2003
* USD 0.00

DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Ecological Selection and the Evolution of Reproductive
Isolation in a Marine Copepod&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Daniel Promilow and Amber
Keyser&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is designed to study the evolutionary
consequences of environmental change on an abundant, marine organism, Tigriopus
californicus. Changing climate patterns affect the temperature and salinity
conditions that these copepods experience. The species must be able to adapt to
these changes, or risk extinction. However, adaptation to changing ecological
conditions can be a mixed blessing because the indirect effects of adaptation
can influence many different aspects of the organism's lifestyle. One of the
most dramatic secondary consequences can be the evolution of barriers to
interbreeding between populations. In this series of experiments, the
researchers will maintain populations of copepods under different environmental
conditions in the laboratory. This will simulate various kinds of climate
change. Over sixteen generations in the laboratory, the researchers will look
for evidence of adaptation to the new conditions at a molecular level and at the
developmental level. In addition, they will look for indirect effects of climate
change such as an increasing inability of copepods from different populations to
interbreed. The results of these experiments will help researchers to predict
the long-term, evolutionary effects of global climate change on crustaceans in
the marine environment. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;