* 0104327
* A UV-LIGA Microfabricated Electromagnetic Power Relay
* ENG,ECCS
* 04/15/2001,03/31/2005
* Wanjun Wang, Louisiana State University
* Standard Grant
* Rajinder P. Khosla
* 03/31/2005
* USD 219,600.00

&lt;br/&gt;Most micro-sized relays (switches) currently on the market or
reported in the literature&lt;br/&gt;are solid-state devices made using
semiconductor technology, with silicon the predominant&lt;br/&gt;material. Such
devices are not best suited for applications that require large
power&lt;br/&gt;capability because they typically have low current capacity, low
off-resistance, high&lt;br/&gt;on-resistance, high power consumption, and low
dielectric strength. In recent years, the&lt;br/&gt;fast-evolving technology of
microelectromechanical systems (MEMS) has opened up new&lt;br/&gt;opportunities
for microfabricating microelectromechanical switches. However, most of
the&lt;br/&gt;MEMS relays are based on silicon fabrication and can not be used
for power applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We propose to design, analyze
(model and simulate), microfabricate, and test a new type&lt;br/&gt;of micro-
relays using electromagnetic actuation. These relays should have the
following&lt;br/&gt;characteristics: fast switching speed, high power capacity,
high off-resistance&lt;br/&gt;(completely disconnected), lower on-resistance,
and low power consumption and heat&lt;br/&gt;generation. Some preliminary study
has been conducted and promising results have been&lt;br/&gt;obtained on the
proposed research work.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed micro-relays will be
fabricated with UV-LIGA (based on UV lithography)&lt;br/&gt;microfabrication
technologies. UV-LIGA is based on thick resist (SU-8) and
optical&lt;br/&gt;lithography, provides slightly lower quality, much shorter
time span for development and&lt;br/&gt;fabrication, and therefore much lower
cost. The LIGA processes provide great potential for&lt;br/&gt;building
microstructures from a broad selection of materials. Any metals or alloys
that&lt;br/&gt;can be electroplated could be used as a potential candidate
material for three-dimensional&lt;br/&gt;MEMS structural components. The
combination of a broad material selection and the&lt;br/&gt;capability of making
high aspect ratio microstructures make the technology best suited
for&lt;br/&gt;fabricating microelectromechanical relays that can be used in, but
not limited to, the&lt;br/&gt;applications of high power capacity. For example,
good spring materials like&lt;br/&gt;beryllium-copper, and good electrically
conducting materials including copper and gold can&lt;br/&gt;all be
electroplated. With improved switching time, the relays may also be used for
series&lt;br/&gt;sampling with low feedthroughs. Compared with the commonly used
electrostatic actuation,&lt;br/&gt;the proposed electromagnetic actuation has
several advantages: stronger actuation force&lt;br/&gt;and potentially higher
power capacity, lower possibility of electrostatic sparks&lt;br/&gt;