* 0104695
* INNOVATION
* EDU,DRL
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* Tamara Robinson, Educational Broadcasting Corporation
* Continuing Grant
* Sandra Welch
* 07/31/2004
* USD 1,902,760.00

The Educational Broadcasting Corporation (WNET in New York) is developing and
producing a new public television project exploring cutting-edge technology. The
project consists of an eight-part hourly broadcast component; six 60-second
"mini-programs;" a World Wide Web component; and extensive educational outreach
targeted to adults aged 25-39 and older. The topics for the eight programs in
season one are:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Replacements - prosthetic devices and
biologically electronic artificial body parts&lt;br/&gt; In Search of Eve - the
race to decode the human genome&lt;br/&gt; Light of the 21st Century - Fiber
Optics&lt;br/&gt; Nanotechnology - molecular manipulation of
materials&lt;br/&gt; Technospy - technologies used to gain
information&lt;br/&gt; Sports Technology - the pursuit of better equipment and
training regimes&lt;br/&gt; Artificial Intelligence - efforts to create
computers the mimic human intelligence&lt;br/&gt; Appropriate Technologies -
technologies that use local, inexpensive material&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Beth
Hoppe, WNET's Director of Science Programs will serve as Executive Producer for
the series. Each of the programs would be produced by an independent producer
selected by WNET. Content advisors include: Angela Christiano, Departments of
Dermatology, Genetics and Development, Columbia University; Sheila Sen Jasanoff,
Harvard University JFK School of Government; Horace Freeland Judson, Center for
History of Recent Science, George Washington University; Michio Kaku,
theoretical physicist, CUNY and host, Explorations radio series; Wilfred
Pinfold, Microprocessor Research Labs, Intel Corp.; and Barbara Wilson, chief
technologist, NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory&lt;br/&gt;