* 0104892
* Anthropoid Origins Symposium (New)
* SBE,BCS
* 04/01/2001,03/31/2002
* Richard Kay, SUNY at Stony Brook
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 03/31/2002
* USD 16,785.00

This award will underwrite a symposium organized to bring together scientists
with divergent opinions on questions surrounding the origins of anthropoids, the
group of primates including monkeys, apes and humans. The participants will
address such questions as: How are anthropoids related to other primates? Where
and when did the group originate? What functional and adaptive innovations
characterize anthropoids today? What is the adaptive significance and
evolutionary history of these innovations? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is an
exciting time for those interested in deepening our knowledge of primate
evolution. Newly recovered middle and late Eocene primates from Asia and Africa
have been variously interpreted as supporting competing hypotheses regarding
anthropoid relationships and biogeographic origins. Equally divergent views
exist concerning the antiquity of the major groups of living anthropoids-
catarrhines and platyrrhines (Old World and New World Monkeys). There is an
improved understanding of function and adaptation in the visual system, brain,
and feeding apparatus, key anatomical systems where distinctive anthropoid
features are concentrated. New methods for estimating visual acuity and activity
patterns in fossil primates are providing insights into the evolution of the
visual system. The rapid accumulation of information on color vision in
primates, including new genetic evidence of possible trichromacy in
strepsirrhines, and new behavioral data on the benefits of color vision, makes
this an exciting time to evaluate the role of chromatic perception in anthropoid
evolution. Research into the primate visual system by neuroscientists has
generated a plethora of important data in recent years, making this an ideal
time to bring these researchers together with anthropologists. Primate
behaviorists and ecologists are developing new models to explain the origins of
group living in primates and anthropoids provide an excellent test of these
ideas. The fossil record of early anthropoids allows testing of these models,
revealing novel trait combinations that can provide critical falsification of
these models and suggest the sequence in which current trait associations have
evolved. Molecular approaches continue to aid in clarifying our understanding of
the timing and tempo of evolutionary change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective
is to bring together some of the key researchers in these fields to discuss
their views, to enhance intellectual exchanges among paleontologists and
neontologists who study the visual and masticatory systems, molecular
systematics, and phylogenetic analysis as applied to the study of
adaptation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;