* 0104824
* Dissertation Research:  Phylogenetic Relationships within Passiflora L. Section Cieca Mast. (Passifloraceae)
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* Walter Judd, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 07/31/2003
* USD 10,000.00

Passiflora (plant family Passifloraceae) is a large genus consisting of
approximately 500 species primarily occurring in tropical America, Southeast
Asia, and Australia. Passion flowers are popular garden plants because of their
beautiful, intricate flowers and are grown commercially for their fruit.
Additionally, they are being investigated for their medicinal applications.
Passiflora section Cieca currently comprises 13 species of herbaceous to woody
vines that are characterized by small flowers without petals, filaments of the
corona in two series and reticulate seed coats. The section is distributed in
the southern United States, Mexico, Central America, South America and the
Caribbean. The flowers are primarily pollinated by bees and wasps, with an
interesting shift to hummingbird pollination in three species occurring in
Jamaica and southern Mexico. One species within section Cieca, Passiflora
clypeophylla, is suspected to be extinct but this has not been definitively
proven. Three others are listed as endangered or threatened. In order to examine
the evolutionary relationships within section Cieca, we will conduct a detailed
revision of the group focusing on the combined analysis of DNA sequences and
morphological characters. Close attention will be paid to pollination biology in
order to examine the selective forces that have led to a change from bee and
wasp to hummingbird pollination. Where possible the butterfly herbivores of the
species within section Cieca will be observed and identified in order to
supplement literature reports and to investigate the close relationship between
passion-vine butterflies (Heliconiinae) and Passiflora. A detailed key,
descriptions, distribution maps, and illustrations will be included in the
revision, along with cladistic, biogeographical and ecological analyses. The
proposed study will significantly contribute to a better understanding of
evolution at the species level in the Passifloraceae. This investigation will be
the first to incorporate modern cladistic methods in a morphological study of
any group within the genus Passiflora. The proposed research will also use
combined morphological and molecular data matrices to develop hypotheses of
phylogenetic relationships in the section and will contribute to a better
understanding of the utility of such an approach in plant systematics. In
addition, this research will permit the evaluation of the Heliconiinae-
Passiflora coevolutionary relationship based upon a well-supported phylogenetic
hypothesis for a group of species within Passiflora. Lastly, this study will be
one of the few studies to attempt to determine the evolutionary forces that have
led from hymenopteran to bird pollination in a group of closely related,
tropical species. Thus, the result of the proposed study will be a more
extensive understanding of evolutionary trends and relationships within a group
of rapidly evolving plant species of the neotropics.

