* 0104907
* Dissertation Research: A Functional and Mechanistic Investigation of Yolk Androgens in the European Starling (Sturnus Vulgaris)
* NONE,NONE
* 05/15/2001,04/30/2003
* Elizabeth Adkins-Regan, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 04/30/2003
* USD 10,000.00

Dissertation Research: A Functional and Mechanistic Investigation of Yolk
Androgens in the European Starling (Sturnus Vulgaris)

Elizabeth Adkins-Regan and Kevin Pilz

Female birds deposit steroid hormones, such as testosterone, in the yolks of
their eggs. In captive-bred canaries, high levels of "yolk testosterone" in eggs
cause elevated growth rates and begging behavior in the chicks that hatch from
those eggs. There is currently no information regarding the behavioral effects
of yolk hormones in other species of birds. Nor is there well-substantiated
evidence that females deposit different levels of hormones in eggs under
different ecological circumstances to maximize their reproductive success. This
study intends to fills these gaps in our knowledge by studying two types of
"yolk androgens", one being testosterone and the other being a related hormone
called androstenedione, in wild-living European starlings (Sturnus vulgaris).
The first goal of this research is to document the effects of yolk androgens on
European starling chick growth and behavior. Eggs will be injected with hormone
or with a control solution and the growth and begging behavior of the chicks
will be monitored until the chicks are ready to leave the nest. The second goal
of this research is to test the hypothesis that females who engage in the
reproductive strategy of brood parasitism deposit high levels of yolk androgens
in their eggs. A brood parasite female lays her eggs in the nests of other
females to avoid raising the chicks herself; starlings sometimes brood
parasitize other starlings. If yolk androgens cause chicks to compete more, by
begging more and growing faster, then a female who lays brood parasitic eggs
should deposit high levels of androgen in those eggs so that her chicks will be
able to selfishly outcompete their unrelated nestmates. The third goal of this
research is to examine whether female characteristics such as body size and age
are related to the levels of yolk androgens that females deposit in eggs. This
data will be used to determine if the small size and young age of brood
parasitic females may explain why brood parasitic eggs have high levels of yolk
androgens. This data will also be used to test the hypothesis that "high
quality" females (larger, older females) should invest more yolk androgens in
eggs than "low quality" females.

In summary, this research will investigate within a single species of wild
songbird, 1) the effects of yolk androgens on chicks; 2) whether females
allocate androgens to eggs in ways which benefit their reproductive success; and
3) whether female allocation of yolk androgens varies with female
characteristics such as body size and age. This research will increase our
knowledge of hormone effects on development in birds and provide understanding
of non-genetic means by which females can adaptively manipulate offspring
characteristics. The research may also be useful as a model of maternal hormone
effects on developing offspring in mammalian species.