* 0104700
* "Peep and the Big Wide World:"  A Television Science Series for Three to Five Year Olds
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2007
* Kate Taylor, WGBH Educational Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* Valentine Kass
* 08/31/2007
* USD 5,911,050.00

WGBH is producing and disseminating two seasons of a daily, half-hour television
science series and accompanying outreach for three to five year olds. The series
will be carried nationally as part of Discovery Television's newly expanded
Discovery Kids. The project, "Peep and the Big Wide World," will model a
developmentally-appropriate process of inquiry and exploration, nurture young
children's innate curiosity, catalyze further hands-on exploration of the world
around them, and motivate parents and care-givers to support and encourage these
activities. The television programs will combine animation and short, live-
action segments. The animation will weave the early childhood science curriculum
into stories about three birds and their animal friends as they explore the
world. Science content, unifying concepts, and habits of mind will be reinforced
through two-minute live-action segments that show kids engaged in science play
relating directly to the previous story.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The television
series will be supported by a comprehensive "Anywhere Science" outreach
component of the project. "Anywhere Science" reinforces the fact that
opportunities to experience and enjoy science exist in most facets of life. It
will offer a range of activities -- through both web and print materials -- that
can be enjoyed by just about anyone, just about anywhere. "Anywhere Science" is
being designed to show parents and caregivers how important it is to support
children's curiosity and how easy it is to engage in activities that help
develop their science "habits of mind." The outreach campaign will be built
around the new National Association for the Education of Young Children
professional development standards and Head Start's science framework.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The content director for "Peep and the Big Wide World" is
Karen Worth, Senior Scientist at the Education Development Center and the Co-
Director of the Center for Urban Science Education Reform. She is also the
Principal Investigator of "Tool Kits for Early Childhood Science Education" that
is developing national standards for preschool science education. The Executive
Producer for the project is Kate Taylor who has previously served as Executive
Producer for"ZOOM," " Where in the World is Carmen Sandiego," and "Degrassi
Junior High." The creator of PEEP and animation artist is Kai Pindal, former
Head of Animation at Danish Television. The head writer is Kathy Waugh who has
written four seasons of the Emmy winning children's series, "Arthur." Evaluation
will be conducted by Rockman et al. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advisors for the
series include Barbara Bowman, President of the Erikson Institute for Advanced
Study in Child Development; Diane Levin, Professor of Education at Wheelock
College; Tera O'Hora, Consultant and Workshop Facilitator for "Science Beyond
the Sandtable;" Kathy Paget, an early childhood educator working as a science
curriculum developer and evaluator of science-related educational projects at
the Technical Education Research Center; Diane Whitehead, a Quality Initiative
Coordinator for the National Head Start Association; and Elizabeth Young,
Director of Head Start Child Care in Cambridge, MA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;