* 0104912
* Dissertation Research: From Parasitism to Mutualism: Effects of Wolbachia on Drosophila Survival and Reproduction
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2001,12/31/2003
* David Rand, Brown University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 12/31/2003
* USD 5,808.00

Rand 0104912

Deadly parasites sometimes turn into benevolent mutualists. Understanding the
evolutionary forces that can affect this transition requires a model system in
which both parasites and mutualists are found. A large body of literature exists
documenting the parasitic effects of Wolbachia in the fly Drosophila simulans.
However, our preliminary experiments with the model organism Drosophila
melanogaster indicate that a beneficial Wolbachia strain inhabits this species.
This mutualistic form of Wolbachia can extend the lifespan of D. melanogaster
flies up to 35%. This research investigates whether this increased lifespan
leads to enhanced evolutionary fitness. To do this, the investigators will
compare the age-specific survival and reproduction of infected flies with flies
that have been experimentally treated with antibiotics to remove Wolbachia
infection.

The experiments will improve understanding of parasite-arthropod coevolution by
characterizing a novel phenotype, extended lifespan, associated with Wolbachia
infection. This will allow quantification of Wolbachia's effect on Drosophila
fitness and determine if normally parasitic Wolbachia are becoming mutualists in
Drosophila hosts. The Wolbachia-Drosophila symbiosis may prove useful to
researchers investigating the virulence of parasites, and may provide an ideal
system for testing evolutionary theories about the transition from parasitism to
mutualism.

