* 0104305
* Control problems for systems of strongly coupled partial differential equations with variable coefficients.
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Irena Lasiecka, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2006
* USD 475,527.00

In recent years, the emerging technology of smart materials and
&lt;br/&gt;structures has brought to the fore of scientific investigation the
&lt;br/&gt;pressing need to control, optimize, and stabilize dynamical
&lt;br/&gt;'interactive' structures, whose components' behavior is governed by
&lt;br/&gt;partial differential equations (PDEs). A canonical illustrative
example &lt;br/&gt;of keen national interest is the noise reduction problem in
an acoustic &lt;br/&gt;chamber (aircraft's or rotorcraft's cockpit or cabin,
etc). This couples &lt;br/&gt;the oscillatory behavior of the unwanted acoustic
pressure (noise field) &lt;br/&gt;within the chamber with the elastic vibrations
of a flexible wall of the &lt;br/&gt;chamber, possibly reinforced by sandwiched
layers, and possibly &lt;br/&gt;accounting for thermo-elastic effects. Pairwise
sets of piezo-electric &lt;br/&gt;patches bonded on the flexible wall, once
suitably wired, develop an &lt;br/&gt;elastic moment that is meant to dampen out
the noise in the acoustic &lt;br/&gt;chamber. Mathematically, the acoustic
pressure is modeled by a second &lt;br/&gt;order scalar hyperbolic equation
(wave equation), while the flexible &lt;br/&gt;wall is modeled by a plate-like
Kirchhoff equation with or without &lt;br/&gt;structural damping. In the first
case, the plate has a parabolic &lt;br/&gt;behavior, in the second a hyperbolic
behavior, resulting therefore in &lt;br/&gt;either hyperbolic/parabolic
coupling, or in hyperbolic/hyperbolic &lt;br/&gt;coupling of the overall
structure. Two additional key, novel, &lt;br/&gt;distinguishing features of the
present project are: (i) first, the &lt;br/&gt;linear or non-linear PDEs
describing the coupled structure have variable &lt;br/&gt;coefficients in space,
which is always the case when the properties of &lt;br/&gt;the medium depend
from point to point; (ii) and, moreover, the flexible &lt;br/&gt;wall may be
curved (rather than flat), and thus modeled by a shell &lt;br/&gt;(rather than a
plate). Accordingly, differential geometric methods are &lt;br/&gt;then proposed
in the control theoretic analysis of the overall coupled &lt;br/&gt;structure,
to cope with these two serious difficulties. The goal is to &lt;br/&gt;optimally
control - according to a pre-assigned optimality criterion - &lt;br/&gt;and
asymptotically stabilize the coupled structure. The methodology of
&lt;br/&gt;this project consists in first establishing a mathematical theory, to
be &lt;br/&gt;followed next by a numerical analysis thereof, to yield effective
and &lt;br/&gt;computable algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Recent Federal
research has convincingly demonstrated smart &lt;br/&gt;materials/structures to
be a laboratory reality. This is also confirmed &lt;br/&gt;by a Workshop Report
for the National Science Foundation entitled: &lt;br/&gt;"Rebuilding and
enhancing the Nation's infrastructures: a role for &lt;br/&gt;intelligent
material systems and structures", 1993. These new structural &lt;br/&gt;concepts
actively damp noise and vibration, suppress flutter at trailing &lt;br/&gt;edges
of airfoils and enable active twist/camber of both fixed wing and
&lt;br/&gt;rotorcraft; attenuate or suppress water borne signatures (active
&lt;br/&gt;acoustic signature control), etc. The transition of novel
smart&lt;br/&gt;structures into new, truly revolutionary platforms faces many
obstacles. &lt;br/&gt;The most significant is design optimization: both of the
smart structure &lt;br/&gt;and its communication and control systems. The
present project aims at &lt;br/&gt;producing a contribution in this area, based
on solid mathematical &lt;br/&gt;foundations and analysis.&lt;br/&gt;