* 0104315
* U.S.-Argentina Collaborative Research:  Integration of Disjunctive Programming and Constrained Logic Programming for the Design and Scheduling of Process Systems
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Ignacio Grossmann, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* Susan Parris
* 06/30/2005
* USD 15,826.00

Grossmann&lt;br/&gt;0104315&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This U.S.-Argentina Program
award will provide support for cooperative research between Dr. Ignacio
Grossmann of Carnegie-Mellon University and Drs. Jaime Cerda and Aldo Vecchietti
of Universidad Nacional del Litoral in Santa Fe, Argentina. Their work is in the
integration of disjunctive programming and constrained logic programming for the
design and scheduling of process systems.&lt;br/&gt;This project will introduce
recent advances on generalized disjunctive programming and constrained logic
programming to the combinatorial problems that come up in scheduling of process
systems. The collaborators will concentrate on short term mixed batch/continuous
multiproduct scheduling and design models. Dr. Grossmann has experience in the
area of mixed integer linear and nonlinear optimization and its applications in
a variety of areas including process operations problems, while Dr. Cerda has
expertise in heat exchanger network synthesis as well as process scheduling
problems. Results of this work will have applications in design, scheduling, and
control, as well as in a variety of engineering and science areas.&lt;br/&gt;