* 0104006
* Configuration Spaces on n-gon Linkages
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* John Millson, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 06/30/2005
* USD 174,169.00

DMS-0104006&lt;br/&gt;John J. Millson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Millson and his
collaborators will explore the geometric &lt;br/&gt;properties of configuration
spaces of n-gon linkages in &lt;br/&gt;Lie algebras, symmetric spaces, compact
Lie groups and &lt;br/&gt;Euclidean buildings beginning with the question of
deciding &lt;br/&gt;when these moduli spaces are nonempty (finding the
generalized&lt;br/&gt;triangle inequalities). In addition they will study the
finer &lt;br/&gt;structure of these moduli spaces. In particular, they will
&lt;br/&gt;study commutative and noncommutative Hamiltonian systems of
differential equations on these spaces and use the quantizations &lt;br/&gt;of
these systems to obtain results about the representation &lt;br/&gt;theory of
compact Lie groups and of the Artin groups of Lie &lt;br/&gt;type. Millson and
B.Leeb have obtained necessary and sufficient conditions for the moduli spaces
of n-gon linkages in Lie &lt;br/&gt;algebras to be nonempty generalizing well-
known results of &lt;br/&gt;Klyachko for sl(n,C). Millson, M.Kapovich and B.Leeb
have &lt;br/&gt;found necessary and sufficient conditions for the moduli
&lt;br/&gt;spaces of n-gon linkages in Euclidean buildings and symmetric
&lt;br/&gt;spaces to be nonempty. In some cases, Millson and
&lt;br/&gt;H.Flaschka have constructed (commutative) integrable
&lt;br/&gt;Hamiltonian systems on these spaces but the flows are &lt;br/&gt;not
periodic. For applications to the representation &lt;br/&gt;theory of compact
Lie groups it is critical to find the &lt;br/&gt;associated "action variables,"
i.e. find Hamiltonians &lt;br/&gt;with periodic flows which are functions of the
original Poisson-commuting Hamiltonians. Millson and Toledano-Laredo
&lt;br/&gt;have constructed representations of Artin groups of Lie
&lt;br/&gt;type by quantizing certain noncommutative Hamiltonian systems.
&lt;br/&gt;They hope to construct the trigonometric analogues of their
&lt;br/&gt;quantum systems. The results just mentioned may be found at
http://www.math.umd.edu/~jjm.&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;Millson's work begins with
one of the first theorems of &lt;br/&gt;high-school geometry - the theorem that
if two triangles &lt;br/&gt;have the same set of side lengths then they are
congruent. &lt;br/&gt;The analogue for quadrilaterals is clearly false: one can
&lt;br/&gt;change a square into a rhombus without changing the
side&lt;br/&gt;lengths. So one is led to try to parametrize the set of
&lt;br/&gt;all planar n-gons with the same side lengths. From there
&lt;br/&gt;one is led to a favorite theme of nineteenth century
&lt;br/&gt;mathematics, the study of planar linkages (systems of&lt;br/&gt;rods
and hinges). In the nineteenth century such a &lt;br/&gt;study was of immense
practical significance - the problem &lt;br/&gt;was to convert linear motion (of
a piston rod) to circular &lt;br/&gt;motion (turn a wheel) by a linkage. The
problem was&lt;br/&gt;solved by a French naval officer, Peaucellier. It turns
&lt;br/&gt;out that from the modern point of view the nineteenth
&lt;br/&gt;century work is insufficiently precise. Millson and
&lt;br/&gt;Kapovich have corrected the errors and written up a proof
&lt;br/&gt;of a result (often attributed to Thurston) that, given &lt;br/&gt;any
smooth manifold M, there is a planar linkage whose &lt;br/&gt;configuration
space is diffeomorphic to a disjoint union &lt;br/&gt;of a number of copies of
M. This result will appear in&lt;br/&gt;the journal "Topology". The above work
on planar linkages &lt;br/&gt;led to a study of n-gon linkages in space. This
theory is &lt;br/&gt;enormously richer, connecting with symplectic geometry,
&lt;br/&gt;integrable Hamiltonian systems and representation
theory.&lt;br/&gt;The analogous theory in spherical and hyperbolic three-space
&lt;br/&gt;and their generalizations (compact Lie groups and the
&lt;br/&gt;symmetric spaces of their complexifications) appears to
&lt;br/&gt;connect up with some of the newest objects in geometry &lt;br/&gt;and
algebra, for example Poisson Lie groups and &lt;br/&gt;quantum
groups.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;