* 0104518
* Dissertation Research:  Sexual Selection: Female Preference in the wild
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2001,03/31/2002
* Barry Sinervo, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* stephen vessey
* 03/31/2002
* USD 9,840.00

Studies of female preference in the wild. Barry R. Sinervo and Ryan Calsbeek

Females should be selective in their choice of mate, since females typically
invest more in the production and/or care of offspring than do males. When there
are a limited number of females available for mating, males should vie for
access to females. Though abundant evidence supports the notion that female
choice can profoundly affect the evolution of natural populations, there is
little agreement regarding the mechanisms by which females benefit from mating
selectively. Females may choose mates for direct benefits (territory quality,
parental care, nuptial gifts), and/or indirect benefits (the contribution of
good genes by the male). The relative importance of direct and indirect benefits
will be tested in the side-blotched lizard, Uta stansburiana. In this lizard,
males set up territories that vary greatly in the availability of thermal
resources. Normally, males that control the best territory also are of large
size for the following reason. Thermal resources are crucial for lizards, which
obtain heat for maintaining high body temperature from the sun. High body
temperature and activity promote high growth rate and body size. The thermal
resources on a males territory are correlated with the amount of rock in the
habitat. The mates vary in territory quality and in other physical attributes
such as body size. To understand the importance of direct and indirect benefits,
territory quality and body size will be experimentally uncoupled. Direct
Benefits: Experimental manipulations of territory quality will be performed
between pairs of neighboring males. After all territories are mapped in early
spring, rock will be removed from the territories of large males and deposited
on adjacent territories of their smaller male neighbors. This manipulation will
effectively reverse the correlation of large male body-size and high-quality
territories that is normally present in nature. Changes in the location of
female territories will be measured as a function of changes in territory
quality, which measures female preference for direct benefits of territory
quality. Measuring female's reproductive success will test for the direct
benefits accrued by females on high quality territories. Aspects of female
reproductive success will include: the condition and survival of the female
parent, numbers of offspring produced, size and condition of offpsring,
subsequent growth and survival of offspring, The thermal properties nest sites
where females lay eggs will also be measured. Indirect Benefits: The indirect
benefits of mate choice are associated with genes that a high quality mate
passes on to the female's progeny. In this case, females would be expected to
select large males which are likely to carry genes that might enhance progeny
growth rate to maturity or perhaps survival. In this species, the female mates
with many mates which can vary in male body size. In nature, DNA paternity
methods will be used to determine the father of each progeny in the female's
clutch. The performance of progeny from large and small males will be measured.
In addition, females will be mated in the laboratory to large and small males
and the performance of individual progeny will be followed after the progeny are
released onto experimental plots in nature. Finally, mate choice trials will be
carried out to assess whether females exhibit a strong preference for male body
size. The combination field experiments of territory quality and laboratory
experiments will provide a strong test of the relative contribution of direct
benefits of territory quality and indirect benefits of good genes for the growth
and survival of the female's progeny.