* 0104323
* Transport and Critical Behavior in Mesoporous Random Materials
* ENG,CBET
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Eldred Chimowitz, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Robert M. Wellek
* 08/31/2004
* USD 165,104.00

ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt;CTS-0104323&lt;br/&gt;Chimowitz, Eldred H/ U of
Rochester&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigators hypothesize that in
the near-critical regime the dominant transport mechanism in supercritical
fluid-microporous membrane systems will occur by diffusion of surface-bound
solute species with little contribution from void regions of the membrane
because of the effects of critical slowing-down therein. In this case the
principal investigators have argued that his should uniquely lead to highly
enriched solute fluxes through the membrane which would be a significant outcome
for the proposed research objectives.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The specific goal in
the first year of the project will be to use computer simulation to study near-
critical transport phenomena through microporous membrane systems using a novel
relaxation-dynamics simulation technique, particularly suited for calculations
in the critical region. The relaxation-dynamics simulation ensemble consists of
two chambers, a phenomenological construction chosen to mimic concentration-
driven diffusion processes. Each respective chamber's structure can be set up to
resemble the membrane of interest. The two chambers are separated initially by
an impermeable partition with the two profiles meeting at a discontinuous
concentration interface. Once the partition is removed, diffusion between both
chambers occurs, and molecular fluxes/selectivities can be directly enumerated
as the system relaxes towards its overall equilibrium state at the given
thermodynamic conditions. The dynamics in the entire ensemble will be generated
by a kinetic Monte-Carlo, particle-exchange algorithm. The main objective of
these simulations will be to evaluate this new simulation methodology and use it
to study the properties of the near-critical membrane system described above.
The principal investigators have currently benchmarked these computational
procedures in homogeneous fluid systems and now have the computational resources
and theory in had to use them to carry out a systematic study of near critical
dynamics in confined structures. They hope to be able to complete a
comprehensive investigation of this issue within next year, leading to new
results that they intend to write up for publication.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These
simulation results will be of significant value in providing a conceptual
framework for guiding experimental work in this area, which they aim to
emphasize during the latter half of the project. The objective here will be to
build and commission an experimental system for reliably acquiring data for
model solute permeances through mesocale inorganic membranes as supercritical
transport conditions. The principal investigators view the ability to do this as
central to exploring the viability of the concepts described herein; funds have
been requested to facilitate this endeavor. This will require the modification
of a high-pressure absorption apparatus, currently in their laboratory, to
accommodate a ceramic membrane module, which they intend to purchase from the US
Filter Corporation. During this time their dynamic simulation capability in
these systems should be fully functional, which will advance their goal of a
useful interaction between both simulation and experimental aspects of the
project.&lt;br/&gt;