* 0104397
* Moduli of Spin Curves, Geometric Vertex Algebras and Quantum Cohomology
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* Arkady Vaintrob, University of Oregon Eugene
* Continuing grant
* Alexandre Freire
* 07/31/2003
* USD 62,002.00

Abstract for DMS - 0104397.

The investigator will study two groups of problems related to physical models of
topological string theory and two-dimensional gravity and their interaction with
geometry and other branches of mathematics. Based on physical ideas and methods,
E.Witten conjectured that certain topological invariants of the moduli spaces of
Riemann surfaces with higher spin structures assemble in a generating function
that can be determined by an infinite system of differential equations (the so-
called Gelfand-Dickey hierarchy). The goal of the first part of the proposal is
to study geometric and algebraic structures related to this conjecture by using
techniques from the theory of Gromov-Witten invariants and quantum cohomology.
Besides exposing deep connections between seemingly unrelated areas of geometry
and analysis, a goal of this part of the project is to develop tools for
analyzing more general cohomological field theories of spin type and the
corresponding spin analogs of quantum cohomology and Gromov-Witten invariants.
The second part of the proposal is related to applications and generalizations
of the so-called chiral de Rham complex, a canonical sheaf of vertex algebras
introduced in joint work with Malikov and Schechtman. The main goal here is to
find a rigorous geometric foundation for the physical models of two-dimensional
superconformal field theory on smooth varieties and orbifolds.

String theory is a proposed physical theory which attempts to unify all kinds of
forces and, in particular, combines Einstein's theory of gravity with the
quantum theory. Because this theory cannot yet be verified on experiments,
physicists working in string theory are testing it on sophisticated mathematical
models. Often the same physical quantity can be computed by more than one method
which gives answers expressed in terms of very different mathematical
structures. This suggests the existence of deep ties between various seemingly
remote parts of mathematics and leads to formulation of non-trivial conjectures
connecting different mathematical objects, usually geometric and analytical in
nature. The goal of the current project is a mathematical study of some of these
conjectures and interactions. Besides producing new mathematical results, it
should give mathematical verification of some physical models and provide more
direct links between mathematical and physical methods of analysis of these
models.