* 0104331
* Studies on Pseudo-holomorphic Maps
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Thomas Parker, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2005
* USD 187,824.00

Abstract for DMS - 0104331&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project involves analytic
aspects of the theory of &lt;br/&gt;pseudo-holomorphic curves. The aim is to
develop&lt;br/&gt;effective methods for computing Gromov-Witten invariants of
&lt;br/&gt;symplectic manifolds and enumerative invariants of algebraic
&lt;br/&gt;manifolds. This work builds on the P.I.'s recent work with E. Ionel
&lt;br/&gt;on the `sympletic sum formula' for GW invariants. The first project
&lt;br/&gt;involves extending the sum formula to the `modified GW invariants'
&lt;br/&gt;recently defined by the P.I.'s student Junho Lee. This would make the
&lt;br/&gt;formula applicable to K\"ahler surfaces with $p_g&gt;0$ where there
are&lt;br/&gt;important conjectures that are not currently approachable by
GW&lt;br/&gt;methods. The second project is a symplectic approach to
understanding &lt;br/&gt;physicists' predictions about the generating functions
which count &lt;br/&gt;curves in Calabi-Yau 3-folds. The goal is to prove the
predicted &lt;br/&gt;formulas by adapting some analytic methods C. Taubes
developed to relate &lt;br/&gt;the Seiberg-Witten and Gromov invariants. The
last two projects also relate &lt;br/&gt;to the sympletic sum formula. One seeks
formulas expressing the &lt;br/&gt;relative Gromov-Witten invariants of a pair
$(X,V)$ in terms of the&lt;br/&gt;usual GW invariants and the descendant classes
of $X$ and $V$. The &lt;br/&gt;other proposes extending the sum formula to a
more general type of &lt;br/&gt;symplectic sum which occurs in algebraic
geometry when one considers &lt;br/&gt;projective linear
systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;One of the most basic problems in
mathematics is to determine the &lt;br/&gt;solutions of a system of polynomial
equations, and an important first &lt;br/&gt;step toward that goal is to
determine the NUMBER of solutions. There &lt;br/&gt;is an explicit formula for
the number of simultaneous solutions of a &lt;br/&gt;set of n polynomials in n
variables. One can then ask for the &lt;br/&gt;number of solutions for n
polynomials in n-1 variables. In this &lt;br/&gt;case there is a free parameter,
so the locus of solutions will be a &lt;br/&gt;union of curves. How many? This
question has been systematically &lt;br/&gt;studied for 100 years, but only a
few special cases&lt;br/&gt;were solved. Then, around 1990, it was realized that
these problems &lt;br/&gt;can be translated into symplectic geometry, and then
tackeled using &lt;br/&gt;the powerful machinery of mathematical gauge theory.
(Gauge theory, &lt;br/&gt;originally part of physics, has been the focus of many
very fruitful &lt;br/&gt;interactions between mathematicians and physicists over
the past &lt;br/&gt;twenty years; it includes Yang-Mills and Seiberg-Witten
theory, and &lt;br/&gt;String theory). This `Gromov-Witten invariant' approach
led quickly &lt;br/&gt;to formulas answering some of the original enumerative
problems, and &lt;br/&gt;there are clear indications that there are more to be
discovered. &lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed toward further developing the
symplectic gauge &lt;br/&gt;theory in order to produce&lt;br/&gt;additional
general formulas and to meld these formulas into a coherent theory.&lt;br/&gt;