* 0104781
* Small Grant for Exploratory Research: Biogeochronology of the Villafranchian Site of Seneze, Central France
* SBE,BCS
* 03/15/2001,02/28/2002
* Martine Faure, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 02/28/2002
* USD 15,885.00

The Villafranchian is a European time interval based on the mammals which lived
from roughly 3.5-1.5 million years ago, an interval which saw important events
in human and faunal evolution. Although this concept was first proposed nearly
150 years ago, there is still uncertainty as to the timing of the unit and
subunit boundaries. The PI's will attempt to clarify the situation through
reanalysis of one of the major late Villafranchian mammalian localities, the
volcanic explosion-crater lake (maar) of Seneze, in central France. No major
paleontological collection has been undertaken at Seneze in 60 years, while
stratigraphic and dating studies since 1960 have yielded conflicting results,
ranging between 2.2-1.5 Ma. As the earliest human tools in Europe proper (Spain)
and human fossils with tools at the margins of Europe (Israel, Georgia) occur
close to this time range, the fauna from Seneze is often used as a standard for
comparison to determine the age of such early human presence.&lt;br/&gt; The
team effort has three complementary goals: 1) to clarify the local geology of
this complex site; 2) to utilize a combination of dating methods (ESR, Ar-Ar and
paleomagnetic correlation) on the site and its fauna; and 3) to collect
mammalian fossils from known points within the revised and dated stratigraphy.
New specimens of important mammals such as the terrestrial primate
Paradolichopithecus may result from this study. This application requests funds
for a four-week geological and age-dating season in June-July 2001. If that is
successful, full-scale collecting of fossils is planned for
2002-2004.&lt;br/&gt;