* 0104177
* Algebraic and Geometric Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Kent Orr, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2005
* USD 213,325.00

We investigate the classification of compact topological and
smooth&lt;br/&gt;manifolds, as well as embedding problems - knot theory. We use
both new&lt;br/&gt;and classical homological, geometric and analytic techniques
such as&lt;br/&gt;algebraic L-and K-theory, controlled topology, operator theory
and Von&lt;br/&gt;Neumann signatures. One problem attacked, from differential
geometry, is&lt;br/&gt;to determine whether almost flat manifolds bound compact
manifolds. New&lt;br/&gt;knot invariants, defined during the prior grant, are
continuing to reveal&lt;br/&gt;new and unexpected knotting phenomena and will be
used to further&lt;br/&gt;investigate the classification of topological four
manifolds within a&lt;br/&gt;fixed homology type. These invariants will also be
applied to further&lt;br/&gt;compute the topological concordance group of knots,
and to the rich&lt;br/&gt;structure of three manifolds as seen through
descending series of the&lt;br/&gt;fundamental group. Another problem is to
compute and apply characteristic&lt;br/&gt;classes for combinatorial vector
bundles, an initial step in understanding&lt;br/&gt;a new category of manifolds
- the combinatorial differentiable manifolds&lt;br/&gt;of Gelfand-MacPherson. A
final topic is the computation of algebraic K-&lt;br/&gt;and L-theory using
controlled topology and applying these computations to&lt;br/&gt;manifolds with
fixed fundamental group.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A n-dimensional manifold is a set
of points which is locally modeled on an&lt;br/&gt;n-dimensional linear space.
For instance a surface is a locally&lt;br/&gt;2-dimensional linear space, such
as a sphere, or the surface of a donut&lt;br/&gt;(torus). The principal problem
of geometric topology is the&lt;br/&gt;classification of manifolds. In
differential topology we also ask how&lt;br/&gt;many ways we may do calculus on
a given manifold, addressing the&lt;br/&gt;uniqueness question. The fundamental
group of a manifold gives an&lt;br/&gt;algebraic structure to the collection of
all loops in the manifold, thus&lt;br/&gt;providing a pathway to algebra. The
researchers focus on both high&lt;br/&gt;dimensional and low dimensional
manifolds. Four dimensional manifolds are&lt;br/&gt;of particular interest as
the results and techniques in this dimension&lt;br/&gt;manifest the harmony of
the algebraic techniques which have found success&lt;br/&gt;in high dimensional
manifold topology and the geometric techniques which&lt;br/&gt;prevail in
dimension three. Investigating the foundations of manifold and&lt;br/&gt;knot
theory fundamentally underpins our understanding of geometry,&lt;br/&gt;algebra,
physics and differential equations. Additionally, knot theory&lt;br/&gt;plays a
growing role in string theory, quantum field theory and the study&lt;br/&gt;of
DNA.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;---------- Forwarded message
----------&lt;br/&gt;Date: Fri, 11 May 2001 14:27:02 -0500 (EST)&lt;br/&gt;From:
"James F. Davis" &lt;jfdavis@indiana.edu&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To: Christopher Stark
&lt;cstark@nsf.gov&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cc: korr@indiana.edu&lt;br/&gt;Subject: Re: NSF
proposal recommendation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Hi Chris,&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
Kent and I were very happy to here that you plan to recommend that&lt;br/&gt;our
NSF proposal be granted. However, some of circumstances have
changed&lt;br/&gt;since we wrote the proposal, so I thought I should discuss
them with you&lt;br/&gt;in case the budget is affected. Sorry for the delay
getting back to you,&lt;br/&gt;I was visiting the University of Chicago this
week.&lt;br/&gt; We asked for summer money to support three graduate students:
Karl&lt;br/&gt;Bloch, Diarmuid Crowley, and Tae-Hee Kim. Well, I am happy to
report&lt;br/&gt;that Diarmuid Crowley has been named a Clay Mathematical
Institute&lt;br/&gt;Lift-Off Mathematician &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;http://www.clay
math.org/researchers/index.htm&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;and will receive some money
from them this summer (provided some visa&lt;br/&gt;problems work out.) He is
suggesting to Clay that they award him the&lt;br/&gt;money from June 13 to July
27. After Aug 1, I believe he will be&lt;br/&gt;supported by Max Planck
Institute in Bonn. However, he could still use&lt;br/&gt;NSF money, for example,
he is attending the 3-week School on&lt;br/&gt;high-dimensional manifold
topology in at the ICTP in Trieste, Italy,&lt;br/&gt;mostly at his own expense.
Please advise us if it is necessary to&lt;br/&gt;rebudget and return the money
allotted to Diarmuid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The second change is with regard to
my proposed REU student, Matt&lt;br/&gt;Cecil. Matt Cecil worked with me as an
REU student last summer (partially&lt;br/&gt;supported by NSF funds), and
continued throughout the academic year. He&lt;br/&gt;is attending UCSD as a math
graduate student in the fall. However, due to&lt;br/&gt;mathematical reasons and
personal reasons, he will not be an REU student&lt;br/&gt;with me this summer.
So the question again is - what to do with the money&lt;br/&gt;allotted to him?
I talked to our chair, Dan Maki, and he said that he&lt;br/&gt;could use the
money to help undergraduate research projects connected with&lt;br/&gt;industry.
Dan has many industrial contacts throughout the state of&lt;br/&gt;Indiana and
had lead such projects for several years. The money would&lt;br/&gt;primarily go
to student travel expenses.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; So, Chris, please advise on
whether we should give some money back to&lt;br/&gt;the NSF and rebudget, or
just go with the modifications outlined above.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Jim&lt;br/&g
t;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;