* 0104731
* The Late Pleistocene through Recent Peoples of Northeast Africa: Measures of Affinity based on Dental Evidence
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2003
* Joel Irish, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Mark L. Weiss
* 06/30/2003
* USD 75,339.00

Who were the post-Pleistocene peoples of Egypt, Nubia, and Africa's Horn? How
closely related were they? Were they native to northeast Africa, immigrants, or
both? Is there continuity with recent peoples? These, and other long-standing
questions have been asked by countless African researchers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Yet, despite many archaeological and a lesser number of
biological-based studies, particularly among Dynastic populations, there has
been little agreement regarding the answers. The proposed project is intended to
build upon these previous studies and, specifically, several dental
investigations by J Irish -- in which 36 dental traits in samples throughout
North and sub-Saharan Africa (n= 1,625 individuals) were compared. The
objectives of the new project are to address the more specific, region-oriented
questions in three ways. First, up to 5,000 dentitions in a cross-section of
northeast Africans (and comparative West Asian and European samples), will be
examined for the same traits, plus 32 dental measurements. This work will be
done to discern collective traits across time/space beyond what little is known,
and identify trends in occurrence. Second, those groups most dentally alike will
be identified using inferential statistics. It is widely held that dental
similarity approximates genetic relatedness. These numerically-derived
affinities can then test existing hypotheses concerning population origins,
relationships, migration, and microevolution. &lt;br/&gt;Previously, such
hypotheses were derived and tested via artifactual evidence, or biological data
subject to environmental and methodological bias. Dental anthropology is a
proven field that minimizes these factors. Third, the findings will be
contrasted with published genetic, linguistic, cultural, and other data to test
for concordance among methods. These objectives, when met, will provide a better
understanding of diachronic population history in a region that fostered some of
the greatest civilizations the world has ever known. &lt;br/&gt;