* 0104531
* Microscopic Properties and Physical Behavior of Materials and Media
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Oscar Bruno, California Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2004
* USD 217,546.00

DMS Award Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Award #: 0104531&lt;br/&gt;PI: Bruno,
Oscar&lt;br/&gt;Institution: California Institute of
Technology&lt;br/&gt;Program: Applied Mathematics&lt;br/&gt;Program Manager:
Catherine Mavriplis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Microscopic Properties and
Physical Behavior of Materials and Media&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The present text
proposes research in two distinct areas, namely 1) estimation of the overall
(homogenized) behavior of inhomogeneous materials containing microscopic
misfits, and, 2) evaluation of wave propagation and scattering by inhomogeneous
media. Microscopic misfits are certain types of deformations and
electrical/magnetic polarizations that are experienced by the microscopic
components of a composite material. In a ceramic-metal composite (cermet), for
example, the two basic components of the mixture have different coefficients of
thermal expansion; heating, therefore, gives rise to misfits - i.e., microscopic
deformations which would be mismatched, were it not for constraints of
continuity of elastic displacements at the boundaries between ceramic and metal.
Misfits thus produce microscopic stresses that determine, to a substantial
extent, the macroscopic composite behavior. The proposed efforts in these
regards will seek to provide a theoretical understanding of misfits, so that
materials with improved properties can be designed. One of our goals, for
example, seeks to design ceramics that do not shatter at elevated temperatures,
and are thus appropriate for use in turbine blades at high temperatures.
Problems of scattering by inhomogeneous media, on the other hand, play central
roles in a wide variety of applications, including radar, sonar and remote
sensing, medical microscopy, optical communications and non-invasive evaluation.
The work proposed here will seek to develop fast high-order solvers for a
variety of configurations arising in engineering practice. In view of recent
results, it is envisioned that the proposed techniques will significantly
enhance our prediction capabilities in both materials science and computational
wave propagation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The proposed work impacts a number of
areas of federal strategic interest, including high-performance computing,
materials research, medicine, biology and national security. The specific
research is in two distinct areas, namely 1) estimation of the overall behavior
of inhomogeneous materials containing microscopic misfits, and, 2) evaluation of
wave propagation and scattering by inhomogeneous media. These efforts seek to
produce highly efficient computational methods for engineering of materials with
specified properties, for the solution of problems in optics and microscopy, and
for remote sensing problems related to radar and sonar.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Date: June 18, 2001&lt;br/&gt;