* 0104104
* Random Combinatorial Structures
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2006
* Boris Pittel, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Dean Evasius
* 05/31/2006
* USD 125,000.00

A classic example of a combinatorial structure is a network (a graph),
described as a set of nodes (vertices) connected to their neighbors by links
(arcs, edges). The networks (graphs) have long been used as abstract
mathematical descriptions of real-life social and technological networks. In
1960 Erdos and Renyi began studying a mathematical model of a graph with many
vertices that slowly evolves in time, as one link after another is inserted
between two randomly selected nodes. However idealized, this model captured a
combinatorial complexity of the real networks that are poorly connected at the
inception and become more and more tight as more and more pairwise links appear
in a chaotic fashion. Erdos and Renyi discovered a remarkable mathematical
phenomenon: for a long time the evolving graph remains split in many small
connected components, and then during a relatively short time period the graph
undergoes a dramatic transition which results in the appearance of a giant
connected subnetwork (subgraph) that contains a positive fraction of all
vertices. This pioneering work started an avalanche of research aimed at
elucidating deeper feautures of the phase transition phenomenon and tracking
down the likely changes in the graph structure after the giant component has
appeared. This research includes a detailed study of the group of largest
components at the moments when they are about to merge into a giant component.
Another component of this research is to have a close look at a core of the
giant component, i.e. the largest subset of vertices in that component which are
connected to each other noticeably stronger than to the other vertices. The
principal investigator will work on alternative random graph models that may be
closer to the real-life networks. One such network is the World Wide Web. There
is a body of interesting, but not rigorous, research on the networks that grow
population-wise in such a way that the most connected nodes are statistically
preferred as contacts by the arrivals. The proposer plans to study these network
growth processes jointly with D. Aldous and A. Frieze. Other classic examples of
combinatorial structures are the partitions of sets and integers. And again
there are numerous illustrations of how useful and insightful these abstractions
are in applications. An integer partition is a partition of a given integer into
decreasing parts. A central problem is to study the structure of a partition
chosen at random among all such partitions. Since the pioneering work by Erdos
and Lehner, the studies by Szalay, Turan, Fristedt and this investigator
resulted in discovery of a rather detailed picture (shape) of the typical
partition. The investigator plans to continue his research on the random integer
partitions, and to extend it to the random plane partitions, a surprisingly rich
combinatorial scheme, whose probabilistic aspects have only started to emerge.
The investigator plans to combine enumerational tools and the probabilistic
techniques in order to study the geometric characteristics of the typical plane
partitions. The random partitions have been found critically important in
probabilistic studies of optimization problems. One such well known problem is
to partition a given set of numbers (weights) into two groups so that the
weights of two groups are as close to each other as possible. Simplicity of this
problem is deceiving: there is no efficient algorithm to solve it when the set
of weights is large. It is natural then to switch attention and to study
computational complexity of a typical problem when the individual weights are
random. In on-going joint research C. Borgs, J. Chayes and the investigator have
found a parameter of the problem whose value plays a crucial role in
determination of how intrinsically difficult a typical instance of the problem
is. Much as the partition problem differs from the evolving random graph, there
is a striking similarity between two structures: both experience a rapid
transition within a surprisingly narrow window on the parameter scale. The
research will continue, and the collaborators plan to broaden it, to include
various other optimization problems.