* 0104176
* RUI:  High Pressure Studies of Carbon Nanotubes
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Gopalan Srinivasan, Oakland University
* Standard Grant
* Wendy W. Fuller-Mora
* 08/31/2006
* USD 215,829.00

0104176&lt;br/&gt;Venkateswaran&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This individual
investigator award will fund a professor at a predominately undergraduate
institution for a research project that will investigate the optical and
electrical properties of carbon nanotubes subjected to high pressure. During the
three-year period, the following experiments will be performed: (1) High-
pressure Raman studies on solubilized single walled carbon nanotube samples that
contain individual tubes and small bundles of 2-3 tubes, leading to an.
understanding of the effects of van der Waals coupling between the tubes. (2)
Raman studies on iodine and C60 doped nanotubes aimed at probing the effects of
encapsulated atoms on the vibrational properties of nanotubes. (3) Development
of experimental techniques to measure electrical transport properties at
elevated pressures and study of the gas adsorption properties of nanotubes as
reflected by the changes in their electrical resistivity and thermopower. A key
component of this proposal is the involvement of undergraduate students in
research. Research collaborations with the Pennsylvania State University,
proposed in this project, will provide an opportunity for undergraduate students
to visit a research university and participate in materials synthesis. Our
experimental research is expected to stimulate further theoretical work on
carbon nanotubes and related materials.&lt;br/&gt;%%%&lt;br/&gt;The dominant
technological thrust of the twenty-first century will be the new ability to
control materials properties and fabricate devices at the nanoscale level.
Carbon nanotubes are unique molecular structures in the form of tiny, long tubes
made of carbon atoms. They are light, have high mechanical strength and
flexibility, and can exhibit metallic or semiconducting electrical behavior.
These versatile properties make carbon nanotubes strong candidates for the basis
of innovation in nanotechnology. The rapid progress made in the field of carbon
nanotubes in the recent years, promise interesting possibilities for a wide
variety of applications. However, to develop this potential to the level of
reliable devices, a deeper understanding of their fundamental physical
properties is needed. This individual investigator award will fund a professor
at a predominately undergraduate institution for a research project that will
study the optical and electrical properties of carbon nanotubes and train
undergraduate students in materials characterization techniques. This project
focuses on the understanding of the fundamental interaction among tubes in
nanotube bundles and on the effects of introducing other molecules, such as
iodine or fullerene, inside the tubes as well in the channels between tubes in a
bundle. In addition, the undergraduate students will have an opportunity to
participate in frontier research in this exciting
field.&lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;