* 0104030
* Asymptotic Properties of 3-Manifolds and Their Fundamental Groups
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2005
* James Cannon, Brigham Young University
* Continuing Grant
* Tomek Bartoszynski
* 06/30/2005
* USD 105,036.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0104030&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: James W. Cannon&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We attempt to resolve the
hyperbolic case of Thurston's&lt;br/&gt;Geometrization Conjecture for
3-dimensional manifolds. Among the&lt;br/&gt;many possible approaches, we choose
to study the asymptotic&lt;br/&gt;recursive properties of the fundamental group
of the manifold. We&lt;br/&gt;concentrate on the asymptotic shingling patterns
at infinity&lt;br/&gt;defined by the group and seek methods for proving that
such&lt;br/&gt;patterns do or do not satisfy the necessary and
sufficient&lt;br/&gt;conformality axiom which we introduced in our earlier
studies. We&lt;br/&gt;study this problem in three contexts: (1) We study
closed&lt;br/&gt;3-manifolds with Gromov-hyperbolic group, with emphasis on
the&lt;br/&gt;examination of concrete examples constructed by our new method
of&lt;br/&gt;twisted-face-pairings; (2) We study general subdivision
or&lt;br/&gt;local-replacement rules in the plane, where we have more
freedom&lt;br/&gt;in constructing examples with special properties; and (3)
We&lt;br/&gt;study branched coverings of the 2-sphere by the 2-sphere,
where&lt;br/&gt;the corresponding problem is to some extent already solved
by&lt;br/&gt;means of Thurston's combinatorial characterization of
rational&lt;br/&gt;maps. It is in the third context that the connection
with&lt;br/&gt;classical Teich- mueller theory becomes apparent; we are
seeking&lt;br/&gt;an appropriate version of Teichmueller theory for our setting.
In&lt;br/&gt;all of these contexts, we use the circle-packing programs of
Ken&lt;br/&gt;Stephenson, the automatic group programs of Epstein, Holt,
and&lt;br/&gt;Rees, and the program SnapPea of Jeff Weeks in conjunction
with&lt;br/&gt;programs of the proposer and his coworkers to
construct,&lt;br/&gt;geometrically optimize, and explore the patterns being
studied.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;William P. Thurston has supplied us with a
powerful conjectural&lt;br/&gt;picture of the spaces of 3-dimensional
mathematics, the&lt;br/&gt;3-dimensional manifolds. Thurston's Geometrization
Conjecture is&lt;br/&gt;the most important unresolved problem in low
dimensional&lt;br/&gt;topology, even if one sets aside the case of spherical
geometry&lt;br/&gt;where the conjecture implies the famous "million dollar"
Poincare&lt;br/&gt;Conjecture. Thurston suggests that every 3-manifold can
be&lt;br/&gt;divided in an intrinsic manner into pieces, each of which
is&lt;br/&gt;modelled on one of eight natural geometries. Within each
piece,&lt;br/&gt;one can apply well-understood algebraic and geometric
techniques&lt;br/&gt;to derive properties of the manifold. This project seeks
to&lt;br/&gt;resolve the generic case of the Thurston Conjecture, namely
the&lt;br/&gt;case of hyperbolic geometry. The technique employed is
to&lt;br/&gt;maximally unwind the manifold, that is, take its universal
cover,&lt;br/&gt;and study the asymptotic properties of this cover. The cover
can&lt;br/&gt;be studied combinatorially almost as a growing cellular
organism&lt;br/&gt;as a plant or animal might be studied by a cell biologist.
The&lt;br/&gt;cover can be studied computationally as a cellular
automaton&lt;br/&gt;might be studied by a computer scientist. The cover can
be&lt;br/&gt;studied analytically by methods of discrete dynamical systems
or&lt;br/&gt;differential equations or conformal mapping.&lt;br/&gt;