* 0104768
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Putting the Relationship Between Species Diversity and Ecosystem Functioning into Context.
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2001,03/31/2003
* Robert Denno, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 03/31/2003
* USD 9,225.00

With the rate of global species extinction rapidly increasing, there is an
intensifying debate among scientists as to whether or not a high diversity of
species is required to maintain ecological processes that are important for the
functioning of ecosystems (processes like primary productivity, decomposition,
and the cycling of nutrients). Limited evidence suggests that the certain types
of ecosystems may require more species than others. For example, recent
experimental work has led to the hypothesis that decreasing species diversity in
ecosystems characterized by periodic disturbances leads to greater changes in
ecological processes than decreasing species diversity in ecosystems less
characterized by disturbance. The current research will test this hypothesis by
relating species diversity to the rates of 3 ecological processes in stream
ecosystems that differ in flooding regime (=disturbance metric). Using records
from the US Geological Survey, 200 randomly selected streams from the eastern
United States will be ranked according to their frequency and predictability of
bank-full flooding. The 25 streams most characterized by flooding and 25 streams
least characterized by flooding will be sampled to determine the rates of three
ecological processes (primary productivity, leaf decomposition, and removal of
suspended particles from the water), and the diversity of species that influence
these processes (primary producers, invertebrate detritivores, and invertebrate
filter feeders). To test the hypothesis, the relationships between (1) algal
diversity and primary productivity, (2) invertebrate detritivore diversity and
leaf decomposition, and (3) invertebrate filter-feeder diversity and retention
of suspended particulate matter, will be statistically compared between streams
most and least characterized by flooding. The results will help determine
whether species diversity is more or less important for conserving biological
processes in ecosystems that are naturally or anthropogenically disturbed. This
study will also provide much needed, basic information about the factors that
potentially regulate the contribution of species diversity to ecosystem-level
processes.