* 0104029
* Some Theoretical and Applied Inverse Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Victor Isakov, Wichita State University
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 08/31/2004
* USD 79,000.00

This project is dedicated to the study of uniqueness and stability in some
important inverse problems, in particular to identification of diffusion
coefficients and the speed of propagation for scalar partial differential
equations and (Maxwell and elasticity)systems. Tools will be new Carleman type
estimates and interaction between control theory and inverse problems. Also
potential theory is to be utilized in the further study of inverse gravimetry
and vorticity problems. In case of many boundary measurements the effort will be
made to resolve the fundamental uniqueness question in the inverse conductivity
problem with the data on a part of the boundary by using localized solutions of
elliptic equations recently constructed by Greenleaf and Uhlmann. The PI will
try to find cases of increased stability in inverse problems, in particular
obtaining Lipschitz conditional stability estimates for recovery of nonlinear
(space independent) elliptic and parabolic equations from boundary measurements
and quantifying increased stability in prospecting by stationary waves with
higher frequency. Applications of theoretical results will be in identification
of volatility in options markets. We expect to develop a very efficient and
reliable algorithm based on the modeling of volatility. This problem is of
fundamental importance for prediction of options markets and evaluation of
economical stability from current market data. Another expected application is
recovery of the fundamental physical relations (in chemical equations, heat
conduction) from experimental data. This problem is of growing importance for
contemporary engineering due to the discovery of new materials and the use of
high temperatures. The theory of inverse gravimetry combined with available
models of vorticity is expected to achieve progress in evaluation of turbulence
(e.g. past aircrafts) from distant measurements of pressure. This problem has
important implications for increasing capability of large airports. The project
will involve graduate students and stimulate their interest in mathematical
problems of practical importance.