* 0104126
* Knots and 3-Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2004
* Abigail Thompson, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2004
* USD 58,700.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0104126&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Abigail A. Thompson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The focus of the proposed
research is the study of knots and&lt;br/&gt;3-dimensional spaces. We will
examine questions about surgery on&lt;br/&gt;knots, knotting of graphs in
3-space dimensional spaces, and&lt;br/&gt;Heegaard decompositions of
3-manifolds. We describe three&lt;br/&gt;specific goals and their connections to
some of the basic&lt;br/&gt;questions in the field. The first goal is to develop
the tools&lt;br/&gt;and techniques of multi-parameter thin position and sweep-
outs so&lt;br/&gt;that they can be used to tackle some of the long-
standing&lt;br/&gt;problems in knot theory and 3-manifold theory. A second is
to&lt;br/&gt;extend work of the proposer and M. Scharlemann on
unknotted&lt;br/&gt;planar graphs in the 3-sphere to a more general
setting.&lt;br/&gt;Finally, we aim to obtain a clearer understanding of
general&lt;br/&gt;questions about 3-manifolds by obtaining a deeper
understanding&lt;br/&gt;of 3-manifolds of Heegaard genus two. We will examine
specific&lt;br/&gt;questions about tunnel number one knots, special cases of
larger&lt;br/&gt;questions about what genus two manifolds can be obtained
by&lt;br/&gt;surgery on a knot in the 3-sphere, which of these
manifolds&lt;br/&gt;contain immersed surfaces with injective fundamental groups,
and&lt;br/&gt;how information from the Heegaard diagrams of these
manifolds&lt;br/&gt;translates into geometric and algebraic information about
the&lt;br/&gt;manifold itself.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We live in what is
apparently a universe with three spatial&lt;br/&gt;dimensions. Exploring the
possible forms that our universe might&lt;br/&gt;have is not only a deep problem
for physicists but also for&lt;br/&gt;mathematicians. Different mathematical
possibilities lead to&lt;br/&gt;very different expected physical properties. As
an example, we&lt;br/&gt;do do not know if, were we able to program a very fast
rocket to&lt;br/&gt;go "straight" into space, it would eventually return to
its&lt;br/&gt;starting point, like a ship on the surface of the earth, or if
it&lt;br/&gt;would continue to travel away from us forever. There are
an&lt;br/&gt;infinite number of possibilities for the shape of the
universe.&lt;br/&gt;This project proposes to explore some of them using
the&lt;br/&gt;techniques of low-dimensional topology and knot theory.&lt;br/&gt;