* 0104000
* Knot and 3-Manifold Invariants, Seifert Surfaces and Dehn Surgery
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* Efstratia Kalfagianni, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 07/31/2004
* USD 58,000.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0104000&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Efstratia Kalfagianni&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The PI will study the
``finite type" invariants of knots and&lt;br/&gt;3-manifolds by using techniques
from classical 3-dimensional&lt;br/&gt;topology and search for geometric
information encoded in these&lt;br/&gt;invariants. First, she will continue her
work on developing the&lt;br/&gt;theory of finite type invariants for knots and
links in arbitrary&lt;br/&gt;3-manifolds by using techniques from the theory of
atoroidal&lt;br/&gt;decompositions of 3-manifolds. She also plans to work
on&lt;br/&gt;relating the Vassiliev knot invariants to properties of
Seifert&lt;br/&gt;surfaces spanned by the knots and to intrinsic invariants of
the&lt;br/&gt;knot complement. This will extend classical results about
the&lt;br/&gt;topology of the Alexander polynomial to the Jones polynomial
and&lt;br/&gt;its generalizations. Finally, the PI plans to search
for&lt;br/&gt;relations between the Jones polynomial of a knot and
the&lt;br/&gt;fundamental group of 3-manifolds obtained by Dehn surgery on
the&lt;br/&gt;knot.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research of the project lies in the
area of 3-dimensional&lt;br/&gt;topology the central objects of study of which
are spaces called&lt;br/&gt;3-manifolds. A 3-manifold is an object that locally
looks like&lt;br/&gt;the ordinary 3-dimensional space but whose global structure
can&lt;br/&gt;be complicated. A main goal of 3-dimensional topology is
to&lt;br/&gt;understand these structures and achieve a classification
of&lt;br/&gt;3-manifolds. An important part of 3-dimensional topology is
also&lt;br/&gt;the study of knots (loops embedded in some tangled way
in&lt;br/&gt;3-manifolds) and their classification. One of the ways
that&lt;br/&gt;topologists have been approaching these problems is through
the&lt;br/&gt;use of ``invariants". In the recent years, ideas originated
in&lt;br/&gt;physics, lead mathematicians to the discovery of a variety
of&lt;br/&gt;invariants of knots and 3-manifolds. The central theme of
the&lt;br/&gt;PI's project is to understand the properties of these
invariants,&lt;br/&gt;using ideas from traditional 3-dimensional topology and
from&lt;br/&gt;physics, and to look for applications to the
aforementioned&lt;br/&gt;classification problems.&lt;br/&gt;