* 0104431
* International Research Fellowship Program:  Stabilization and Control of Structural Acoustic Systems Modeled With Thermoelastic Shells -- An Intrinsic Approach
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/2001,09/30/2003
* Catherine Lebiedzik, University of Virginia Main Campus
* Fellowship Award
* Susan Parris
* 09/30/2003
* USD 120,460.00

0104431&lt;br/&gt;Lebiedzik&lt;br/&gt;The International Research Fellow Awards
Program enables U.S. scientists and engineers to conduct three to twenty-four
months of research abroad. The program's awards provide opportunities for joint
research, and the use of unique or complementary facilities, expertise and
experimental conditions abroad.&lt;br/&gt;This award will provide twenty-four
months of support to Dr. Catherine Lebiedzik of the University of Virginia to do
research with Dr. John Cagnol at Pole Universitaire, Leonard de Vinci, in Paris,
France, and with Dr. Jean-Paul Zolesio at Ecole des Mines de Paris in Sophia
Antipolis, France. Funding for this project is provided by NSF's Math and
Physical Sciences Directorate's Office of Multidisciplinary
Activities.&lt;br/&gt;The PI will work on the problem of reducing noise in an
acoustic cavity. The project involves the complex mathematical solution of a
simple physical system; describing the physics via the acoustic wave equation
embedded in an appropriate boundary surface. Noise reduction is a concern in the
field of aerospace engineering as well as an application of modern control
theory of partial differential equations (PDEs). The structural acoustic
interaction in the chamber is mathematically modeled by a coupled system of
PDEs.&lt;br/&gt;The international nature for this work is necessary because the
intrinsic model itself was first developed in France. The French group will be
responsible for generalizing the model to include thermoelastic effects and for
assisting in numerical analysis with the finite element method.&lt;br/&gt;