* 0104196
* Topology, Geometry and Physics
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2006
* Raoul Bott, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 06/30/2006
* USD 530,000.00

Abstract for DMS - 0104196 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The three principle
investigators on this proposal will be&lt;br/&gt;involved in research in the
following areas: Barry Mazur will be involved&lt;br/&gt;in at least four major
projects. The first concerns Euler systems and&lt;br/&gt;their applications in
algebraic geometry, arithmetic and analytic number&lt;br/&gt;theory. The second
project will study interpolations of modular&lt;br/&gt;eigenforms via special
curves. The third concerns the ABC conjecture in&lt;br/&gt;number theory and the
fourth concerns rational points on rationally&lt;br/&gt;connected varieties.
Raoul Bott will conduct research at the interface&lt;br/&gt;between mathematics
and physics including research topics that relate to&lt;br/&gt;computational
complexity, equivariant cohomology, diffeomorphism groups&lt;br/&gt;and toric
varieties. The major project of Clifford Taubes concerns the&lt;br/&gt;coding of
smooth 4-manifold structures by the pseudo-holomorphic curves&lt;br/&gt;defined
by their self-dual 2-forms. The first long range goal is to read&lt;br/&gt;off
invariants of smooth 4-manifolds from these curves. The second goal&lt;br/&gt;is
to use them to simplify a presentation of the
manifold.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Here are some comments of a less
technical nature about this&lt;br/&gt;research: Barry Mazurs work concerns
properties of the integers and&lt;br/&gt;relations between them. A typical
question asks for integers, say a, b&lt;br/&gt;and c, that satisfy some given
equation. An example is the equation of&lt;br/&gt;Pythagoreas, which asks that
the sum of the squares of a and b equal that&lt;br/&gt;of c. There are very
general and natural classes of such relations (such&lt;br/&gt;as those involved
in the now proved Fermat conjecture) that probe to the&lt;br/&gt;heart of the
theory of numbers; and the study of such equations forms the&lt;br/&gt;core of
Mazurs research. Raoul Botts work probes the manner in which&lt;br/&gt;families
of symmetries can be used to simplify computations in mathematics&lt;br/&gt;and
theoretical physics. These symmetries relate different structures
and&lt;br/&gt;often this relation equates a simple to understand property of one
system&lt;br/&gt;to a mysterious and not understood property of another.
Clifford Taubes&lt;br/&gt;major project probes the possibilities for the large
scale structure of&lt;br/&gt;four dimensional universes. Our universe has four
dimensions, these the&lt;br/&gt;usual three dimensions of space plus time as the
fourth. This said, the&lt;br/&gt;research seeks to provide a complete list of
the possible large scale&lt;br/&gt;structures for a universe such as ours. To
put this in perspective, there&lt;br/&gt;is a conjectured list for all possible
three dimensional spaces, but there&lt;br/&gt;is as yet no credible conjecture
for a similar list for four dimensions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;