* 0104751
* Properties of galaxies: constraints from gravitational lensing and dynamics
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2006
* Christopher Hunter, Florida State University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2006
* USD 130,000.00

NSF Award Abstract - DMS-0104751 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mathematical Sciences:
Properties of galaxies: constraints from gravitational lensing and dynamics
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract DMS-0104751 &lt;br/&gt;Hunter
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will follow two complementary two lines of
investigation of the large-scale structure of galaxies. The first line is
concerned with the gravitational lensing that occurs when a galaxy lies close to
the line of sight between us and a much more distant source, such as a quasar.
Electromagnetic waves from the distant source are both bent and slowed down as
they pass close to the galaxy. As a result, the "gravitational lens" may produce
multiple images of that quasar. A number of quasars that are multiply imaged by
galaxies are now known. The configuration of those images and their relative
magnitudes is determined by the distribution of mass in the intervening galaxy.
The principal investigator has developed methods for calculating the lensing
properties of elliptical lenses. Applied to observational data, these properties
can be used to make deductions about the distribution of mass in the lensing
galaxy. He will develop methods that are more powerful and refine them as
necessary after testing them on observational data. The second line of
investigation is concerned with the dynamics of the stars, which are the major
visible components of galaxies. Its ultimate aim is to build dynamical models of
galaxies, but two preliminary topics are to be studied first. One is
investigation of how central density cusps and central black holes, which are
widely believed to be present in many galaxies, influence the orbits of the
stars, and to what extent they allow galaxies to be triaxial. The other is to
improvement of a procedure for analyzing orbits and computing their fundamental
frequencies and orbital densities. The two lines of investigation are
complementary because both the orbits of the stars in a galaxy, and the
gravitational lensing properties of that galaxy, are influenced by all the
matter of the galaxy, whether visible or dark. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This
project looks at galaxies, the fundamental building blocks of the Universe, from
two perspectives. One is that of gravitational lensing and the other is that of
the motions of the stars of the galaxies. Light rays are bent when they pass
close to a massive object such as a galaxy. Consequently, a galaxy that happens
to lie between us and a distant quasar can cause us to see multiple images of
that object. This phenomenon is known as gravitational lensing. It is of much
current interest because it provides a tool for investigating the combined
effects of the visible and dark matter content of a galaxy, since both
contribute to the lensing. There are a number of instances of galaxies that
produce four images of the same distant quasar. The principal investigator is
developing theories for deducing what those image systems, their configurations
and their relative strengths, tell us about the arrangement of mass in those
galaxies. That arrangement is critical for the structure of the galaxy. Galaxies
contain swarms of hundreds of billions of stars. The motions of those stars are
governed by the gravitational forces due to all the mass of the galaxy, both
visible and dark. Understanding the motion of stars in galaxies will facilitate
understanding the large-scale structure of the universe.&lt;br/&gt;