* 0104310
* US-Egypt Cooperative Research:  Seismic Hazard Mitigation and Soil Strength Mapping for Land Use Planning in Tushka Area, Upper Egypt
* O/D,OISE
* 10/01/2001,08/31/2007
* Arthur Lerner-Lam, Columbia University
* Standard Grant
* Osman Shinaishin
* 08/31/2007
* USD 30,000.00

0104310&lt;br/&gt;Versteeg&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Description: This project
supports a collaborative project between Dr. Roelof Versteeg, Lamont Doherty
Earth Observatory, Columbia University and Dr. Raafat Fat-Helbary, Aswan
Seismological Center, the National Research Institute of Astronomy and
Geophysics, Aswan, Egypt. &lt;br/&gt;They plan to create a useable seismic
hazard and soil strength maps for the Tushka Project, a massive new
infrastructure effort in Upper Egypt. The PIs plan on combining probabilistic
seismic hazard maps that describe the frequency of exceeding specified ground
motion levels with a surface wave analysis technique that can provide detailed
site effects. They will combine MASW type of inversion techniques with imaging
to obtain shear-wave velocity profiles that can be of great use for engineering
projects. The results will be made available in a GIS environment. This work
will develop a technique that can usefully complement macro-scale hazard
analysis, and make refined microzonation of hazard a real possibility useful in
siting of critical facilities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Scope: The project has
important scientific and practical implications. The geography of the Upper
Egypt area is important and has been affected by recent human development
including the construction of the Aswan High Dam. This research will document
and interpret geophysical and geotechnical data and will seek to develop
practical information for future projects. Dr. Versteeg has the needed
experience in the acquisition and processing of geophysical data as well as the
integration of these data into GIS based product for use by non-geophysicists.
Dr. Fat-Helbary is experienced in the Tushka seismic studies. He will lead the
effort for collection of the large-scale data sets, and will lead the effort in
creating ground motion acceleration maps. Both sides will benefit from this
collaboration and from the opportunity to learn from the type of planning that
is underway to develop a region of the world that has historical significance.
The experience and methods developed in this proposed project will be applicable
to future developments in Egypt as well as in other parts of the world. The PIs
are well qualified for the planned. The project meets INT criteria for support
of collaborative research.