* 0104897
* Dissertation Research: Austral Biogeography: The Evolution of Subalpine Ourisia (Scrophulariaceae) in a Phylogenetic Context
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2003
* Beryl Simpson, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 06/30/2003
* USD 10,235.00

Summary (word count: 223) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ever since naturalist Joseph
Dalton Hooker explored the southern continents over 150 years ago, biologists
have been interested in understanding the current distributions of related
organisms in southern South America, Australasia, and/or Africa. It has been
argued that this austral biogeographic pattern is associated with the vicariant
breakup of Gondwana that began over 80 million years ago, but a competing
hypothesis suggests that the same pattern might have arisen more recently via
long-distance dispersal. Fossil evidence and results from phylogenetic studies
corroborate the vicariance paradigm for some woody forest groups, but few
studies have focused on higher elevation herbaceous genera in southern regions.
It has been suggested that these alpine herbs may not be relics of a widespread
Gondwana flora, but rather the result of more recent events. Recentness is
likely in alpine groups because these herbs occur in habitats that have existed
only since the final Quaternary uplift of high-elevation mountains in New
Zealand and South America. The subalpine, herbaceous genus Ourisia
(Scrophulariaceae) comprises about 35 different species that are distributed
throughout the South American Andes from Venezuela to Tierra del Fuego, the
mountains of New Zealand, and high-elevation regions of Tasmania. We will
reconstruct the evolutionary history of Ourisia using DNA sequence data and
morphology to investigate vicariance and dispersal hypotheses as potential
explanations for the austral biogeography of the genus.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Significance (word count: 235) &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our
comprehensive phylogenetic study of Ourisia (Scrophulariaceae) presents a
valuable opportunity to expand our understanding of the austral biogeographic
pattern. Most biogeographic studies of plant groups that exhibit this southern
distribution have focused on woody forest groups such as Nothofagus
(Nothofagaceae), Araucaria (Araucariaceae), and closely related genera in
Atherospermataceae. Although Gondwanan vicariance is a good model for these
ancient groups, it may not apply to high-elevation herbaceous plants such as
Ourisia that occupy habitats that are of more recent Quaternary origin. In
addition to its biogeographical significance, our study will also allow us to
examine some evolutionary patterns within Ourisia. Because Ourisia exhibits
ample variation in floral morphology, chromosome number, habit, and vegetative
characters, a comprehensive morphological study will provide new insights into
character evolution in the genus. We will also examine radiation patterns of
species in the mountains of New Zealand and South America, and discuss the
general implications of areas where the phylogenetic pattern of Ourisia is
congruent with current or historical barriers, geology, and climate. Our study
will thus provide a reconstruction of the evolutionary history of Ourisia that
we can use to: 1) provide a better understanding of the relationships of species
within the genus, and between Ourisia and its closest relatives, 2) examine the
biogeography of Ourisia and assess patterns of radiation within each
geographical region, and 3) investigate evolution of chromosome number and
morphological characters in the genus. &lt;br/&gt;