* 0104968
* Dissertation Research: Phylogeny, Biogeography, and Rates of Speciation in Valerianaceae (Dipsacales)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2003
* Michael Donoghue, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 07/31/2003
* USD 10,519.00

Evolutionary biologists and ecologists have long been fascinated by explosive
radiations of species that exhibit tremendous morphological diversity and occupy
a wide range of habitats. The flowering plant lineage Valerianaceae contains
300-350 species that have been placed in 14-17 genera, with nearly 200 of the
species being endemic to South America. These species exhibit a striking range
of floral and vegetative forms. It has been hypothesized that the South American
species represent a recent radiation. The availability of fossils will allow us
to explicitly test biogeographic hypotheses and investigate rates of speciation
within this group. The goals of this study are: 1) to infer the phylogeny of
Valerianaceae using several DNA sequence data sets, 2) to examine morphological
character evolution, 3) to elucidate the biogeographic history of Valerianaceae,
and 4) to assess rates of speciation, with an emphasis on the South American
radiation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This will be the first phylogentic analysis of
Valerianaceae to include a broad sample of species from each of the genera and
will also provide an empirical application of several new methods for the study
of rates of evolution and speciation. Specifically we will test the hypothesis
that over 200 species of Valerianaceae have originated since the formation of
the Isthmus of Panama some 3-6 million years ago. This project will compliment
ongoing studies of other lineages of the Dipsacales and will enhance our
understanding of Northern Hemisphere biogeography and the origin of the South
American flora. While our main aim is to address questions of broad evolutionary
significance, there is an element of urgency to this research from the
standpoint of conservation. Specifically, the enormous diversity now found in
the Andes of South America is threatened by human impacts on the high elevation
"paramo" vegetation. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;