* 0104026
* Geometric Group Theory and the Topology of Aspherical Manifolds
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Ruth Charney, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2005
* USD 226,253.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Award: DMS-0104026&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Michael W. Davis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This is a proposal for
research in geometric group theory&lt;br/&gt;focusing on Coxeter groups, Artin
groups, and mapping class&lt;br/&gt;groups of surfaces. The main problems to be
addressed are the&lt;br/&gt;following.&lt;br/&gt;(1) For which Coxeter groups is
the Coxeter diagram uniquely&lt;br/&gt;determined by the group? For which
Coxeter groups is the&lt;br/&gt;fundamental generating set uniquely determined
(up to&lt;br/&gt;conjugation) by the group? For which Coxeter groups is the
outer&lt;br/&gt;automorphism group finite?&lt;br/&gt;(2) Are all Artin groups
linear groups? &lt;br/&gt;(3) Find a formula for the cohomology with compact
supports of a&lt;br/&gt;building. Likewise for the Salvetti complex of an Artin
group.&lt;br/&gt;(4) Determine the l^2 Betti numbers of cubical
manifolds&lt;br/&gt;associated to right-angled Coxeter groups. Do they vanish
outside&lt;br/&gt;the middle dimension? This would imply the Flag
Complex&lt;br/&gt;Conjecture concerning triangulations of odd-dimensional
spheres&lt;br/&gt;and has implications for graph embeddings.&lt;br/&gt;(5)
Develop a theory of mock reflection groups. This is a class of&lt;br/&gt;groups
similar to Coxeter groups which arise as transformations&lt;br/&gt;of blow-ups
of hyperplane arrangements.&lt;br/&gt;(6) Is the Torelli subgroup of the mapping
class groups of a&lt;br/&gt;surface of genus at least three finitely
generated?&lt;br/&gt;(7) Can a word hyperbolic group be the fundamental group of
a&lt;br/&gt;surface by surface bundle? Must all finitely presented non
word&lt;br/&gt;hyperbolic groups contain a Baumslag-Solitar group or an
abelian&lt;br/&gt;group of rank two?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Group theory arises
from the study of symmetries of an&lt;br/&gt;object. When this object has an
interesting geometric structure,&lt;br/&gt;one can use geometric techniques to
better understand the group&lt;br/&gt;of symmetries. This project involves the
study of certain&lt;br/&gt;families of groups which arise in a broad range of
mathematical&lt;br/&gt;and physical contexts, such as the study of crystal
structures&lt;br/&gt;and the intertwining of DNA. These groups are associated to
rich&lt;br/&gt;and beautiful geometric structures which lend themselves to
the&lt;br/&gt;techniques of geometric group theory.&lt;br/&gt;