* 0104675
* U.S.-Mexico Collaborative Research:  Dynamics of Extended Systems and Coupled Map Lattices
* O/D,OISE
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Howard Weiss, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 08/31/2006
* USD 70,984.00

0104675&lt;br/&gt;Levi&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This U.S. Mexico award will support
Drs. Mark Levi, Howard Weiss, and Yakov Pesin in a research collaboration with
Valentine Afraimovich of the Mathematics Department of the Unversidad Autonoma
de San Luis de Potosi. The investigators plan to study: 1) Coupled map lattices
corresponding to partial differential equations from physics and biology, in
particular, the FitzHugh-Nagumo equation (which is of great interest in
neurobiology). The collaborators intend to describe the ergodic properties of
its local map and construct SRB measures for the attractor of this map. 2) The
transition from coupled map lattices to partial differential equations via
traveling waves, which will build a foundation for numerical modeling of some
partial differential equations of evolution type. 3) The Dynamics of chains of
coupled oscillators, in particular, those associated with the Sine-Gordon
equation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A coupled map lattice is a discrete time
dynamical system whose phase space is of a particular form, and for which the
overall system exhibits translational symmetry.&lt;br/&gt;Coupled map lattices
have recently gained wide popularity as models of spatio-temporal chaos and
coherent structures. There is currently great interest in using coupled map
lattices to model turbulence, nerve cells, phase transitions in statistical
physics, and crystals. They also arise naturally from the discrete version of
evolution partial differential equations.&lt;br/&gt;