* 0104560
* Dissertation Research: A Host Shift by Swallowtail Butterflies Within the Papilio machaon Species Group: The Role of Plant Chemistry
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2004
* Paul Feeny, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* Samuel M. Scheiner
* 06/30/2004
* USD 12,000.00

0104560 Feeny

Current patterns of association between insects and plants have resulted from
events in which insects modify their range of acceptable host plants by
colonizing novel host-plant species. However, the plant traits that predispose
insects to "shift" onto some plants instead of others are poorly understood. The
goals of this research are to determine (1) if ancestral and novel host plants
share similar chemical stimulants that would facilitate a host shift and (2) if
insect preference for these chemical cues has a genetic component. This will be
accomplished by investigating a host shift within the Papilio machaon group of
swallowtail butterflies. Butterflies will be tested on host plants and chemical
extracts made from these plants to quantify preference for ancestral and novel
host plants. A heritability experiment will be performed to determine if
preference for chemical cues is a heritable genetic trait. These experiments
will determine whether plant chemistry can act as a mechanism for insects to
recognize new plant species as potential hosts.

Understanding how insects incorporate new hosts into their diets is important
because many of our worst agricultural pests have colonized crop plants by
shifting from a native host plant to an abundant crop host. Therefore, learning
how plant chemistry can affect an insect's decision to shift to a novel host may
help to reduce future colonizations by insect pests.