* 0104963
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Genetic Basis of Adaptation in Thermally Adapted Escherichia Coli
* BIO,IOS
* 04/15/2001,03/31/2003
* Michelle Riehle, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 03/31/2003
* USD 9,000.00

DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Genetic Basis of Adaptation in Thermally Adapted
Escherichia Coli&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Albert Bennett and Michelle
Riehle&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will take a genomic approach to
understanding of adaptation to high temperature. The PIs will examine
populations of Escherichia coli, a microbe present in the intestinal flora of
all mammals, that have been cultured in the laboratory for 2000 generations at
high temperature. They will examine the genetic basis of adaptation to high
temperature, the degree of parallel evolution among different lines adapted to
high temperature, and the reversability phenotypic and genetic changes upon
exposure of populations to lower temperatures. The work addresses three main
goals. The first goal is to examine how adaptation to high temperature changes
the copy number of genes, either increasing copy number via duplication or
decreasing copy number via deletion. The second goal is to examine how
adaptation to temperature affects the level of gene expression. Lastly, given
changing thermal conditions, how do organisms respond on the phenotypic or
organismal level and how do they respond on the genetic level? Is there a
particular pattern? Are changes at the organismal level always caused by the
same genetic change, or can multiple genetic changes yield the same change in
phenotype? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;DNA high-density arrays will be used to screen
whole genomes for regions of gene duplication and deletion, and to characterize
gene expression. This whole genome approach is a powerful tool in that it allows
the simultaneous screening of all 4290 E. coli genes, making individual
examination of all 4290 genes unnecessary. This work is important because it
begins to dissect the complex process of adaptation that has intrigued
comparative and evolutionary biologists ever since the time of
Darwin.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;