* 0104001
* Direct and Inverse Problems in Diffractive Optics Modeling
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2006
* Gang Bao, Michigan State University
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2006
* USD 320,000.00

Over the next five years, the Principal Investigator proposes &lt;br/&gt;to
examine the mathematical issues and develop computational methods&lt;br/&gt;for
solving the following classes of direct and inverse problems&lt;br/&gt;motivated
by industrial applications: scattering and diffraction by periodic
&lt;br/&gt;structures (gratings), second harmonic generation in nonlinear
diffractive &lt;br/&gt;optics, and inverse and optimal design problems in
diffractive optics. &lt;br/&gt;The main topics of the proposed work are as
follows:&lt;br/&gt;-- Modeling, analysis, and computation of the diffraction by
periodic &lt;br/&gt;chiral structures and the scattering by a perturbed
diffractive structure. &lt;br/&gt;Modeling and design of electromagnetic
resonances.&lt;br/&gt;-- Well-posedness of the nonlinear Maxwell equations in
second harmonic&lt;br/&gt;generation. An interface least-squares finite element
method for solving&lt;br/&gt;the three-dimensional model problem. Structure
(grating)&lt;br/&gt; enhanced nonlinear optical effects. Effects of coatings on
nonlinear &lt;br/&gt;diffractive optics.&lt;br/&gt;-- Optimal design of
diffractive structures. A relaxation technique &lt;br/&gt;(homogenization) and a
local approach for the optimal design problem. &lt;br/&gt;Uniqueness, stability,
and regularity studies of the inverse diffraction &lt;br/&gt;problem. Numerical
solution of inverse and optimal design problems in &lt;br/&gt;diffractive
optics.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The recent enabling technologies of high-
performance computing facilities&lt;br/&gt;and microlithographic fabrication
techniques have led to an explosion of&lt;br/&gt;applications of diffraction in
optics, establishing diffractive optics &lt;br/&gt;as one of the most rapidly
advancing areas of current research &lt;br/&gt;in optical engineering. The
practical applications and scientific developments &lt;br/&gt;have driven the
need for rigorous partial differential equation&lt;br/&gt;models, mathematical
analysis, and numerical algorithms&lt;br/&gt;to describe the diffraction of
complicated grating structures, to compute &lt;br/&gt;electromagnetic fields and
thus to predict the performance of a given &lt;br/&gt;diffractive structure in
linear, chiral, and nonlinear optical media, as well &lt;br/&gt;as to carry out
optimal design of new structures. The proposed research has
&lt;br/&gt;significant potential for evolving new mathematics and science and
providing &lt;br/&gt;industry with guidance to design and fabricate new optical
devices.&lt;br/&gt;