* 0104791
* Dissertation Research: Relative Effects of Differential Seed and Seedling Predation by Crabs on Tropical Forest Composition and Structure
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2003
* C. Ronald Carroll, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Susan Mopper
* 05/31/2003
* USD 7,674.00

DOCTORAL DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Relative Effects of Differential Seed and
Seedling Predation by Crabs on Tropical Forest Composition and
Structure&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;0104791- Carroll. Ecologists have debated for
more than a century in the theoretical literature over the predominant
mechanisms that structure plant communities over a heterogeneous landscape.
Proposed mechanisms include plant response to variable environmental conditions,
differential seed dispersal, differential competitive abilities among plant
species, and differential seed predation. There have been few empirical
comparative studies that investigate the relative importance of these proposed
hypotheses. Recently, several studies have debated the significance of
differential herbivory versus plant response to environmental conditions on
observed mangrove community shifts, yet no comparable investigations have been
conducted in terrestrial forests. Preliminary data from a secondary coastal
forest in Costa Rica suggests that herbivorous land crabs and terrestrial hermit
crabs have the ability to induce the shifts in forest community structure
observed in tropical coastal forests. Through the use of vegetation analyses,
seed traps, crab exclosures and controls, and manipulations of environmental
conditions, this dissertation research will determine the relative effect of
seed and seedling predation pressure by crabs on the patterns of coastal forest
regeneration. The results of this study will be of practical management use in
coastal forest conservation efforts throughout the tropics. Researcher
collaborations with faculty and students of the Universidad Nacional Autonoma of
Costa Rica fosters an essential working relationship among native Costa Ricans
and the Cabo Blanco Absolute Reserve that is viewed as the model of conservation
by their Park Service.&lt;br/&gt;