* 0104800
* Flexible and Robust Coding of Images and Video
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Eve Riskin, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2005
* USD 447,503.00

Proposal # 0104800&lt;br/&gt;PI: Eve Riskin&lt;br/&gt;U of
Washington&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In the not-too-distant future, downloading
images and video to a handheld device will be as commonplace as viewing an image
on a Web page is today. To enable this, high quality, flexible, and robust image
and video compression algorithms will be required. Recently, Group Testing for
Wavelets (GTW), a new type of wavelet coder based on group testing was
developed. It offers competitive performance to the best compression coders
available today and with further development, GTW could outperform them
significantly.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research involves developing new
algorithms for robust and flexible coding of images and video.
Whereas&lt;br/&gt;GTW is used as a motivating example, the research is
applicable to many compression algorithms and in many scenarios. First, a set of
problems related to GTW will be explored. This includes applying GTW to wavelet
packet decompositions and reduced complexity transforms; extending it to video
and the new area of progressive geometry compression; and developing a theory
for its strong performance.&lt;br/&gt;Next, methods for applying forward error
correction to compressed data in a progressive manner will be investigated.
Finally, unequal frame expansions will be used to recover from packet loss. The
research will have practical use in many arenas including the Internet and
wireless communications and will be included&lt;br/&gt;in a new undergraduate
course on data compression, to be taught jointly by the two principal
investigators.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;