* 0104832
* Dissertation Research: Experimental Test of Ecological Speciation in a Freshwater Minnow (Cyprinidae: Lavinia).
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2003
* Giacomo Bernardi, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 05/31/2003
* USD 8,300.00

Bernardi 0104832

The investigators will determine the extent that ecological and genetic factors
play on the reproductive isolation between two closely related freshwater fish
species in California (Lavinia symmetricus and L. exilicauda). The two species
occur together in two separate drainages: Clear Lake and Monterey Bay rivers.
Levels of reproductive isolation between the two species differ in the two
drainages with extensive hybridization occurring in only one of the drainages.
The investigators will produce crosses between the two species in the laboratory
to measure performance of the hybrids against the pure crosses.

Processes that allow the formation of new species have been a central focus in
biology. Groups of individuals in a rapidly radiating species that have recently
become isolated can be analyzed to determine which factors are contributing to
reproductive isolation. Other research has shown that there are two types of
processes contributing to rapid radiations: ecological and genetic. Much of the
empirical research on radiations in closely related species has focused on
ecological factors. Recent work has revealed that genetic incompatibilities
between closely related species may be more prevalent than believed. Results
from this study will allow a greater understanding of the processes that promote
speciation and diversification.