* 0104151
* Problems in Surface Geometry and Topology
* MPS,DMS
* 06/15/2001,11/30/2005
* Howard Masur, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 11/30/2005
* USD 135,311.00

&lt;br/&gt;Problems in Surface Geometry and
Topology&lt;br/&gt;Abstract&lt;br/&gt;Howard Masur&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
principal investigator proposes to work on problems in the geometry
&lt;br/&gt;and topology of surfaces. The geometric problems consist of studying
the&lt;br/&gt; dynamics of flows on flat surfaces with cone angle singularities.
&lt;br/&gt;A particular example is the study of billiards in polygons with
angles that &lt;br/&gt;are rational multiples of pi. The particular aspect of
this study will be to&lt;br/&gt; attempt to find the asymptotic growth rate for
the number of periodic orbits.&lt;br/&gt; For some billiards such as the square,
the growth rate is known.&lt;br/&gt; Other more interesting examples are certain
right triangles.&lt;br/&gt; The principal investigator will study additional
examples such as the&lt;br/&gt;square with a slit or barrier. The idea is to
find asymptotic quadratic&lt;br/&gt;estimates. The topological problems concern
the mapping class group of a &lt;br/&gt;surface. This group is one of the main
objects of study in surface topology. &lt;br/&gt; One of the recent developments
in group theory is to study the large scale&lt;br/&gt;or asymptotic geometry of
a group. The principal investigator proposes to&lt;br/&gt;study the large scale
geometry of the mapping class group with a goal of&lt;br/&gt;showing that the
mapping class group is quasi-isometrically rigid. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;In the field of dynamical systems one studies the motion of objects.
&lt;br/&gt;The field had its origins in the study of the motion of
the&lt;br/&gt;planets. Billiards are another closely related example. There one
has a&lt;br/&gt;point mass that moves in straight lines so that when it
encounters&lt;br/&gt;the boundary of a region, it rebounds so that the angle of
reflection&lt;br/&gt;equals the angle of incidence. Billiards have been studied
for over 100&lt;br/&gt;years. In order to understand such a dynamical system
one&lt;br/&gt;needs to understand the long term behavior of the orbits. One
particular&lt;br/&gt;example of this long term behavior are the study of the
periodic&lt;br/&gt;orbits. These are the orbits that repeat themselves. The
study of&lt;br/&gt;periodic orbits for billiards in polygons in the plane is the
main subject&lt;br/&gt;of this proposal. &lt;br/&gt;