* 0104580
* Olivine Geochemistry and Stable Isotope Studies of the Giant Jinchuan Ni-Cu Sulfide Deposit, Western China: Investigation of Ore Genesis in a Magma Conduit
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Chusi Li, Indiana University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2004
* USD 186,327.00

Li&amp;Ripley&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0104580&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The formation of large
Ni-Cu sulfide deposits in mafic magmatic systems appears to require: 1)
attainment of sulfide saturation through country rock contamination, 2)
concentration of immiscible sulfide liquid in fluid dynamically favored areas
within magma conduits, and 3) enrichment of the metal content of the coalesced
sulfide by reaction with continued flow of magma through the conduit. The
Jinchuan deposit in north-central China is the largest conduit-related
occurrence in the world. Major reserves of Ni- and Cu-sulfides are located
within ultramafic rocks that intrude a Proterozoic metasedimentary sequence. To
date the deposit has not been investigated with respect to the potential role of
country rock contamination in ore genesis, nor have the physicochemical dynamics
of metal upgrading of sulfide by fresh magma been evaluated.&lt;br/&gt;We
propose a detailed study of olivine chemical variations and stable isotopic
distributions within the rock types present in the Jinchuan intrusion. Olivine
chemistry, in conjunction with whole rock major and trace element data, will be
used to determine if multiple magmas have been involved in building the Jinchuan
intrusion, and if so, to what extent they have interacted with sulfide to
produce enriched Ni and Cu contents. Sulfur and oxygen isotopic data will be
collected from country rocks and both mineralized and non-mineralized intrusive
rocks. These data will be used to evaluate the extent of country rock
assimilation recorded in the ore-bearing intrusive rocks, and to construct
mixing models that will be utilized in simulating the history of sulfide
saturation and concentration in the magmatic system. Findings from the proposed
research will not only improve our understanding of the formation of the
Jinchuan deposit and other deposits of similar type around the world, but will
also improve our knowledge of dynamic petrological processes in mafic magmatic
conduit systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;