* 0104007
* Geometric Variational Problems
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2004
* Jon Wolfson, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Alexandre Freire
* 06/30/2004
* USD 66,750.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract- DMS-0104007-Geometric Variational
Problems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The principal investigator proposes to continue
the study, joint with &lt;br/&gt;R. Schoen, of constrained
variational&lt;br/&gt;problems for lagrangian cycles. In its most basic form the
problem &lt;br/&gt;can be posed as follows: Consider a
symplectic&lt;br/&gt;manifold with a metric compatible with the symplectic form.
Fix a &lt;br/&gt;homology class that can be represented by a lagrangian cycle.
&lt;br/&gt;Find a lagrangian cycle that minimizes volume &lt;br/&gt;among all
lagrangian cycles representing this class and derive optimal regularity of this
cycle. &lt;br/&gt;In the case that the symplectic manifold is
Kaehler,&lt;br/&gt;with Kaehler-Einstein metric, sufficient regularity of the
minimizer &lt;br/&gt;implies that the minimizer is both lagrangian and minimal
(zero mean curvature). &lt;br/&gt;If the first Chern class is negative such
submanifolds could be unique, in a suitable sense,&lt;br/&gt;and then useful in
understanding the geometry of the ambient manifold. &lt;br/&gt;If the Kaehler
manifold is a Calabi-Yau manifold sufficient regularity implies &lt;br/&gt;that
the minimizer is a calibrated submanifold, a special lagrangian
submanifold.&lt;br/&gt;We propose to investigate the existence and regularity of
this and &lt;br/&gt;related varitional problems and to study the consequences of
these results on the&lt;br/&gt;geometry of Kaehler-Einstein
manifolds.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A consequence of the
proposal is an existence theorem for special &lt;br/&gt;lagrangian submanifolds
of a Calabi-Yau manifold.&lt;br/&gt;This result is an essential part of the
program proposed by &lt;br/&gt;Strominger-Yau-Zaslow for the geometric
construction of "mirror&lt;br/&gt;symmetry". Mirror symmetry is one of the most
interesting and &lt;br/&gt;important problems currently being studied in
mathematics and &lt;br/&gt;theoretical physics. At its core it proposes a
duality between a class of &lt;br/&gt;manifolds called Calabi-Yau manifolds.
This duality allows &lt;br/&gt;computations to be performed on one manifold that
yield a result for its "mirror". &lt;br/&gt;Thus computations that are otherwise
extremely difficult can be achieved.&lt;br/&gt;The realization of mirror
symmetry will effect such diverse subjects &lt;br/&gt;as algebraic geometry,
differential geometry, topology, partial &lt;br/&gt;differential equations and
string theory.&lt;br/&gt;The current interest in this subject helps bridge the
gap between &lt;br/&gt;physics and mathematics. In two-dimensions our proposal
has some &lt;br/&gt;close analogies to a well-known model problem&lt;br/&gt;in
non-linear elasticity. The regularity theory developed here will &lt;br/&gt;shed
light on the difficult regularity problems of that theory. &lt;br/&gt;Finally
this problem is the first attempt to make a systematic study &lt;br/&gt;of a
variational problem with a geometric constaint. &lt;br/&gt;This idea will have
other important applications in &lt;br/&gt;geometry and its
applications.&lt;br/&gt;