* 0104974
* Dissertation Research: Evolutionary Genetics of the Speciation Gene, Maternal Hybrid Rescue
* BIO,DEB
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2003
* H. Allen Orr, University of Rochester
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2003
* USD 9,966.00

Speciation - the splitting of one species into two - creates biodiversity. As
two interbreeding populations evolve mechanisms preventing the exchange of
genes, they become new species with independent evolutionary fates. Genetic
exchange between species is often limited by the sterility or inviability of
their hybrids. At least in animals, such hybrid problems are caused by genetic
incompatibilities: some genes from species A no longer function properly with
those of species B when brought together in hybrids. The work proposed here will
investigate the genes that cause hybrid inviability between species of the
fruitfly Drosophila. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Using the genetic and developmental
techniques available in these model organisms, the project will first identify
the DNA sequences of genes that miscommunicate in hybrids and, second,
characterize their lethal interaction. The experiments will focus on the role of
one candidate "speciation gene", maternal hybrid rescue. Once identified at the
molecular level, one can then ask how the sequences of such genes changed
between species, why their products fail to properly interact in hybrids, and
what evolutionary forces drove their divergence. Only by genetically dissecting
hybrid problems can biologists begin to understand the evolution of genetic
incompatibilities and thus the origin of new species. &lt;br/&gt;