* 0104055
* Variational Analysis in Problems of Optimization
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2007
* R. Tyrrell Rockafellar, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2007
* USD 230,377.00

Pang, Jong-Shi&lt;br/&gt;From: Terry Rockafellar
[rtr@math.washington.edu]&lt;br/&gt;Sent: Wednesday, June 13, 2001 3:59
PM&lt;br/&gt;To: jpang@nsf.gov&lt;br/&gt;Subject: proposal abstract&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;Jong-Shih, here's the abstract for my proposal "Variational Analysis
&lt;br/&gt;in Problems of Optimization". &lt;br/&gt; Terry&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt; ~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;This project will apply the latest advances in variational analysis
to &lt;br/&gt;a range of optimization problems and issues. Sensitivity and
metric &lt;br/&gt;regularity in parametric dependence will be studied. Second-
order &lt;br/&gt;optimality conditions will be devised for new purposes and from
&lt;br/&gt;nonstandard perspectives. Connections between cost-to-go functions
and &lt;br/&gt;feedback for certain kinds of optimal control will be explored
along &lt;br/&gt;with the specialization to a control framework of recently
generalized &lt;br/&gt;Euler-Lagrange equations and Hamiltonian equations. New
risk models and &lt;br/&gt;splitting algorithms will be developed in stochastic
programming, where &lt;br/&gt;decisions must be made optimally in advance of
full information. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;These efforts are needed because
problems of optimization, which are &lt;br/&gt;of great importance in many
applications from management to engineering, &lt;br/&gt;are not well covered by
standard mathematics of the past and have &lt;br/&gt;required new ways of
thinking. In such problems, centered on minimizing &lt;br/&gt;"cost" or
maximizing "efficiency", for instance, there usually are very &lt;br/&gt;many
side conditions that have to be satisfied, and moreover the number &lt;br/&gt;of
decision variables to be coped with can be enormous---in the thousands
&lt;br/&gt;or even millions. It is crucial to have a solid foundation for the
&lt;br/&gt;development of numerical methods for finding solutions and
understanding &lt;br/&gt;the effects that shifts in input data might have on
those solutions. &lt;br/&gt;The work to be performed will further the progress
in those directions. &lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;