* 0104573
* Ultrasonic Imaging: A New Tool for Early Detection of Breast Cancer
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2005
* Clifford Nolan, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Standard Grant
* Michael Steuerwalt
* 07/31/2005
* USD 61,000.00

Nolan 0104573 The investigator seeks to improve ultrasound imaging in order for
it to be a more effective tool in breast cancer diagnosis and treatment. He uses
modern methods of partial differential equations and microlocal analysis to
provide images of the breast that are artifact-free and of a higher resolution
than currently available. He models propagation and scattering of ultrasonic
waves using microlocal analysis and geometrical optics. In particular, the
approach uses the complete waveform of the ultrasound instead of just its phase.
Microlocal analysis provides a clear explanation of artifacts that appear in
acoustic images. More importantly, it provides a means of avoiding and removing
such artifacts. To help in obtaining clear images, the investigator looks for an
arrangement of transducers providing the strongest measurable scattered signal
at the surface of the breast. The optimal configuration is based on a power
method that starts with a non-zero arbitrary source and measures the resulting
scattered field (caused by a tumor for example) at the surface. He models the
scattering process with a linear scattering operator based on the wave equation.
The scattering operator maps sources to scattered wave fields, whereas the
adjoint scattering operator maps scattered wave fields to sources. By composing
the scattering operator with its adjoint, he uses the power method to find the
eigenfunction corresponding to the largest scattered signal. Novel in the
approach is the ability to couple the power method with geometrical optics. This
provides an analytical tool for computing the optimal sources that can then be
implemented computationally in a very efficient way for both modeling and
imaging the inversion. This work aims to provide a new method of imaging the
female breast for use in diagnosing and treating of breast cancer. The technique
is based on ultrasound waves, howver it uses much more information from these
waves than is currently used. In particular, the shape of the waves that bounce
off of a lesion or tumor in the breast is analyzed. The method is tailored to
avoid artifacts that can appear in current imaging techniques. In addition, the
method will be fast and feasible to implement. Because of the reliability and
clarity of the images, this new imaging technique should significantly cut down
on the number of unnecessary biopsies that are currently carried out in the
United States each year. Because of the speed of the method, it can help to
provide a quick diagnosis. The method also takes advantage of recently developed
three dimensional imaging technology. Ultrasound is a tried and safe method of
imaging; it involves no harmful radiation. The method is general enought that it
could concievably have spin-offs into other modes of imaging (X-Ray, MRI, etc.).
Finally, this new method of imaging should create opportunities for new and
established companies to manufacture devices that take advantage of it.