* 0104292
* Symmetry and Mechanics: Geometric Integration Techniques and Bifurcations of Relative Critical Points
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* Debra Lewis, University of California-Santa Cruz
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 07/31/2004
* USD 87,000.00

Mathematical Sciences: Symmetry and Mechanics: Geometric Integration Techniques
and Bifurcations of Relative Critical Points

DMS-0104292 Lewis

The project consists of three main components: geometric integration using Lie
group methods, numerical integration of conservative systems, and bifurcation
theory of relative critical points. The first component involves the design of
efficient, stable geometric integration schemes on Lie groups and homogeneous
manifolds. The primary goals are minimization of computational costs with
accurate capture of key features and facilitation of the adaptation of existing
numerical codes to geometric schemes. The second component addresses the role of
approximate or exact preservation of conserved quantities or structures in the
numerical integration of conservative systems. Comparisons of the symplectic,
energy, and momentum errors to overall algorithm performance, including accuracy
of capture of such key features of the underlying system as (relative)
equilibria and separatrices, will be carried out for a variety of algorithms,
including variational algorithms. The third component addresses the variational
characterization of relative equilibria, that is, steady motions, as critical
points of appropriate functionals. The notion of a relative critical point
unifies and generalizes the two most widely used characterizations; this
generalization will facilitate the extension of existing bifurcation and
stability results to a wide range of finite and infinite dimensional systems and
will provide insights into the geometric structure of sets of relative
equilibria.

Specific applications of geometric integration methods include the Landau--
Lifschitz--Ginzburg (LLG) equations for a micromagnetic field and various
mathematical models of muscular hydrostats. The LLG equations model systems such
as read/write heads on disk drives, nanocrystralline magnets, and
magnetohydrodynamic materials; efficient, accurate numerical algorithms are
needed to carry out simulations on the spatial and temporal scales relevant to
industrial applications. Muscular hydrostats are structural components of many
biological systems, including many kinds of worms, reptile and amphibian
tongues, and sea anemones; plausible mathematical models of these systems are
needed to test theories of the evolution of such systems. Conservative systems
arise throughout physics and mechanics, playing a crucial role in both
industrial and theoretical research. Numerical simulations that respect the
conservation laws of such systems have been shown to be crucial in several
fields, including astrophysics. The bifurcation analyses will be applied to
problems in fluid mechanics, elasticity, and stellar dynamics.