* 0104195
* Block Designs: Advances in Theory and Use
* MPS,DMS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* John Morgan, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 08/31/2005
* USD 172,500.00

A problem common to many disparate fields of scientific and industrial enquiry
is&lt;br/&gt;that of comparing a set of experimental conditions, or
`treatments', when faced with&lt;br/&gt;heterogeneity in the units of material
on which the experiment is to be performed. The&lt;br/&gt;technique of blocking
specifically addresses this problem. Typically using values of
some&lt;br/&gt;identifiable nuisance factor, the experimental units are
partitioned into homogeneous&lt;br/&gt;subsets called blocks. Inferences can
then be based on the more precise comparisons of&lt;br/&gt;measurements from the
same block. The design problem is to determine which treat-&lt;br/&gt;ments are
assigned to which units in which blocks, said assignment being driven
by&lt;br/&gt;the desire to maximize the quality of information that will
ultimately be produced.&lt;br/&gt;The problem becomes more complicated as more
nuisance factors, with various inter-&lt;br/&gt;relationships, are introduced or
identified. This project addresses the design problem&lt;br/&gt;for a variety of
commonly encountered experimental settings, with two broad goals:&lt;br/&gt;(i)
to extend the known theory for determining optimal designs for a wider range
of&lt;br/&gt;settings than is now known or available; and (ii) to produce a
comprehensive catalog&lt;br/&gt;of designs to be incorporated into a larger,
web-based resource that will include a vari-&lt;br/&gt;ety of downloadable
combinatorial designs useful for statisticians, mathematicians,
and&lt;br/&gt;other scientists in academia and industry. By collecting optimal
designs in a single,&lt;br/&gt;easily accessible resource, the use of good
designs can be increased and the practice of&lt;br/&gt;experimental science
consequently sharpened.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;When comparing v treatments, the
most commonly encountered situation across a&lt;br/&gt;range of scientific
endeavors is that of a single blocking variable partitioning bk
experi-&lt;br/&gt;mental units into b blocks of k units each. This project will
examine optimality problems&lt;br/&gt;for these simple block designs, and the
attendant combinatorial issues, augmenting the-&lt;br/&gt;ory by computation
where needed, to produce designs for a practical range of
parameter&lt;br/&gt;combinations (v; b; k), including settings where
equireplication is not possible. The most&lt;br/&gt;frequently used designs with
two blocking factors are row-column designs, in which two&lt;br/&gt;blocking
factors can be visualized as row and columns in a rectangular array, and
re-&lt;br/&gt;solvable designs, in which a second blocking factor partitions a
simple block design into&lt;br/&gt;subsets of blocks each consisting of a single
replicate. This project will also address&lt;br/&gt;problems in optimality and
construction of designs in both these classes, with special&lt;br/&gt;emphasis
on plans most demanded in practice: those with few replicates.