* 0104893
* Dissertation Research:  Phylogeny and Evolution of Subsocial Behavior in the New World Treehopper Subfamily Membracinae (Homoptera: Membracidae)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2003
* Bryan Danforth, Cornell Univ - State: AWDS MADE PRIOR MAY 2010
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 06/30/2003
* USD 9,383.00

0104893 Danforth and Lin Insects in the New World treehopper subfamily
Membracinae (5 tribes, 38 genera and about 447 species) show a range of social
behavior from (1) solitary individuals, to (2) nymphal or adult aggregations, to
(3) highly developed maternal care with parent/offspring communication via
substrate-borne vibrations. The behavioral variation in membracine treehoppers
provides an excellent opportunity to study the evolution of subsocial behavior
in insects. However, our current knowledge on the evolution of subsocial
behavior in this group is limited because of an incomplete picture of their
phylogenetic relationships. We don't know how many times maternal care has
evolved, whether maternal care gives rise to solitary behavior, or exactly how
complex forms of maternal care involving communication and signalling have
evolved. In order to more fully understand the historical patterns of social
evolution in membracine treehoppers, a phylogenetic study of this group will be
conducted using both morphological and molecular (DNA sequences from nuclear and
mitochondrial genes) data by graduate student Chung-Ping Lin under the guidance
of Dr. Bryan Danforth at Cornell University. New collections will be made from
South America to augment existing samples and museum holdings. The results of
phylogenetic analyses will provide a historical framework to reconstruct the
likely direction of behavioral character changes among membracine treehoppers.
This information will then be used to identify the origins of subsocial behavior
and to trace the development of subsocial behavior over evolutionary time. The
result of this study will contribute not only to our understanding of subsocial
behavior in this fascinating group of insects but to knowledge of evolution of
sociality in general.

