* 0104973
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Function of Multiple Signals in Avian Vocal Communication
* BIO,IOS
* 05/01/2001,04/30/2003
* Stephen Nowicki, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Michael D. Greenfield
* 04/30/2003
* USD 9,691.00

The function of multiple signals in avian vocal communication&lt;br/&gt;Stephen
Nowicki&lt;br/&gt;Martin D. Beebee&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The puzzling occurrence
of highly conspicuous traits in the males of many species of animals is thought
to be explained by the fact that these traits act as signals to potential mates,
indicating something about phenotypic or genotypic quality. This apparent
resolution, however, does not easily explain cases in which individuals exhibit
more than one conspicuous trait. For example, many songbirds use a combination
of bright coloration and complex vocal displays in courtship, or multiple kinds
of courtship vocalizations. If an individual trait can act as an indicator of
male quality, what is the added function, if any, of possessing two or more such
traits? The goal of this project is to study the function of multiple vocal
traits in the yellow warbler (Dendroica petechia), and test a hypothesis for how
different traits of an individual might function as signals. As with several
groups of North American and European songbirds, yellow warblers have two
distinct modes of singing: one relatively simple and one more complex. Results
from previous work suggest that these singing modes are specialized for
communicating different messages to males and females. This hypothesis will be
evaluated using a combination of field and laboratory studies to examine three
important aspects of signal function: how the singing modes are used by males,
what kinds of information the singing modes convey, and how males and females
respond to the different singing modes. &lt;br/&gt;