* 0104290
* QEIB:  Statistical Issues in Combining Data for Phylogenetic Analysis
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2005
* Laura Kubatko, University of New Mexico
* Standard Grant
* Grace Yang
* 06/30/2005
* USD 125,000.00

This research involves the development of methods for combining data sets from
different sources with the goal of obtaining robust estimates of phylogenetic
relationships. As an example, consider the case in which evolutionary
information in the form of DNA sequence data is available from several distinct
genes sampled throughout the genome. Phylogenetic trees estimated individually
from each of these genes will yield estimated gene trees, trees which illustrate
the evolutionary history of that particular gene. What is often of most interest
is the estimation of the species history, which may be different from the gene
history. Thus, the genetic information must be combined appropriately so that
species relationships can be estimated. This research will address three main
issues associated with this problem. The first is the study of currently
available tests for assessing combinability of the individual data sets, and the
improvement of these existing tests. The second component of this research
involves the development of new procedures for testing for similarity in
underlying evolutionary history in the datasets, and for development of methods
for testing which evolutionary mechanisms (i.e., hybridization, horizontal gene
transfer, etc.) might be responsible for differing underlying histories. These
newly developed tests are based on likelihood ratio statistics which compare the
likelihood of a tree-like structure estimated under the assumption of a
particular evolutionary force to an unrestricted likelihood. The final component
of this research is the development of appropriate methods for combining data
from different sources in order to estimate the species tree. This is achieved
by modeling the probability that a set of observed gene trees would have arisen
from a given species trees. The estimated species tree is then that tree which
maximizes this probability.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The inference of the
evolutionary history of a collection of organisms based on the information
contained in their DNA sequences is a problem of fundamental importance in
evolutionary biology. The abundance of DNA sequence data arising from genome
sequencing projects has led to significant challenges in the inference of these
phylogenetic relationships. Among these challenges is the inference of the
evolutionary history of a collection of species based on DNA sequence
information from several distinct genes sampled throughout the genome. This
research will address numerous aspects of this problem, including (1) the
assessment of existing procedures for combining data from different genes, and
the improvement of such procedures; (2) the development of methods for testing
for the cause of differences in the evolutionary histories of distinct genes;
and (3) the development of new procedures for combining DNA information from
distinct genes with the goal of inferring species relationships. This work has
applications in the understanding of much-debated species relationships, such as
the evolutionary relationships between placental mammals, marsupials, and
monotremes.