* 0104642
* Dissertation Research:  Systematics of Harveya Hook. (Orobanchaceae) and the Evolution of Photosynthetic Loci in the Holoparasitic Genera Harveya and Hyobanche L.
* NONE,NONE
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* Andrea Wolfe, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 07/31/2004
* USD 10,000.00

Harveya Hook. (Orobanchaceae) is a genus of parasitic plants native to South
Africa. Harveya species parasitize other plants by means of specialized root
organs called haustoria. Little is known regarding delimitations of species
within Harveya, relationships among species, or if Harveya species are specific
to particular host plants. Goals of this study include the examination of
morphological characters to determine species delimitations, the inference of
phylogenetic history from morphological characters and DNA sequences, and
determination of host specificity by excavation of haustoria. In parasitic
plants, genes encoding photosynthetic proteins are not functionally constrained.
These genes may bear function-reducing mutations. Because parasitic plants
obtain nutrients from a host plant rather than through photosynthesis, these
mutations are not detrimental to fitness. Therefore, these mutations may be
passed to offspring and become fixed in populations. Deterioration or deletion
of photosynthetic genes has been documented in parasitic plants of diverse
lineage. Another parasite, Hyobanche L., is the sister genus of Harveya.
Hyobanche bears mutations in the gene rbcL, a chloroplast gene encoding the
large subunit of Rubisco, a protein necessary for photosynthesis. These
mutations render rbcL non-functional in this genus. One might expect Harveya to
demonstrate similar function-ending mutations in this gene. However, in all
Harveya species examined thus far, rbcL encodes a functional protein. Two
hypotheses may be invoked to explain the absence of these mutations. (a) The
loss of Rubisco functionality has occurred via a different pathway in Harveya
than in Hyobanche. (b) Rubisco retains function in Harveya, in facultative
photosynthesis or an unknown, non-photosynthetic role. In this study, genes
encoding both the small subunit (rbcS) and large subunit (rbcL) will be
sequenced in Hyobanche and Harveya to compare functionality. Additionally, RNA
and protein products of these genes will be assayed to determine the
evolutionary pathway by which Rubisco functionality has been lost in these
genera or if Rubisco serves some non-photosynthetic function. The importance of
this study is several-fold. South Africa maintains the greatest floral diversity
of any temperate region of equal size. However, many species may become
endangered as population growth continues, and human habitations expand into
wild areas. Conservation efforts will rely on knowledge of the evolutionary
history and ecological needs (e.g. suitable plant hosts) of threatened
organisms. Secondly, the dichotomy of rbcL functionality in Hyobanche and
Harveya provides an ideal system for the study of evolution of photosynthetic
genes in non-photosynthetic plants. Furthermore, rbcL and rbcS have an
integrated function, but are coded in different genomes of the plant: rbcL in
the chloroplast genome and rbcS in the nucleus. Loss of function of one of these
genes may result in loss of function in the other. To date, no study has
examined if mutations occurring in one genome may be mirrored by mutations in
the other. Hyobanche and Harveya offer an excellent framework for investigating
this phenomenon.

