* 0104361
* Isospectral and isotonal metrics with different local geometries
* MPS,DMS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2004
* Zoltan Szabo, Research Foundation Of The City University Of New York (Lehman)
* Standard Grant
* Alexandre Freire
* 06/30/2004
* USD 100,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract for DMS - 0104361&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main part of the
project describes a new isospectral&lt;br/&gt;construction technique
(Anticommutator Technique), which provides&lt;br/&gt;the first isospectral pairs
of metrics on the most simple manifolds: on &lt;br/&gt;balls and spheres. The
most striking examples are constructed&lt;br/&gt;on suitable spheres, where one
of the members of an isospectral pair&lt;br/&gt;is a homogeneous metric, while
the other is locally inhomogeneous. &lt;br/&gt;This demonstrates the surprising
fact that no information about the &lt;br/&gt;isometries is encoded in the
spectrum of the Laplacian acting on functions. &lt;br/&gt;These investigations
also extend to the Laplacian spectrum of forms. &lt;br/&gt;Related questions are
also considered. One of them is construction of &lt;br/&gt;Brownian-motion-
equivalent spaces (Isothermal Metrics). &lt;br/&gt;This equivalence relation is
much stronger then the isospectrality property,&lt;br/&gt; yet it does not
determine the local geometry. The same statement is true &lt;br/&gt;regarding
the metrics with equivalent density functions (Isodasyc
Metrics).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The old argument between
Relativity and Quantum Physics is easily discovered &lt;br/&gt;in the depth of
these questions. In Relativity, the whole Physics is derived &lt;br/&gt;from a
curved space. Actually, Physics is identified with the complete Geometry
&lt;br/&gt;of this curved space. Einstein put his idea this way: "There is no
such thing as &lt;br/&gt;Physics. Everything is Geometry." Contrary to
Relativity, the Quantum Physics &lt;br/&gt;uses only particular aspects of
Geometry such as the spectra of several operators &lt;br/&gt;or the Brownian
Motion defined by a metric space. Einstein suggested, however, &lt;br/&gt;that
the Brownian Motion may determine the complete local geometry. &lt;br/&gt;This
reflects the extent of the confusion about the&lt;br/&gt;following question:
"How much Geometry is used by the Quantum Physics?"&lt;br/&gt;The proposed
investigations demonstrate, for the first time, how little&lt;br/&gt;information
about Geometry is used by Quantum Physics. For instance,&lt;br/&gt;Quantum
Physics completely ignores the isometries of the spaces, &lt;br/&gt;which
otherwise form the central piece of a theory developed in Geometry. &lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;