* 0104589
* Mars Quest Online
* EHR,DRL
* 09/01/2001,02/29/2008
* Paul Dusenbery, TERC Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Alphonse Desena
* 02/29/2008
* USD 917,228.00

"MarsQuest Online" is an exploration-based website designed to complement the
innovative MarsQuest traveling exhibit launched by the Space Science Institute
(SSI) in 1997. "MarsQuest Online" will enhance and extend the exhibit, which is
currently on a six-year, 18-city tour. TERC, working in collaboration with the
Space Science Institute and NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), will create
a virtual version of the exhibit using software such as Java, Quicktime VR and
JPL's sophisticated MarsNet Viewer system. Users will be immersed in an
integrated, interactive environment complete with the tools and resources to
carry out investigations and enhance inquiry-based learning. "MarsQuest" will
expand users' understanding of the history of Mars, scientific exploration, the
climate and related earth science concepts, while enabling them to follow the
exploration of various landers and orbiters, and access NASA scientists. A
diverse collection of Guided Inquiry experiences will foster the ability of
users to develop inquiry and analysis skills, while offering options for novice,
intermediate and advanced learners. Finally, a comprehensive evaluation plan
will examine how the website and exhibit compare in promoting the understanding
of science, broadening public interest in space exploration, and motivating
further learning. The site will be promoted for use by schools as a tool for
teaching earth science and space exploration. It is estimated that 300,000
people will visit "MarsQuest Online" annually.