* 0104521
* International Workshop on Earthquake Simulation in Geotechnical Engineering
* ENG,CMMI
* 04/01/2001,12/31/2002
* Xiangwu Zeng, Case Western Reserve University
* Standard Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 12/31/2002
* USD 75,229.00

Considerable progress has been made in recent years in earthquake simulation
techniques in geotechnical engineering through, for example, centrifuge
modeling, 1g shaking table experiments, and numerical and field simulations.
These latest developments significantly enhance the research capabilities in
geotechnical earthquake engineering, and generate enormous opportunities as well
as great challenges for this research community. These newly-available
capabilities significantly expand the types of research that can be conducted.
For example, the simulation of large field structures such as earth dams, in-
depth field investigations, and closer-to-real-life computer simulations become
feasible. At the same time, the significant investment in research facilities
combined with the limited funding resources available requires that future
research focus on making maximum use of these new capabilities. This workshop
will help to facilitate this by bringing together experts from around the world
to discuss the capabilities and limitations of the new facilities, to discuss
the research topics that can be conducted using these facilities, to develop
ideas of collaboration among groups of researchers, to find innovative and
effective ways of information dissemination, and to address the unique
challenges resulting from the implementation of the George E. Brown, Jr. Network
for Earthquake Engineering Simulation (NEES).

Approximately 30 US and international experts will meet in Cleveland, Ohio in
July 2001. In addition, a web discussion site will be setup before, and continue
after the workshop. It will be accessible not only to the workshop participants,
but to all interested researchers, thus allowing non-participants to join in and
contribute to the workshop discussions. The workshop proceedings will be posted
online for wide dissemination and accessibility.