* 0104948
* Dissertation Research: The Evolutionary Genetics of Sexual Dimorphism
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2003
* Timothy Mousseau, University of South Carolina at Columbia
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2003
* USD 8,200.00

One of the great mysteries of the natural world concerns why males and females
of the same species often differ in many morphological characters. Sexual size
dimorphism (SSD), or the difference in mean body size between the sexes, is of
particular interest since body size plays a central role in the fitness of an
individual. With the advent of new statistical tools and conceptual advances,
investigations into the evolution of SSD have moved from the traditional
temporally static, single pressure, single sex perspective, to the more robust
view of multiple selective forces interacting in both sexes across many
generations. However, to fully interpret the evolutionary implications of these
selective pressures, one must also know the underlying genetic architecture of
male and female body size. This is true since genetic architecture may alter or
constrain a dimorphic response to selection. Unfortunately, few studies have
expanded their investigation of SSD beyond the scope of the selective pressures
involved, creating a dearth of information regarding the evolutionary genetics
of dimorphism. The objectives set forth in this proposal will investigate the
underlying genetic structure of a sexually dimorphic trait that is known to be
under selection from multiple sources. This study will employ an empirical
quantitative genetic approach to generate for both sexes the variance covariance
matrices (G-matrices) for body size and two other important correlated traits
under selection. This will permit comparison between the sexes for differences
in genetic architecture and tests for significant correlations between the sexes
for homologous traits that may constrain dimorphic evolution. In addition, when
G-matrices are coupled with selection gradients that describe the direction and
intensity of selection, one can predict if genetic covariances will have a
significant effect on trait evolution, if this effect constrains or reinforces
trait evolution, and if dimorphism is still evolving. The results of this study
will be of general interest as they will likely have bearing on gender-based
differences for many other traits in many other systems.

