* 0104927
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Evolutionary History of Marsupial and Placental Mammals: A Study of Evolutionary Constraints in Mammalian Limbs
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2003
* John Flynn, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* William E. Zamer
* 05/31/2003
* USD 9,000.00

DISSERTATION RESEARCH: The Evolutionary History of Marsupial and Placental
Mammals: A Study of Evolutionary Constraints in Mammalian
Limbs&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Karen Sears and John Flynn
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Marsupials compose only six percent of living mammals and
are less physically diverse than placental mammals. Traditionally, it has been
assumed that low marsupial diversity is due their unique mode of reproduction
constraining their evolution. Immediately after their early birth, newborn
marsupials, using only their forelimbs, crawl a distance one hundred times their
body length to the teat where they attach and complete their development. The
primary goal of this study is to test the hypothesis that the obligate
commitment of the marsupial forelimb and shoulder girdle in propelling the
newborn to the teat has constrained its evolution. Constraints are defined as
factors that limit physical variation. Variation is the raw material of natural
selection, and therefore species or lineages with more variance can evolve new
physical forms more easily. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Constraints have long been
cited as important factors in evolutionary history but have not been adequately
tested. Aside from illustrating the role of constraints in the evolution of
mammalian limbs, an understanding of the role of a constraint in this system
will provide a base for understanding the role of constraints in other systems.
A three-tiered approach incorporating genetic, developmental physical and adult
physical data from living and extinct mammals will be used to test the
hypothetical constraint on marsupial forelimb development. Genetic data will
provide explanations for the observed differences in timing of developmental
events in marsupials and placentals. Changes in developmental timing are
important because they provide a mechanism for constraint. Physical data will be
used to examine patterns of variation within individuals, within species and
within marsupials and placentals. If marsupials are constrained relative to
placentals, they should show less physical variation during development,
especially before birth, and achieve less adult physical diversity. Combining
different types of data will allow unique insights into the process of evolution
and the role that constraints play in it. &lt;br/&gt;