* 0104976
* Dissertation Research:  Population Structure of the Late Stage Ectomycorrhizal Fungus, Russula brevipes
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2003
* Steven Miller, University of Wyoming
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2003
* USD 10,000.00

Miller

Relatively little research has been conducted on the historical and reproductive
factors that affect genetic characteristics of fungi that form mutualistic
associations with host trees. In an effort to elucidate the genetic structuring
of the mutualistic ectomycorrhizal fungus, Russula brevipes, studies utilizing
various molecular markers were designed to determine how historical and
geographical barriers (e.g., ice ages and the formation of mountains) affect
dispersal, genetic makeup and population differentiation. Collections of R.
brevipes from many locations in the Pacific Northwest and Rocky Mountain region
will be made to assess genetic differentiation.

Ectomycorrhizal fungi (EMF) form indispensable symbiotic relationships with tree
roots by providing water and nutrients, increasing seedling survivability, and
protecting against root pathogenic organisms. R. brevipes forms mutualistic
associations with valuable timber and recreation trees in the western U.S.
including lodgepole pine (Pinus contorta), Douglas fir (Pseudotsuga menziesii)
and Sitka spruce (Picea sitchensis). In the Rocky Mountains, lodgepole pine is
never replanted into massive clearcuts and regeneration is dependent on
processes of natural seedling establishment and survival mediated by EMF. It is
important to understand the population biology and genetic structure of EMF,
particularly since these fungi may affect survivability of their hosts by
mediating competition between species through interconnected networks below-
ground.