* 0104651
* SEEK:  Science and Engineering Experiences for Knowledge --  An ASCEND Project
* EDU,DRL
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Jean Andino, University of Florida
* Standard Grant
* Sylvia James
* 06/30/2005
* USD 303,765.00

This proposal seeks funding for a 3-year After School Centers For Exploration
and New Discovery (ASCEND) project for middle school students and their
families. The Science and Engineering Experiences for Knowledge (SEEK) project
will enroll 60 students during Year 1, 120 students during Year 2, and 180
students during Year 3. The students will engage in investigative projects that
explore the program theme, "Florida's Environment: Past, Present, and Future."
Activities include individual and group projects, field trips, family projects
at home, parental involvement, and project presentations at the museum for other
middle school students and museum visitors. Project activities in the first year
will engage the students in learning about Florida's geological and biological
history and global change environment through the study of insects. In the
second year students will be introduced to Florida's present environment through
the study of insects. During the third year, students will investigate factors
that will influcence Florida's future environment such as habitats, weather and
recycling. The students will meet two times a week (3:30 p.m. - 5:30p.m.) during
the school year. The project is a collaborative effort involving the University
of Florida's Florida Museum of Natural History and its College of Engineering,
The Alachua County School Board and the Gainesville Regional Utilities.