* 0104926
* Disorder and Dynamics in Silicate and Aluminosilicate Liquids, Glasses, and Crystals: Nuclear Magnetic Resonance Studies
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Jonathan Stebbins, Stanford University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 08/31/2005
* USD 424,602.00

Stebbins&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0104926&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This proposal is for
renewed funding for a program of research on atomic-scale structure and dynam-
ics of crystalline, glassy, and molten silicates and oxides of interest to the
Earth Sciences. This program emphasizes the application of techniques of Nuclear
Magnetic Resonance (NMR) to obtain fundamental data to help better understand
and predict processes of interest in geochemistry, petrology, and geophys-
ics.&lt;br/&gt; NMR is an element-specific experimental technique that can
provide quantitative data on local struc-ture around atoms such as H, Li, B, C,
O, F, Na, Mg, Al, Si, P, K (etc.) in crys-talline and amorphous sol-ids and
liquids, out to distances of second atom neighbors and some-times beyond. It is
also uniquely sen-sitive to atomic motions at relatively slow time scales
(seconds to nanoseconds), that are particularly in-teresting in processes such
as diffusion, phase transitions, and viscous flow. An unusual capability of this
research effort is in situ, high tempera-ture NMR to temperatures up to 1500
degrees C.&lt;br/&gt; Under previous funding, this project has produced a wide
range of results on coordination en-vironments of both cations and anions in
glasses and melts, how composition, temperature and pressure change the
structure, and how these changes affect thermodynamic and transport prop-erties.
In particular, quantifying the extent of structural disorder in liquids, and
relating this to configurational entropy and viscosity, have been emphasized;
related questions of disorder in crystalline silicates and aluminosilicates have
also been of high priority. During the current funding period, significant
progress has been made in determining the degree of Al-Si ordering in
aluminosilicate glasses and melts, including for the first time the use of 17O
"triple quantum" NMR ("3QMAS") to directly count the proportions of Al-O-Al
oxygens. A statistical thermodynamic model of the ordering, formulated
independently from 29Si NMR data, is well supported by these results and allows
prediction and comparison with data on properties. Other studies using this
method have made new contributions to our understanding of the complex process
of water dis-solution in aluminosilicate melts and to detect variations from
strict "aluminum avoidance" in zeolites. For the latter, new NMR methods
including "five quantum" techniques have shown dramatically en-hanced spectral
resolution. A newly installed 14.1 Tesla spectrometer (600 MHz 1H frequency),
and ac-cess to an 18.8 T instrument at Stanford (800 MHz), have allowed dramatic
improvements in resolution and sensitivity, which have been especially useful in
studying tiny (1 to 10 mg) high pressure samples to determine structural changes
in melts and in mantle minerals such as Al-bearing MgSiO3 perovskite.
&lt;br/&gt; Many of these projects will continue and be extended if this
proposal is funded. A particular emphasis will be on quantifying the effects of
temperature on melt structure, a critical and poorly understood issue that is at
the heart of understanding melt properties. A major tool in this effort will be
a recently con-structed fast quench apparatus that will allow sampling of the
melt structure from a wide range of "fictive temperatures", even for small,
expensive, isotopically enriched samples. Further in situ, high temperature NMR
will be used to characterize dynamics in aluminosilicate melts directly. Studies
will continue of disorder in crystalline aluminosilicates (including framework
and sheet silicate minerals), and its effects on the site-specific rates of
exchange among framework oxygens and H2O. Collaborations on high pres-sure
glasses will continue, to explore simultaneous changes in both cation and anion
coordination and dif-ferent P/T pathways for recording pressure effects on melt
structure; collaborations on site occupancy and order/disorder in upper and
lower mantle minerals will also be extended. New NMR methods and tech-nologies
will continue to be developed which should have a wide range of applicability
both within and outside of the Earth Sciences.&lt;br/&gt;