* 0104009
* Solving polynomial systems by polyhedral homotopies
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Tien-Yien Li, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2005
* USD 167,239.00

In the last two decades, the homotopy continuation method for&lt;br/&gt;solving
polynomial systems has been established and proved to&lt;br/&gt;be reliable and
efficient. Resulting from a previous project,&lt;br/&gt;supported by NSF Grant
DMS-9804846, a source code, HOM4PS, was&lt;br/&gt;produced. Excellent
performance of this code on a large collection&lt;br/&gt;of polynomial systems
in a wide variety of applications provides&lt;br/&gt;practical evidence that the
newly developed methods constitute a&lt;br/&gt;powerful general purpose solver.
Nontheless, there are still&lt;br/&gt;numerous models of polynomial systems in
applications which do&lt;br/&gt;not have a satisfactory line of attack. Those
models provide a rich&lt;br/&gt;source of interesting and challenging problems
with strong mathematical&lt;br/&gt;content. The essence of the proposed project
is the advance development&lt;br/&gt;of the solver based on the conduct of
further research&lt;br/&gt;to greatly enlarge the scope of its applications. The
ultimate goal&lt;br/&gt;is a more complete high-quality block-box solfware which
will&lt;br/&gt;incorporate the best state of the art to provide the general
scientific&lt;br/&gt;community a reliable source for solving polynomial systems
in practice.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The problem of solving polynomial systems has
been, and will continue&lt;br/&gt;to be, one of the most important subjects in
both pure and applied&lt;br/&gt;mathematics. The need to solve systems of
polynomial equations arises&lt;br/&gt;very frequently in various fields of
science and engineering, such as,&lt;br/&gt;formula construction, geometric
intersection, inverse kinematics,&lt;br/&gt;robotics, vision and the computation
of equilibrium states of chemical&lt;br/&gt;reaction equations, etc. In recent
years (1993-1999), a considerable&lt;br/&gt;research effort in Europe had been
directed to this problem in two&lt;br/&gt;consecutive major projects, PoSSo
(Polynomial System Solving) and FRISCO&lt;br/&gt;(FRamework for Integrated
Symbolic/numerical COmputation), supported by&lt;br/&gt;European Commission with
thirteen university teams in seven European&lt;br/&gt;countries involved. Those
research projects focused on the development&lt;br/&gt;of the already well-
established Groebner basis methods within the&lt;br/&gt;framework of computer
algebra. Their reliance on symbolic manipulation&lt;br/&gt;makes those methods
seem somewhat limited to relatively small problems.&lt;br/&gt;In contrast, the
approch by the homotopy continuation method in this&lt;br/&gt;project is
numerical and exhibits much powerful application results.