* 0105024
* Dissertation Research:  Evolutionary History of Reproductive Systems in Closely Related Taxa of the Lichen-forming Genus Porpidia (Ascomycota)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* Gregory Mueller, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2003
* USD 10,000.00

0105024&lt;br/&gt;Mueller&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The overall objectives of this
research project are to clarify relationships within the genus Porpidia (lichen-
forming Ascomycota), and to analyze the distribution and interdependence of
transitions between reproductive modes within and among its species. The genus
was chosen, due to its accumulation of closely related taxa that show
contrasting reproductive modes. The P. flavocoerulescens (sexual)/P. melinodes
(asexual) "species pair" was selected for detailed population-level analyses.
Hypothetical patterns of changes between the two modes of reproduction will be
tested using a phylogenetic approach. The underlying population structure and
history within the "species pair" will be studied using an integrated
phylogeographic and genealogical analysis.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Today the
significance of sexual and asexual reproductive modes and their continued
coexistence are still unsolved, despite the in-depth theoretical attention the
issue has received. This situation is in part due to the scarcity and disparate
nature of available empirical data, which do not allow stringent tests of
proposed hypotheses. Model systems such as Porpidia that include closely related
species with different modes of reproduction ranging from sexual to asexual
provide important means to gain insight into the history and consequences of
different levels of recombination. So far, investigations have concentrated
almost exclusively on either the phylogenetic or population-genetic aspects of
the problem. The present study will be the first in lichenized ascomycetes to
integrate both phylogenetic and population-genetic approaches. It will not only
infer patterns of evolutionary history, but also provide insight into the
underlying population processes and historical events shaping these
patterns.&lt;br/&gt;