* 0105009
* Dissertation Research: The Importance of the Egg Bank to the Genetics and Demography of a Resident Zooplankton Population
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2003
* Robert Megard, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2003
* USD 3,174.00

An intriguing reproductive feature of Daphnia and other Cladocera in lake
plankton is that they produce dormant eggs that can hatch after many years in
lake sediments. Dormant Daphnia eggs in lake sediment are a zoological analog to
the "seed banks" of terrestrial plants in soils. Dormant eggs in surface
sediment are a reservoir of genetic diversity for active populations, and older
eggs in deeper sediments are a record of genetic structure in past populations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project will analyze the genetic composition of the
Daphnia egg bank in sediments from a Minnesota lake to evaluate whether the
population has evolved in response to natural selection imposed by predation by
rainbow trout that have been stocked annually for the past 40 years. It will 1)
compare the genetic composition of the egg bank at times in the past with that
of the active resident population and 2) estimate the effects of hatching of
dormant eggs in surface sediment on the demography of the active population. A
novel feature is that for the past decade this lake has been monitored the
genetics and demography of active zooplankton populations, permitting evaluation
of the linkages between active populations and the pool of dormant eggs. The
goal is to link short-term variations of genetic diversity to long-term
evolutionary dynamics. &lt;br/&gt;