* 0105279
* A Numerical Investigation of Convection Initiation by Instabilities along Outflow Boundaries
* GEO,AGS
* 06/15/2001,06/30/2004
* Bruce Lee, University of Northern Colorado
* Standard Grant
* Stephan P. Nelson
* 06/30/2004
* USD 279,016.00

Three-dimensional aspects of storm outflow play an important role in the
initiation of convective storms. In many forecast scenarios, the primary
question is not whether deep convection will develop along a given boundary but
where and when along this boundary will storms be favored. Preliminary and
related modeling studies by the investigators as well as recent observations
suggest a link between anomalies/instabilities along outflows and other
convergence boundaries and convection initiation. A three-dimensional convective
cloud model will be employed to improve understanding of the processes that
prompt deep convection initiation at specific locations along outflow and other
convergence boundaries. As part of this study, the detailed three-dimensional
structure of outflow boundaries and related moist convective forcing will be
investigated in environments favoring specific instabilities along the outflow
leading edge. Observations will be used where possible to validate the results
from the numerical simulations. The underlying objective of the project is to
improve the prediction of initial storm location by applying the knowledge
obtained from this research. Specific primary objectives of the project
include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. Investigating the role misocyclone circulations
along outflow boundaries with marked horizontal shear (i.e., a vertical vortex
sheet) play in moist convection initiation;&lt;br/&gt;2. Examining the moist
convective forcing and basic structure and morphology of lobe and cleft
instability along outflow boundaries. This second objective will include a
comprehensive examination of the fine-scale three-dimensional structure of
outflow boundaries in environments without marked leading edge horizontal shear
(in contrast to item 1).&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;These objectives involve critical
elements for furthering our understanding of convection initiation along outflow
boundaries. Further, these objectives are consistent with a key goal of the U.S.
Weather Research Program involving the refinement of precipitation forecasts
with improved knowledge of boundary layer processes.&lt;br/&gt;