* 0105500
* Ion Probe Studies of Mantle-Melting Run Products
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,02/28/2003
* A. Dana Johnston, University of Oregon Eugene
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 02/28/2003
* USD 63,441.00

Johnston&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0105500&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests funds
to support an ion probe study of existing 10 kbar mantle-melting run products
which the P.I. proposes to pursue while at Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution
during his sabbatical in Fall, 2001. These run products represent 5+ years of
NSF-funded work by the P.I. and two recent Ph.D. graduates. Ten peridotitic
starting materials, each constructed by recombining hand-picked and acid-washed
mineral separates in differing modes, were investigated. Five of these utilized
minerals from a fertile lherzolite xenolith from Kilbourne Hole while the other
five utilized minerals from a compositionally intermediate lherzolite sample
from Mt. Noorat, S.E. Australia. In all, 54 glass- and olivine-bearing run
products are available, 36 with cpx, 41 with opx, and 47 with spinel. Calculated
melt fractions range from 1-48 wt. %; 22 contain less than 5 wt%
melt.&lt;br/&gt;All experiments employed a variation of the diamond aggregate
technique (e.g., Hirose and Kushiro, 1993; Baker and Stolper, 1994) in which a
layer of 70-100 micron diameter vitreous carbon spheres was substituted in lieu
of powdered diamond, to provide a melt sink in which some melt could be isolated
from the residual crystals, thereby preventing its quench modification upon
termination of the experiments. Major element mineral and glass data for all
starting materials vary in a systematic and sensible manner with increasing
temperature and this, combined with run durations of 2-10 days, supports a close
approach to equilibrium in the experiments.&lt;br/&gt;The primary goals of the
proposed work will be to measure the distribution coefficients between melt and
cpx and opx for REE, Ti, V, Cr, Sr, Y, and Sr (Be, B, Rb, Nb, and Ba will also
be attempted but will probably be too low in the pyroxenes), and to analyze the
water contents of these nominally anhydrous run products. To my knowledge, these
will be the first such data germane to mantle melting derived from experiments
on peridotitic, as opposed to basaltic, bulk compositions. Earlier work in
basaltic systems has revealed complex compositional dependencies of
pyroxene/melt Ds demonstrating that the use of single-valued Ds in modeling
studies is inappropriate. Our major element data greatly expand the composition
space covered by experiment and will allow extension and better definition of
these dependencies, thus improving predictive models. We also have 17 cpx-
bearing run products with less than 5% melt and some of these melts have the
elevated Na2O and SiO2 contents that Baker et. al. (1995) first noted
characterize very near-solidus mantle melts. Given the likely importance of
fractional melting in the mid-ocean ridge environment, determination of the
partitioning behavior of key trace elements between these "exotic" melts and
mantle pyroxenes will be critical&lt;br/&gt;