* 0105269
* Two-Phase Model of Damage, Shear Localization and Plate Boundary Formation
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2001,12/31/2005
* David Bercovici, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2005
* USD 315,360.00

Bercovici, David&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0105269 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator
proposes to study the process of lithospheric shear localization (focussing of
deformation in solid materials due to nonlinear weakening mechanisms) and plate
boundary formation through his newly developed two-phase damage theory. The
theory states that a damaged material (i.e., with microcracks and voids) is, in
its simplest form, a two phase material (a matrix phase representing solid host,
and a fluid phase representing void-filling material such as water or air). It
also states that the energy going into making microcracks is the surface energy
of the crack wall, which in the two phase model is the surface energy of the
interface between phases. Preliminary results show sharp localized weak zones
under intense shear, and distributed damage with extreme shear (suggestive of
processes such as crack-branching instabilities). The theory, however, is still
in a very basic form and has only been tested for simple one-dimensional
geometries. Thus, the proposed project entails further development and testing
to 1) apply it to more mantle/lithosphere-relevant geometries and conditions;
and 2) include further pertinent physics. The model will be applied to cases of
uniaxial compression; compressive folding and tensile necking; gravity-driven
flows (as in slope and continent stability); source-sink driven flows (to
examine the excitation of toroidal motion from purely poloidal flow); and
convectively driven motion. The new physics to be studied and incorporated
includes healing and annealing processes; inter-phase reactions (e.g.,
hydration); anisotropy (to account for pore/microcrack alignment);
thermomechanical effects (e.g., fluid thermal expansion which affects pore
pressure, thermoviscous behavior of matrix material, and temperature sensitivity
of interface surface tension); and partitioning of deformational work between
irreversible dissipative heating and semi-reversible storage as interface
surface energy. This project will further our understanding of the fundamental
processes of lithospheric and other shear localization mechanisms, as well as
the origin of tectonic plates and plate boundaries.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;