* 0105066
* Dissertation Research: Phylogeography of Salamanders of the Plethodon Jordani Complex in the Southern Appalachian Mountains
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2003
* Allan Larson, Washington University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 06/30/2003
* USD 10,550.00

Project Description

The Plethodon jordani complex is an assemblage of seven high-elevation mountain
species that show little morphological differentiation, but contain high levels
of genetic differentiation according to surveys of protein variation. Cycles of
temperature change during the most recent ice ages are predicted to have caused
repeated episodes of population isolation and contact as salamanders tracked
their favorable environments. These contrasting episodes may have caused genetic
ivergence when isolated and genetic mixing while in contact. In many cases it is
unclear how the interplay of these forces has affected species formation in this
species complex. Objectives of this research are to utilize mitochondrial DNA
sequences in tandem with the existing protein variation data to test hypotheses
of genetic differentiation and hybrid formation among fragmented populations in
the P. jordani complex through phylogenetic analyses.

Project Significance

Few phylogeographic studies have sufficient sampling to detect on a fine
geographic scale the patterns of genetic fragmentation and secondary contact
among natural populations. This study seeks to provide a detailed and fine-scale
phylogeographic test of species hypotheses that were generated from protein
variation. The relatively limited distribution of the Plethodon jordani complex
allows extensive sampling across its distribution and, therefore, near complete
characterization of genetic diversity for a mitochondrial gene. The large sample
sizes and mitochondrial DNA sequences allow us to distinguish ongoing dynamic
gene exchange among populations versus historically discontinuous patterns of
gene exchange. Furthermore, the existence of extensive surveys of protein
variation provides an ideal situation for examining combined data sources for
quantifying evolutionary divergence among populations and species formation.



