* 0105115
* Dissertation Research: Phylogenetic Relationships, Biogeography, and Phylogeography of Plethodontid Salamanders of the Genera Pseudotriton, Gyrinophilus, and Stereochilus
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* Paul Chippindale, University of Texas at Arlington
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 07/31/2003
* USD 9,965.00

The objectives of this research are to investigate relationships of red, mud,
spring, and many-lined salamanders (Pseudotriton, Gyrinophilus, and
Stereochilus), evaluate the factors that have determined their geographic
distributions, and assess species boundaries in the group. Specimens from
throughout the ranges of these species will be examined using both molecular and
morphological data. DNA markers will also be developed that will allow reliable
identification of larvae of the red and mud salamanders (Pseudotriton); these
are important components of many aquatic systems but are extremely difficult to
distinguish based on morphology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Plethodontid salamanders
are model organisms for a wide variety of ecological and behavioral studies, but
very little is known about phylogenetic relationships and species boundaries
within and among the genera Pseudotriton, Gyrinophilus and Stereochilus.
Preliminary mitochondrial DNA sequence data suggest greater species diversity
than previously thought. Nuclear sequences will also be examined to test
phylogenetic hypotheses based on the mitochondrial data. Pseudotriton ruber
exhibits genetic homogeneity throughout the Appalachians but considerable
diversity in the lowlands, suggesting a higher degree of gene flow in highland
populations of this species than that observed for any other plethodontids. This
study will allow tests of hypotheses regarding high- versus low-elevation
centers of diversification in plethodontids, and has broader implications for
understanding of historical biogeography, patterns of biodiversity, and
conservation in eastern North America. This work will also result in a major
taxonomic revision of the Pseudotriton/ Gyrinophilus/ &lt;br/&gt;