* 0105081
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: An Ecophysiological Approach to Understanding Macroalgal Nitrate Metabolism and Photosynthesis
* BIO,IOS
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2004
* Timothy Sherman, University of South Alabama
* Standard Grant
* William E. Winner
* 05/31/2004
* USD 10,000.00

DISSERTATION RESEARCH: An Ecophysiological Approach to Understanding Nitrate
Metabolism and Photosynthesis&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Timothy Sherman and Julien
Lartigue&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;All plants and especially aquatic plants are
subject to temporal variation in the availability of nutrients and light. As a
consequence, many plants appear to have evolved a capacity to regulate their
metabolism in response to these fluctuations. How plants tune their
photosynthetic and nutrient assimilation pathways to the ambient conditions and
integrate these two fundamental processes is the focus of this research. Three
cosmopolitan genera of macroalgae - Enteromorpha (Chlorophyta), Gracilaria
(Rhodophyta), and Gelidium (Rhodophyta) - will serve as the plant models for
this work. The goals of this research are 1) to understand how non-synchronous
fluctuations in light and nitrate availability influence nitrate metabolism and
2) to develop a model for predicting rates of nitrate reduction in the field.
The fate of nitrate, from uptake to assimilation, will be tracked using the
stable isotope, N15, while pulse amplitude modulated (PAM) fluorometry will
allow for repeated, non-invasive sampling of photosynthetic pathways. This
integrative approach will lead to a linking of the physiology of nitrate
metabolism and photosynthesis in the context of a plant's physical and chemical
surroundings. The result will be a more complete picture of macroalgal
physiology at the level of the whole organism. This work also seeks to integrate
research with undergraduate education by including aspects of this research in a
marine botany course.&lt;br/&gt;