* 0105073
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH:  Female Influences on Sperm Storage and Use in Two Species of Tephritid Flies with Divergent Mating Systems
* BIO,IOS
* 04/01/2001,03/31/2002
* William Rowland, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* stephen vessey
* 03/31/2002
* USD 0.00

DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Female influences on sperm storage and use in two species
of tephritid flies with divergent mating systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Dr.
William J. Rowland&lt;br/&gt;Ann. H. Fritz&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;'Female
choice' is a form of sexual selection well documented at the level of
precopulatory choice and helps to explain many male traits (e.g. peacock
feathers). After or during copulation, however, females may differentially
influence the fate of ejaculate from two or more males to affect paternity
outcomes. This phenomenon, referred to as 'cryptic female choice' (CFC), is
currently under intense investigation because 1) it adds a new dimension to the
evolutionary conflict between the sexes, and 2) it changes our views on the
degree to which females influence male reproductive success. &lt;br/&gt;This
study examines the relationship between two species of tephritid flies with
divergent mating systems and the potential for female influence on sperm use and
storage. One species mates infrequently and has a complex courtship behavior,
whereas the other species mates frequently and has minimal courtship behavior.
CFC is predicted to be more important in species that exhibit multiple matings
with little pre-copulatory choice. This study uses a multi-pronged approach to
estimate the presence and degree of female influence on reproductive outcomes by
examining sperm storage, mating behavior, neuromuscular control, and paternity
outcomes in relation to male characters.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;