* 0105256
* Topological Methods in Representation Theory and Automorphic Forms
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2008
* Kari Vilonen, Northwestern University
* Continuing Grant
* Joanna Kania-Bartoszynska
* 07/31/2008
* USD 330,595.00

DMS-0105256&lt;br/&gt;Kari Vilonen&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The goal of the the work
of the principal investigator &lt;br/&gt;is to develop geometric techniques for
applications in &lt;br/&gt;representation theory and the geometric Langlands
program. &lt;br/&gt;From this point of view the basic geometric problem is to
&lt;br/&gt;understand perverse sheaves from the microlocal point of
&lt;br/&gt;view. A sufficiently deep understanding of microlocal
&lt;br/&gt;perverse sheaves on flag manifolds should lead to interesting
invariants of irreducible representations of reductive &lt;br/&gt;Lie groups
and, hopefully, in the end, to an understanding &lt;br/&gt;of unipotent
representations. Similar techniques are also &lt;br/&gt;being applied to modular
representation theory. The goal of &lt;br/&gt;the last project is to gain
insight in the geometric Langlands conjecture in its various forms. In addition
to microlocal &lt;br/&gt;techniques the point of view of Whittaker models is
used.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The fundamental theme of the project is the interplay
&lt;br/&gt;between geometry and representation theory. The idea of
&lt;br/&gt;reducing the understanding of various geometries to their
&lt;br/&gt;groups of symmetries goes back to Felix Klein at the end
&lt;br/&gt;of the nineteenth century. From this point of view the
&lt;br/&gt;basic objects, the "atoms" of the theory, are the
&lt;br/&gt;irreducible representations of the group of symmetries &lt;br/&gt;of
a given geometry. It turns out that these atoms arise &lt;br/&gt;from a
particular geometric situation and hence we can &lt;br/&gt;apply geometric
methods to analyze the properties of the &lt;br/&gt;irreducible representations.
This is the goal of the &lt;br/&gt;first part of the the proposal. The second
part of the &lt;br/&gt;project deals with the deep conjectures of Langlands.
&lt;br/&gt;Here the geometry in question arises from an arithmetic
&lt;br/&gt;situation and this brings number theory in the mixture of
&lt;br/&gt;geometry and representation theory.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;