* 0105837
* Alteration or Mantle Origin of Radiogenic Osmium in Pyroxenites and Peridotites From Jurassic Oceanic Crust (Totalp Massif, Swiss Alps)?
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2002
* Harry Becker, University of Maryland, College Park
* Standard Grant
* Glen S. Mattioli
* 07/31/2002
* USD 54,017.00

EAR-0105837&lt;br/&gt;Becker&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A precise estimate of the
osmium isotopic composition of the convecting upper mantle is one of the
prerequisites to obtain constraints on the likely proportion of recycled oceanic
crust in this reservoir as well as in the bulk mantle. Previous Re-Os work on
mid-ocean-ridge basalts and abyssal peridotites, materials commonly used to
constrain the composition of the convecting upper mantle, encountered various
problems. In some instances, it has been suspected that 187Os/188Os of both rock
types may have been increased by contamination with seawater, yielding
chondritic to suprachondritic 187Os/188Os for bulk rocks. Re-Os data on
peridotite whole rocks from a Jurassic oceanic peridotite massif (Totalp
ultramafic massif, Swiss Alps) range between sub- and suprachondritic, similar
to abyssal peridotites. This massif contains concordant pyroxenitic layers that
show subchondritic to highly radiogenic initial 187Os/188Os at 160 Ma, the age
of the overlying pelagic sediments. It has been suggested that pyroxenites may
be a minor component in the convecting upper mantle. This pilot study will
attempt to confirm the results on whole rocks by obtaining Re-Os data on mineral
separates from pyroxenites and peridotites that show suprachondritic
187Os/188Os. In the case of the pyroxenites, consistent internal mineral
isochrones should confirm the validity of the highly radiogenic initial
187Os/188Os, whereas for the radiogenic peridotites, initial 187Os/188Os for
whole rocks should coincide with initial 187Os/188Os of individual phases.
Jurassic Re-Os ages for the pyroxenites would support the notion that crystal
precipitation and melting occurred at about this time, and that the pyroxenites
and their radiogenic Os were derived from the convecting upper
mantle.&lt;br/&gt;