* 0105201
* Dissertations Initiative for the Advancement of Climate Change Research (DISCCRS)
* GEO,EAR
* 01/01/2002,12/31/2004
* C. Susan Weiler, Whitman College
* Continuing Grant
* Michael A. Mayhew
* 12/31/2004
* USD 259,462.00

The DISsertations initiative for the advancement of Climate Change ReSearch
(DISCCRS) program is an interdisciplinary, cooperative effort involving several
professional societies including the American Geophysical Union (AGU), American
Meteorological Society (AMS), and Ecological Society of America (ESA). Targeting
recent Ph.D. recipients from across the spectrum of disciplines involved in
climate change research, the program will quantify and characterize recent Ph.D.
recipients interested in climate change to assess human potential and identify
needs; consolidate and disseminate Ph.D. dissertation abstracts to highlight
individual capabilities; establish electronic distribution lists to promote
international, interdisciplinary communication; and organize an international
"capstone" symposium for recent graduates to foster interdisciplinary
understanding and interactions across disciplines. The program is structured to
foster interdisciplinary understanding and accelerate research and insights in
the vitally important and time-sensitive area of climate change and its impacts.
It will foster international as well as inter-institutional networks, and favor
participants from both developing and developed countries. Demographic data will
facilitate the characterization and tracking of human resources across the
climate-change research community. Tracking recent graduates through their first
few years of professional development should tell us much about career
progression and satisfaction during these early and most critical years of
professional development. The on-line Dissertation Registry provides a
comprehensive yet concise summary of new research for scientists, policy makers,
and agency representatives and facilitate integration of this new generation of
researchers into the broader community. Electronic distribution lists provide a
mechanism to disseminate information and foster communication across
disciplinary and international boundaries. The symposium will bring together
individuals whose work transcends traditional boundaries and enable them to
enhance understanding and perspectives and establish collegial, long-term
associations to advance the field in new ways. In addition to presenting their
research, participants would discuss emerging science and policy topics.
Perspectives and recommendations will be published.