* 0105389
* Symplectic maps to P2, symplectic Lefschetz pencils and new symplectic invariants - a conference proposal
* MPS,DMS
* 03/01/2001,02/28/2002
* Ronald Stern, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Benjamin M. Mann
* 02/28/2002
* USD 12,900.00

DMS-0105389&lt;br/&gt;Ronald J. Stern&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This award provides
partial support for graduate students, &lt;br/&gt;postdoctoral researchers,
junior faculty, and principal speakers to &lt;br/&gt;attend the "Symplectic
Geometry and Lefschetz pencils" conference to &lt;br/&gt;be held April 12-16,
2001 on the campus of the University of &lt;br/&gt;California at Irvine. This
conference will bring together researchers &lt;br/&gt;to discuss and present new
advances in the study of symplectic &lt;br/&gt;Lefschetz theory and symplectic
4-manifolds . The discovery of &lt;br/&gt;Donaldson that every symplectic
4-manifold supports a symplectic &lt;br/&gt;Lefschetz pencil and the discovery
of Auroux and Katzarkov that &lt;br/&gt;every symplectic 4-manifold is a finite
ramified covering of the &lt;br/&gt;complex projective plane presents the
possibility to classify &lt;br/&gt;four-dimensional symplectic manifolds using
mapping class group &lt;br/&gt;data and methods from algebraic geometry. This
conference will &lt;br/&gt;provide an opportunity to summarize, centralize and
disseminate &lt;br/&gt;results in this new direction of mathematical research
and will &lt;br/&gt;provide the opportunity for new PHD's and graduate students
in &lt;br/&gt;algebraic and differential geometry/topology and theoretical
physics &lt;br/&gt;to learn from the leaders of this emerging field. Specific
&lt;br/&gt;information will be available at
http://www.math.uci.edu/sub6.html&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;