* 0105405
* Criticality in Regional Seismicity:  How Do We Test It and What Does It Mean?
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Charles Sammis, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Kaye Shedlock
* 08/31/2003
* USD 52,923.00

Abstract for proposal EAR0105405 (PH # 43x)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Criticality in Regional Seismicity: How Do We Test For It and What Does It
Mean?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI's: C. Sammis and H. Saleur, University of Southern
California&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;There is mounting observational evidence that
large earthquakes are followed by tens of years of regional quiescence of
intermediate-size events, and preceded by a comparable time period of
accelerating seismic release. This acceleration (due mostly to an increase in
intermediate-size events) can be fit to a power law of the time-to-failure
equation, which offers the possibility of predicting large earthquakes on an
intermediate-term basis, of perhaps a few years. The radius R of the optimally
accelerating region scales with magnitude as log R ~ 1/2 M, which is equivalent
to R being proportional to fault length L. This phenomenology has been
interpreted as signifying the approach of a region to, and retreat from, a
critical state. Power law scaling and growth of the correlation length of the
stress field leading to increasingly larger events are expected behavior when
approaching a critical point. We plan to devise and implement quantitative
observational tests of this analogy between regional seismicity and critical
phenomena. This does not require having a detailed understanding of why
earthquakes should be critical phenomena. Criticality, like self-organized
criticality, leads to universal features like power laws and scaling relations,
that are independent of the mechanisms involved. To develop the tests, we will
explore the evolution of the spatial, temporal, and magnitude distributions of
seismicity that are predicted by critical point models. We shall be especially
interested in the behavior of the smaller events, which have not, as yet, been
used to help monitor the approach to criticality.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;