* 0105498
* Competitive Analysis of Online Algorithms for Computer Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Sandra Irani, University of California-Irvine
* Standard Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 08/31/2005
* USD 164,041.00

&lt;br/&gt;Project Title: Competitive Analysis of Online Algorithms for Computer
&lt;br/&gt;Systems&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on algorithms that
work&lt;br/&gt;with limited information. Each topic is motivated by an
application&lt;br/&gt;in on-line resource allocation in computer systems and is
studied&lt;br/&gt;using theoretical analysis as well as empirical
evaluation.&lt;br/&gt;The first topic is focuses on&lt;br/&gt;designing
protocols for power management.&lt;br/&gt;The second topic of this research
addresses problems&lt;br/&gt;that arise in scheduling and load balancing for
multimedia servers.&lt;br/&gt;The third topic focuses on the problem of
balancing the use of&lt;br/&gt;bandwidth and storage in caching continuous
multi-media objects&lt;br/&gt;for Web proxy
servers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For the power management topic, the
question addressed is when to move&lt;br/&gt;an idle device to a lower power
consumption state so as to&lt;br/&gt;conserve power usage while minimizing the
latency experienced by the&lt;br/&gt;user. The investigator expands upon
previous work on power management by&lt;br/&gt;introducing the notion of latency
and by studying systems with multiple&lt;br/&gt;levels of power usage. The work
on multimedia scheduling and load&lt;br/&gt;balancing focuses on two problems.
The first is scheduling transmission&lt;br/&gt;of data that must be viewed
continuously when clients have large&lt;br/&gt;buffers that can store data
transmitted ahead of time.&lt;br/&gt;The second problem is to perform load
balancing in assigning&lt;br/&gt;tasks to servers when there are multiple
resource requirements&lt;br/&gt;that need to be balanced. For the topic of
caching continuous&lt;br/&gt;multi-media objects for Web proxy servers, the
challenge&lt;br/&gt;is that continuous data must be transmitted to the client in
a&lt;br/&gt;continuous sequential stream. To support the real time
requirements&lt;br/&gt;of streaming, web caches need to reserve bandwidth as
well as space&lt;br/&gt;for each request for a continuous data
object.&lt;br/&gt;This research investigates algorithms for balancing
these&lt;br/&gt;two resources.