* 0105543
* A Long-Term Paleoecological Record of Coral Reef Communities
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2001,01/31/2006
* John Pandolfi, Smithsonian Institution
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 01/31/2006
* USD 191,773.00

ABSTRACT

A Long-Term Paleoecological Record of Coral Reef Communities

John M. Pandolfi Ear- 0105543

Reef coral communities living during the past 500 ka (thousand years) show
remarkable persistence in taxonomic composition and diversity during multiple
episodes of global climate change. In contrast, similar studies conducted over
decadal time scales in living reefs show striking change and unpredictability
with apparent dramatic and unprecedented decline during the past 30 years. This
apparent paradox confounds attempts to predict the response of coral reefs to
local and global environmental change. This research will investigate the
taxonomic composition and diversity of coral communities, using a long term
paleoecological record between 9000 and 6000 years before present (ybp) in the
Holocene raised reef terrace along a 35 km segment of coastline of the Huon
Peninsula, Papua New Guinea (PNG). The exposed fossil reef from the 3000-year
Holocene interval preserves fossil assemblages before and after a clearly
identifiable, narrowly dated, and widespread earthquake disturbance event. The
20 m high Holocene seacliffs contain a shallow fore-reef habitat that
exquisitely preserves reef coral assemblages, and can be dated and sampled with
a resolution within 150 years. This temporal framework, inaccessible in living
reefs, corresponds well to the life history attributes of the long-living
corals, and provides the key link between studies of older Pleistocene
assemblages and modern studies at decadal time scales. Study of the PNG
paleoecological record of coral reefs in the absence of significant human impact
will document: 1) patterns in coral community structure every 150 years for 3000
years, including post-disturbance community re-colonization; and 2) the
relationship between coral species distribution patterns through time and space
and global climate and local environmental variation, during continuous sea
level rise and variable Holocene sea surface temperatures. Ecological data will
be gathered by conducting surveys measuring the abundance of reef coral species
along 25-m transects representing similar age assemblages over a 35 km distance.
Previous work differentiating the ancient habitats will be corroborated using
sedimentology and composition of the coralline algal communities. A significant
component of this research is to relate species distribution patterns through
time and space to fluctuations in their environment. Thus, the Holocene reef
environment will be characterized using 'paired' geochemical analyses (isotopic
and trace element) of corals and mollusks. A detailed temporal sequence will be
established for each of the sampled Holocene reef geological sections using
abundant 14C (radiocarbon) age dates.

