* 0105085
* Dissertation Research:  Pathway Analysis of Ethanol and Acetic Acid Detoxification in Drosophila
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2001,10/31/2003
* Andrew Clark, Pennsylvania State Univ University Park
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 10/31/2003
* USD 9,995.00

0105085&lt;br/&gt;Clark&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Ethanol and acetic acid tolerance
are highly positively correlated across populations of D. melanogaster and
species of Drosophila. The non-independence of traits associated with different
steps in the ethanol and acetic acid detoxification pathway underscores the need
for a pathway analysis of ethanol and acetic acid tolerance. Analysis of this
complete pathway was hindered by the fact that only ADH and aldehyde oxidase
(ALDOX) could be studied at the biochemical and molecular levels, leaving the
third step in the ethanol detoxification pathway, catalyzed by acetyl Co-A
synthetase (AcCoAS), uncharacterized. Identification of AcCoAS from the complete
genome sequence of D. melanogaster and recently developed molecular probes for
the AcCoAS reaction now allow for a complete pathway analysis of ethanol and
acetic acid tolerance. We hypothesize that selection for both tolerances
operates on the entire detoxification pathway and will shape the patterns of
variation and covariation between the three key enzymes in the pathway. A
combination of techniques will be employed to quantify variation in and
covariation between nucleotide sequence data, mRNA expression levels, enzyme
activities and tolerance to both ethanol and acetic
acid.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research funded by this Doctoral Dissertation
Improvement Grant takes an evolutionary quantitative genetic approach to
characterize the relationship between genetic variation and enzyme activity
variation at all three steps in the pathway and the consequences of this
variation on ethanol and acetic acid tolerance. The findings will be analyzed in
the context of metabolic control theory and will allow us to make predictions
about the genetic and biochemical responses to selection on organismal
performance&lt;br/&gt;