* 0105000
* Dissertation Research:  Interspecific Interactions in Stage Structured Population Models:  The Effects of Herbivores and Pollinators on Trillium grandiflorum
* BIO,DEB
* 05/01/2001,04/30/2003
* Susan Kalisz, University of Pittsburgh
* Standard Grant
* Susan Mopper
* 04/30/2003
* USD 7,111.00

Proposal 0105000&lt;br/&gt;DIG: Interspecific interactions in stage structured
population models: The effects of herbivores and pollinators on Trillium
grandiflorum&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Susan Kalisz , Tiffany
Knight&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The growth rate of a plant population
depends on the strength of its interactions with herbivores and pollinators, as
well as the stage in the plant life-cycle in which these interactions take
place. Thus, variation in the magnitude of interactions with herbivores and
pollinators among plant populations can cause variation in the rates of growth
among natural plant populations. If populations that have a high density of
flowering plants are more attractive to both herbivores and pollinators, then
the magnitude of their interactions with both herbivores and pollinators may be
expected to change deterministically as plant populations grow or decline in
time. I have collected preliminary data on 12 populations of Trillium
grandiflorum, a perennial forest herb. The magnitude of its interactions with
its mammalian herbivore, white tailed deer, and insect pollinator, bumblebees,
vary highly among these populations, and these interactions primarily influence
the reproductive stage in the plant life-cycle. In a pilot experiment that
manipulated plant density, significant changes in the magnitude of both plant-
herbivore and plant-pollinator interactions were found. In this proposed work, I
will quantify the amount variation among populations that is caused by variation
in herbivore and pollinator interactions. In addition, among several
populations, I will experimentally manipulate the plant density to more fully
quantify the density-dependent influences of herbivores and pollinators on
Trillium survival, growth and fecundity. I will use a modeling framework to
synthesize all of this information and assess the effects of changes in
interspecific interactions on the growth rate of plant populations.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;