* 0105127
* Dissertation Research:  Evolution of Growth Form and Phytochemical Consequences in Adenia (Passifloraceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* Lucinda McDade, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 07/31/2004
* USD 9,971.00

Is it possible that a plant's growth form predicts plant chemistry? We
investigate the association between evolutionary changes in growth form and
shifts in plant chemistry with this research. The genus Adenia (Passifloraceae)
provides an ideal group to research this and related questions. With ca. 90
species, species in this group have diversified into trees, succulent shrubs,
tuberous herbs, tuberous vines, caudiciforms, fibrous rooted vines, and lianas,
as well as variants on these basic forms. In addition to this remarkable growth
form radiation, the chemistry is varied and appears to play an important role in
the plants' interactions with Acraea caterpillars and various Chyrsomelidae
which use Adenia as a host. &lt;br/&gt;By constructing a molecular phylogenetic
hypothesis of the relationships of species in Adenia, we hope to test the
monophyly of the group and determine where Adenia fits within the Passifloraceae
family. During the second phase of the research, we investigate the development
and evolution of stem anatomy as it relates to growth form. We test the
hypotheses that the ancestral growth form is a vine (implying that the trees,
shrubs, and herbs are derived from vines) and that the succulence observed in
the trees and shrubs is a result of paedomorphic processes. Ultimately, we map
leaf cyanogenesis and leaf tannin content on the phylogeny to test hypotheses
developed from allocation theory and apparency theory. We believe that
cyanogenesis will be highest in vines whereas tannins will be most concentrated
in other more "apparent" growth forms. Furthermore, we predict that changes in
stem anatomy will correlate with changes in chemistry. Species of Adenia are
distributed throughout the Old-World tropics. Hearn has traveled to South and
Eastern Africa to make field collections and observations of the Adenia there.
This fall and winter, 2001, he will travel to Madagascar to research the 20
Adenia endemics found there. This DDIG support provides the funding to carry out
both the Malagasy research, the anatomy research, and parts of the molecular and
chemistry research.&lt;br/&gt;