* 0105265
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Stone Tools and the Brain: A Positron Emission Tomographic Study
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2002
* Nicholas Toth, Indiana University
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 05/31/2002
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. Nicholas Toth, Mr. Dietrich Stout will collect data
for his doctoral dissertation. The goal of the research is to gain insight into
the cognitive abilities of early humans and to accomplish this, Mr. Stout will
examine the brain activity associated with the production of simple "Mode 1"
stone tools. The first such objects appear in the archaeological record ca. 2.5
million years ago and because of their durable nature, over most of the period
of human evolution they comprise the primary evidence available to reconstruct
behavior. They provide the best, and often, the only insight into early human
mental ability. Archaeologists have experimentally replicated Mode 1 tools which
consist of simple flakes removed from a larger core of raw material as well as
the successively more complicated succeeding lithic technologies. However it is
difficult to draw a direct link between these manufacturing techniques and
cognitive organization. It is unknown exactly what minimal basic cognitive
abilities are necessary to produce simple stone tools and the degree to which
early humans were capable of abstract thought. To address this problem, Mr.
Stout will conduct Positron Emission Tomography (PET) to determine mental
ability by establishing a more direct link between flintknapping and brain
activation. Six technologically naive subjects will participate in a
longitudinal study. PET images of three experimental conditions (control, novice
flintknapping and experienced flintknapping) will be collected. Use of a slowly
decaying tracer for imaging will allow experimental tasks to be performed under
relatively naturalistic conditions outside a scanner, prior to image collection.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Three kinds of data will be collected: PET images,
attributes of the tools produced, and videotapes of task performance. The main
research goals to be pursued with these data will be 1. dissection of
sensorimotor and cognitive aspects of flintknapping skill and 2. exploration of
neural, artifactual and behavioral aspects of skill acquisition. PET image data
will be used to test specific hypotheses derived from both the literature and
from results of a pilot study. Of particular interest will be putative
activation of "cognitive planning" areas in novices and potential overlap with
classic cortical "language" (Broca's and Wernicke's) areas. The ultimate
objective of the research is to apply the results to the archaeology of human
origins. A large body of research in the experimental neurosciences now allows
patterns of brain activation to be interpreted in terms of mental processes such
as motor or strategic planning. In this fashion, imaging of tool replication
experiments will provide insight into the necessary information processing
requirements of particular flintknapping tasks. This insight may then be
judiciously applied to cognitive interpretations of the archaeological
record.&lt;br/&gt;