* 0105192
* Reproduction and Representations of Family Among Malian Migrants in Paris, France
* SBE,BCS
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2006
* Dennis Cordell, Southern Methodist University
* Continuing Grant
* Deborah Winslow
* 05/31/2006
* USD 131,462.00

Immigrants in the contemporary world are faced with significant problems of
identity, since modern technology facilitates a transnational existence with
ties in both current and original cultures. A major issue faced by migrants is
adjusting their desired family size to their new circumstances. Traditional
societies stressed large numbers of children while modern societies have a
reduced vision of a reasonable family size. This research by an anthropologist
and a historical demographer studies how Malian immigrants to Paris restructure
and negotiate their identities as parents. Within the family men and women face
contradictory pressures. Biomedical messages promoting fertility control, Islam,
and French immigration policy have generated conflicting responses of
accommodation and resistance resulting in marital conflicts over family size and
composition. Men oppose contraception, citing Islamic doctrine, while women
justify contraceptive use based on fatigue, sickness and economic security. This
research on Malian immigrants in Paris will examine the role of Islam in shaping
migrant responses to fertility control messages. The project will trace Malian
representations of appropriate family size and shape over the past three
decades, focusing on the role of village associations in France mediating
between family in France and West Africa. Systematic sampling of migrants will
be done in sites of village and community associations, workers' hostels and
health services in Paris districts with substantial African populations.
Structured interviews with 180 women and men over a two-year period will be
carried out. Hypotheses will be tested relating immigration policy and different
reproductive strategies of men and women. The research will contribute to the
anthropological understanding of the politics of reproduction, documenting the
local and global processes implicated in reproductive relations of Malians in
France. By focusing on men's and women's objectives and preferences, the
research will provide insights into how reproductive goals are shared,
contested, and how transnational linkages shape family organization. &lt;br/&gt;