* 0105077
* Dissertation Research: Phylogenetic Studies in the Lasiosphaeriaceae (Fungi, Ascomycetes, Sordariales)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2003
* Sabine Huhndorf, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 06/30/2003
* USD 9,985.00

The family Lasiosphaeriaceae is one of the largest and least studied families in
a group of fungi known as pyrenomycetes. It contains several ecologically and
economically important genera, which occur throughout temperate and tropical
regions and produce minute, dark-colored, flask-shaped fruiting structures on
wood and dung. Numerous genera have been transferred into this family without
critically assessing their evolutionary relationships. This study will (1)
provide a monophyletic circumscription of the Lasiosphaeriaceae and test
hypotheses about morphological characters currently used in ascomycete
systematics; (2) provide a taxonomic revision of Lasiosphaeria, one of the
largest and most complex genera in the family. Lasiosphaeria; (3) focus on the
L. hirsuta and L. ovina species complexes, establishing species boundaries. This
study will serve as a model system for future studies in ascomycete systematics
by using a multi-gene approach, incorporating both protein-coding and ribosomal
genes, along with morphological characters for determining phylogenetic
relationships at the specific, generic and familial levels.&lt;br/&gt; The
Lasiosphaeriaceae and its type genus Lasiosphaeria are of particular systematic
interest for several reasons. Phylogenetic analyses of DNA sequences that
included single representatives of four of the ten families of Sordariales
suggested that the order is not monophyletic. A detailed assessment of the
evolutionary relationships among these families is needed to address this issue,
but a meaningful sampling strategy requires revision of key genera like
Lasiosphaeria. The Lasiosphaeriaceae either contains, or is closely related to,
the family containing Neurospora and Sordaria. Representatives of the
Sordariaceae will be included in our analyses to evaluate these generic and
familial relationships. Ascospore morphology has been used extensively
throughout the filamentous ascomycetes for distinguishing families and genera
even though this one-character taxonomy has never been rigorously tested. This
study will be the first to objectively test the evolutionary potential of this
character system. Although many Lasiosphaeriaceae are encountered throughout
temperate and tropical areas, identification guides are not available. With the
aid of digital image capturing systems, this study will produce detailed
hardcopy and web-based identification guides for taxa in the
Lasiosphaeriaceae.&lt;br/&gt;