* 0105342
* Topology of Hyperplane Arrangements
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2004
* Alexandru Suciu, Northeastern University
* Continuing Grant
* Christopher Stark
* 06/30/2004
* USD 67,172.00

DMS-0105342&lt;br/&gt;Alexandru I. Suciu&lt;br/&gt; &lt;br/&gt;This project is
centered around a topological study&lt;br/&gt;of complex hyperplane
arrangements, with a view towards&lt;br/&gt;finding effectively computable
invariants of their complements.&lt;br/&gt;The goal is to decide whether a given
invariant is&lt;br/&gt;combinatorially determined, and, if it is, to
express&lt;br/&gt;it explicitly in terms of the intersection lattice
of&lt;br/&gt;the arrangement. An important role is played by
the&lt;br/&gt;jumping loci for cohomology with coefficients in
local&lt;br/&gt;systems, and the related resonance varieties.&lt;br/&gt;These
varieties have emerged as a central object of study.&lt;br/&gt;They provide deep
information about the homotopy theory&lt;br/&gt;of the complement of an
arrangement, as well as&lt;br/&gt;a bridge relating various invariants, in often
unexpected ways.&lt;br/&gt;Another key role is played by the rational-
homotopy&lt;br/&gt;notion of formality, which provides the
underlying&lt;br/&gt;explanation for many of the encountered
phenomena.&lt;br/&gt;Whenever possible, the study is done in a more general
setting,&lt;br/&gt;which includes certain types of subspace
arrangements,&lt;br/&gt;both real and complex, as well as certain links in the
3-sphere.&lt;br/&gt;Such a point of view enlarges the range of applicability of
the&lt;br/&gt;results, and helps explain what is really peculiar to
complex&lt;br/&gt;hyperplane arrangements.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In its simplest
manifestation, an arrangement is a&lt;br/&gt;finite collection of lines in the
plane. These lines&lt;br/&gt;cut the plane into components, and understanding
the topology&lt;br/&gt;of the complement amounts to counting those
components.&lt;br/&gt;In the case of lines in the complex plane (or, for
that&lt;br/&gt;matter, hyperplanes in complex n-space), the
complement&lt;br/&gt;is connected, and its topology (as reflected, for
example,&lt;br/&gt;in its homotopy groups) is much more
interesting.&lt;br/&gt;The theory of arrangements is a relatively new
branch&lt;br/&gt;of mathematics, started in the 1960's with a study&lt;br/&gt;of
the classifying space for the pure braid group.&lt;br/&gt;The theory has
developed at the interface between&lt;br/&gt;topology, algebra, algebraic
geometry, and combinatorics.&lt;br/&gt;Hyperplane arrangements, and the closely
related&lt;br/&gt;configuration spaces, are used in numerous
areas,&lt;br/&gt;including robotics, multi-dimensional
billiards,&lt;br/&gt;graphics, molecular biology, computer vision,
and&lt;br/&gt;databases for representing the space of all
possible&lt;br/&gt;states of a system characterized by many degrees&lt;br/&gt;of
freedom. There are also deep connections between&lt;br/&gt;hyperplane
arrangements, knot theory, hypergeometric&lt;br/&gt;functions, conformal field
theory, and quantum cohomology.&lt;br/&gt;