* 0105145
* Dissertation Research: Comparative Analyses of Life History Evolution in Variable Environments: Cole's Paradox Revisited
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2001,12/31/2003
* D. Lawrence Venable, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 12/31/2003
* USD 9,929.00

Venable&lt;br/&gt;0105145&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The researchers are studying the
annual vs. perennial habit as alternative strategies for persistence in variable
environments in a group of related plants native to the arid western United
States. They will be using DNA sequence data to infer the ancestor-descendant
relationships in the Section Anogra of the genus Oenothera (Onagraceae). They
will test the association of the annual habit with aridity in the context of
this hypothesis of relationships. In addition, they will use demographic studies
of an annual species and a closely related perennial species to test for
patterns of survival and fecundity predicted to favor the annual vs. perennial
habit. The combination of large-scale (phylogenetic) and small-scale
(demographic) comparative studies will allow the researchers to examine both the
pattern of evolutionary change and specific mechanisms driving this
change.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;It has long been suggested that the transition from
the perennial to annual habit is an important pathway of diversification and
adaptation in arid lands. In this study of the selective forces driving changes
in habit, the researchers will further the understanding of the drivers of
biotic diversity in arid lands, and the means by which plants persist in
variable environments in general. &lt;br/&gt;