* 0105493
* Plastic Deformation and Deformation Fabric in Wadsleyite and Ringwoodite: Effects of Water and Grain-Size
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Shun-ichiro Karato, Yale University
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2004
* USD 415,000.00

Karato &lt;br/&gt;0105493 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The interaction of convection
currents in Earth's mantle with the mantle transition zone (410 to 660 km depth)
affects the pattern of mantle circulation and hence evolution of this planet.
This interaction depends strongly on the change in physical properties that
occurs in the transition zone, particularly the rheological properties. To help
understand the influence of rheological properties of transition zone materials
on this interaction, the PI proposes to conduct experimental studies on plastic
flow in transition zone minerals &lt;br/&gt;(wadsleyite and ringwoodite
respectively) under the transition zone conditions with the emphasis on the
effects of water and grain-size. Both grain-size and water can change
significantly as convection currents go through the transition zone. The
investigators will extend their previous studies into two new directions; (1) to
investigate the effects of water on rheology and deformation fabric, and (2) to
improve the quality of data by better-defined (constant strain-rate) deformation
experiments and by stress measurements using the synchrotron radiation facility
and transmission electron microscopy. These results will provide the first
quantitative data set on the effects of water and grain-size on rheology and
deformation fabric of major transition zone minerals and a firm basis for
interpretation of seismic anisotropy in the transition zone. &lt;br/&gt;