* 0105622
* Spatially-Resolved Polymer Degradation Via Electron Spin Resonance Imaging (ESRI)
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Shulamith Schlick, University of Detroit Mercy
* Continuing grant
* Andrew Lovinger
* 06/30/2005
* USD 333,250.00

This award is directed to the study of polymer degradation due to UV irradiation
and thermal treatment in the presence of air and ozone/air mixtures. The
proposed studies will be performed on polymers containing hindered amine
stabilizers (HAS) as protecting additives. The main method of study is electron
spin resonance imaging (ESRI) of nitroxides and other radical intermediates
formed in the degradation process. Spatial information will be encoded in the
spectroscopy by collecting ESR spectra in the presence of magnetic field
gradients. 1D ESRI will provide the spatial distribution of the radical
intensity, and 2D spatial-spectral ESRI will allow visualization of the line
shapes along the sample depth. The experiments will be performed as a function
of treatment time, wavelength of the UV source, and temperature in thermal
degradation. Additional information will be obtained by spin probe ESR, UV,
FTIR, and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC). Photo- and thermal
degradation will be performed on two classes of polymers: 1. Polymers based on
styrene, acrylonitrile and butadiene, as homopolymers and in different
combinations as copolymers. This group will include the copolymers poly(styrene-
co-butadiene), poly(acrylonitrile-co-butadiene) and poly(styrene-co-
acrylonitrile), and poly(acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene) (ABS). 2. Copolymers
of polypropylene and ethylene prepared by sequential polymerization. These
polymers consist of a semicrystalline polypropylene (PP) matrix and a dispersed
amorphous elastomeric component, and have a phase-separated morphology; the
study of these systems will benefit from the rich literature available on
polypropylene degradation, but will present the challenge and advantage of
properties modification by addition of the elastomer phase. The ability to
perform nondestructive profiling via ESRI is an important advantage compared to
other (destructive) methods now in use for probing the spatial dimension. %%%
The proposed research is expected to: identify specific morphological domains
where the degradation process is accelerated; map the consumption of the
stabilizer within the sample depth on the scale of mm, and within the
morphological domains on the scale of micrometers, contribute to the
understanding of environmental factors, for instance the effect of irradiation
wavelength and ozone; and lead to nondestructive spectral profiling as a method
for the detection of early events in polymer degradation and stabilization.