* 0105865
* Topographic and compositional studies of andesite lava flows at Sabancaya volcano, Southern Peru.
* O/D,OISE
* 07/15/2001,04/30/2002
* Tracy Gregg, Smithsonian Institution
* Standard Grant
* Harold Stolberg
* 04/30/2002
* USD 48,955.00

0105865 Bulmer

This Americas Program award will support Dr. Mark Bulmer and Dr. Bruce Campbell,
both of the Smithsonian Institution, and Dr. Tracy Gregg of SUNY at Buffalo in a
research collaboration with Eng. Guido Salas of the Universidad Nacional de San
Agustin in Arequipa, Peru. The overall objective of this study is to improve
current knowledge of the emplacement of thick lava flows by studying those at
Sabancaya volcano in Southern Peru. These flows have unique topographic and
geochemical signatures. Three tasks are proposed: (1) Determine quantitative
inferences on the rheology and flow regime of the lava flows based on the
dimensions, topography, morphology, petrography and geochemistry of the flows;
(2) Compare the flow properties derived in Task 1 to a variety of natural lava
flows and laboratory simulations; and (3) Use the results gained from Tasks 1
and 2 to determine the extent to which the surface structure and roughness of
different lava flow surfaces can be used as a diagnostic tool in remote sensing
for accurate geologic interpretation of emplacement styles and lava
compositions.

The eruption of large evolved lava flows on Earth has never been witnessed,
making careful data analyses combined with numerical (and possibly physical)
modeling the only way to understand them. Furthermore, little is known about the
magmatic processes that govern the generation, ascent and eruption of these
viscous flows. For this collaboration, the U.S. researchers will contribute
archived data sets of satellite and airborne visible and near-infrared data of
Sabancaya volcano and the surrounding region, while the Peruvian side will
contribute access to geologic samples from 1989 when the first of the most
recent eruptions began, and their expertise concerning the surrounding region.
The Sabancaya flows will provide an important reference point for the geological
interpretation of remotely sensed data of volcanic terrains.

***

