* 0105508
* Continuing Study of the Post-Seismic Fault Healing of the 1992 M7.5 Landers, California, Earthquake
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* John Vidale, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Kaye Shedlock
* 08/31/2003
* USD 122,293.00

Abstract for proposal EAR0105508 (PH # 25x)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title:
Continuing Study of the Post-Seismic Fault Healing of the 1992 M7.5 Landers,
California, Earthquake&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI's: Yong-Gang Li, University of
Southern California, and John E. Vidale, University of California, Los
Angeles&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; We propose to continue our study of the post-
seismic healing process on Landers, California, rupture zone using fault-zone
seismic waves excited by explosions detonated within the rupture zone. Repeated
surveys in 1994, 1996, 1998, and 2000 have revealed that the shear velocity of
the fault zone rock increased by ~1.2% between 1994 and 1996, and increased
further by ~0.7% between 1996 and 1998. This trend indicates the Landers rupture
zone has been healing by strengthening after the mainshock, most likely due to
the closure of cracks that opened during the 1992 earthquake. The observed
velocity increase between 1994 and 1998 is consistent with a decrease of ~0.03
in apparent crack density within the rupture zone. We also found that cracks
near the fault zone was partially water-filled and became more wet with time.
However, the data recorded in the most recent experiment showed that wave
velocities in the shallow rupture zone did not increase further more but with a
slight decrease for shear velocity between 1998 and 2000, inferring that the
fault healing probably became invisible since 6 to 8 years after the 1992
earthquake. However, we speculate that the healing process on Landers rupture
zone might have been affected by the M7.1 Hector Mine earthquake on October 25,
1999, occurring only ~25 km east of Landers. The Hector Mine mainshock triggered
slip on the neighboring faults as shown in the InSAR data and could cause crack
opening or coalescence in the shallow crust due to strong shaking and change in
the mean stress in the region. We shall conduct a repeated experiment in
2001-2002. The new data will help us to determine if the healing process on the
Landers rupture zone was affected by the Hector Mine earthquake or has become
invisible. We shall compare the healing process on the Landers rupture zone with
that on the Hector Mine rupture zone for which we are monitoring from November
of 2000. We shall develop a mechanical model based on crack dilatancy theory to
interpret the fault healing quantitatively.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;