* 0105329
* Synthesis and Characterization of Model Catalysts Formed by Reaction of Metal Carbonyls with Alumina
* ENG,CBET
* 05/01/2001,04/30/2005
* Wilfred Tysoe, University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee
* Standard Grant
* Glenn L. Schrader
* 04/30/2005
* USD 250,006.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Title: Synthesis and
Characterization of Model Catalysts Formed by Reaction of Metal Carbonyls with
Alumina&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number: CTSS-0105329&lt;br/&gt;Principal
Investigator: Wilfred Tysoe&lt;br/&gt;Institution: University of Wisconsin-
Milwaukee&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The objective of this
proposal is to grow and characterize model supported catalysts formed by
adsorbing metal carbonyls onto planar hydroxylated alumina films grown on a
refractory metal substrate. Oxide films will be deposited onto single crystal
substrates. With these model systems, surface science techniques can be used to
define and characterize surface species more precisely than can be done with
conventional catalysts. The nature of the active catalyst will be probed using
x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy to monitor metal oxidation state, electron
energy loss spectroscopy to estimate cluster sizes, reflection-absorption
infrared spectroscopy to follow vibrational changes, and temperature-programmed
desorption to measure decarbonylation kinetics. The two systems to be studied
are alumina-supported molybdenum and alumina-supported rhenium catalysts for
olefin metathesis. The metathesis reaction has wide industrial applications, and
obtaining a better understanding of the catalysis through model studies may help
in the development of improved catalysts. The synthesis of realistic planar
model supported catalysts, and the corresponding ability to fully analyze the
surface, provides a powerful strategy for fundamentally understanding catalytic
reactions on realistic supported systems.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;