* 0105864
* High-Pressure Behavior of Framework Structures
* GEO,EAR
* 06/01/2001,05/31/2005
* Nancy Ross, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 05/31/2005
* USD 241,544.00

Ross&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0105864&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Framework structures encompass a
wide range of natural and synthetic compounds of importance in the Earth
sciences, solid state chemistry, condensed matter physics, and materials
sciences. Framework structures are materials whose atomic structure can be
described in terms of the linking together of tightly-bonded groups of atoms
such as SiO4 or PO4 that can be thought of forming relatively rigid polyhedra
whose corners are formed by the anions such as oxygen. The frameworks are then
formed by the condensation of these polyhedra, i.e. by sharing of the oxygen
anions. Examples of framework structures formed of tetrahedral groups such as
SiO4 and AlO4 include major groups of minerals such as the feldspars (60% of the
Earths crust), and zeolites that are the most important family of catalysts in
the chemical industry. Other frameworks, including minerals stable in the deeper
Earth such as garnets, incorporate network-forming tetrahedra and octahedra.
Perovskites, which are probably the single most technologically-important group
of compounds because of their electrical and elastic properties, are examples of
frameworks composed entirely of corner-linked octahedra.
&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the principles of behavior of these common structure
types is important for a number of reasons. For example, in geochemistry we need
to be able to predict the limit of solid solution of other components into end-
member compounds. For geophysics one needs to predict the influence of these
minor chemical components on the elasticity of minerals. The interaction of
elastic and structural properties is also important for understanding the
behavior of such perovskites such as ferro-relaxors and ferro-elastics that are
used in many industrial devices. High-pressure studies can provide important
insights into the general properties of frameworks for several reasons. First,
pressure is energetically a far stronger driving force than temperature and thus
one can explore a far greater range in structural behavior by compressing a
structure rather than heating it. Second, pressure allows the repulsive regime
of the inter-atomic potential to be explored directly. And, third, determination
of the unit-cell constants of a material yield not only the volume as a function
of pressure (for thermodynamic calculations and petrology) and the bulk modulus
which is important for geophysical interpretations, but also certain
combinations of individual elastic moduli. The philosophy of the research that
we propose to undertake is to study the evolution of selected structure types
under pressure by single-crystal X-ray diffraction up to pressures of 10 GPa.
Current methodologies do not allow the sufficiently precise determination of the
structural parameters of crystals under high pressures to identify all of the
small changes that occur in framework structures as pressure is applied.
Therefore a significant part of the work proposed in this grant is devoted to
the improvement in the experimental techniques, which we expect will have wider
applications than to high-pressure research alone. From the specific results we
expect to be able to derive general principles concerning the behavior of
framework structures under a range of conditions. &lt;br/&gt;