* 0105226
* Expanding Capabilities for the University of Arizona Paleomagnetics Laboratory
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* Robert Butler, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* Russell Kelz
* 07/31/2003
* USD 51,771.00

0105226&lt;br/&gt;Butler&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Paleomagnetics Laboratory at
the University of Arizona is an experimental facility utilized for a wide
variety of geological projects. The Paleomagnetics Laboratory Director and PI on
this project, is currently collaborating with geologists on research projects
in: (a) southeast Alaska; (b) the Bolivian Andes; (c) the Pyrenees of Spain; (d)
Nepal; (e) Ethiopia; and (f) northern Tibet. Funds from this grant will provide
partial support for three equipment needs:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1) The primary
instrument used to measure paleomagnetism is a superconducting rock magnetometer
(SRM) that uses a refrigeration system to maintain low temperatures of the
cryogenic components. This refrigeration system requires periodic replacement
which will be accomplished early in the grant period.&lt;br/&gt;(2) A common
method of analyzing the magnetism of rock samples is thermal demagnetization in
which samples are heated to progressively higher temperatures in a low magnetic
field environment. To increase capacity for processing samples in the
laboratory, we will construct three additional thermal demagnetization furnaces.
&lt;br/&gt;(3) In paleomagnetic research, it is important to identify and
characterize the iron-bearing minerals that carry magnetic signals. We will
purchase and install a Kappabridge susceptometer for measurements of magnetic
susceptibility versus temperature and anisotropy of magnetic susceptibility. The
resulting data will provide rapid and detailed information permitting
identification and characterization of ferrimagnetic
minerals.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Purchase and/or construction of these
instrumentation items will permit The Paleomagnetics Laboratory at the
University of Arizona to expand productivity and advance the experimental
capabilities of this facility. &lt;br/&gt;***&lt;br/&gt;