* 0105190
* Minimization of actuator hysteresis under varying load and temperature conditions
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2001,09/30/2005
* William Galinaitis, Ferrum College
* Continuing Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 09/30/2005
* USD 100,000.00

The accuracy of positioning systems that use piezoelectric actuators is limited
by a hysteresis relationship between the input to the actuator and the resulting
displacement. The positioning accuracy of the system can be improved by
minimizing the effect of the hysteresis. To reach this goal it is necessary to
have an accurate representation of the hysteresis, and a control strategy that
provides compensation for the hysteresis. Recent work has demonstrated the
feasibility of using the KP operator to model hysteresis. This work also
demonstrated the use of the inverse KP operator to create an open loop control
that minimized the positioning error caused by the hysteresis. The results of
that work are restricted to an actuator working under a fixed set of operating
conditions. As these conditions change the performance of the model and the
control degrade. To remedy this situation the proposed three year research
program will focus on the modification of the KP operator so that it is capable
of modeling hysteresis over a wide range of operating conditions (temperature
and load). As before, the inverse operator will be used as part of a controller
designed to minimize positioning error over a range of operating conditions. The
major program tasks are: 1) The determination of the conditions necessary for
data that is used to identify the nonnegative measure of the KP operator; 2) The
modification of the KP operator to explicitly include variables associated with
the temperature of the actuator and the load acting on the actuator; 3) The
inversion of the modified KP operator and the development of a control based on
this inverse. Computer simulations and experimental data will be used to
evaluate the relative performance of the KP and modified KP operators.
Similarly, the performance of controllers based on the inverses of both
operators will be compared to determine if the positioning accuracy of the
actuator can be improved by incorporating load and temperature variables into
the KP operator. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A key component of many mechanical
systems is the positioning subsystem. This subsystem typically consists of a
controller that uses sensor information to drive an actuator such that a desired
position is attained by a system component. For a satellite-tracking antenna, it
may be the system that aims the parabolic antenna dish at the desired point in
the sky, or it is the system that is used to position a specimen under the probe
tip in a scanning probe microscope (SPM). Whether it is a system for pointing an
antenna or imaging microscopic structure, the accuracy of the positioning
directly impacts the overall effectiveness of the system. For an SPM a
piezoceramic type actuator is used for positioning. A relationship between the
actuator input and the resulting position, called hysteresis, limits the
accuracy of this type of actuator. The hysteresis introduces a positioning error
that cannot be effectively minimized with conventional control strategies.
However, over the past decade several methods have been developed that are
capable of minimizing this error for fixed operating conditions. The proposed
program is directed at extending a method based on the KP operator so that it
can be used to reduce the hysteresis error over a range of actuator operating
conditions. The two major benefits of the program are: 1) The results can be
used to improve the accuracy of currently installed positioning systems such as
those used for microscopic imaging and integrated circuit production and 2) The
program will actively engage a diverse undergraduate student population to state
of the art research. The second of these benefits is as significant as the
first, for this effort will include the development of an experimental test
facility at Ferrum College for both computer simulation work and experimental
testing. Students at the college will be active participants in the design,
implementation and execution of experiments directed at the development and
evaluation of the hysteresis models and the actuator controllers. Additionally,
they will apply material learned in their undergraduate courses to analyze
experimental data and system performance. The program will provide a rare
opportunity for undergraduate students in this region to experience advanced
research typically only found at a major research university or industrial
research center. This program will also be an introduction for this region of
the state to advanced technology.