* 0105283
* Collaborative Research: Restricted Caches, An Experimental and Theoretical Study
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Eric Torng, Michigan State University
* Standard Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 08/31/2005
* USD 239,619.00

The gap between processor speed and main memory access speed&lt;br/&gt;can cause
processors to spend much of their time waiting on memory accesses.&lt;br/&gt;As
the gap has grown, this memory latency has become an&lt;br/&gt;increasingly
significant bottleneck in processor performance.&lt;br/&gt;Existing cache
designs have worked well to fill the gap,&lt;br/&gt;but new cache designs are
needed as the gap continues to grow.&lt;br/&gt;A promising new class, restricted
caches, includes&lt;br/&gt;skew caches, assist caches, victim caches, and other
multi-lateral caches.&lt;br/&gt;Experiments have indicated that some restricted
caches&lt;br/&gt;offer significant potential for improvement over
traditional&lt;br/&gt;set-associative caches. They also have revealed some
interesting&lt;br/&gt;phenomenon that are not possible in traditional caches.
For example,&lt;br/&gt;skew caches seem to exhibit self-
reorganization.&lt;br/&gt;However, no theoretical explanation exists for this
behavior or for&lt;br/&gt;why these restricted caches perform
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators study the performance of distinct
restricted cache&lt;br/&gt;structures and algorithms for managing
them.&lt;br/&gt;The investigators first identify an underlying structural
difference&lt;br/&gt;between restricted caches and traditional fully-
associative&lt;br/&gt;caches: all cache lines are not identical. Specifically,
in a&lt;br/&gt;restricted cache, unlike in a traditional set-associative
cache,&lt;br/&gt;there exist pairs of memory blocks whose sets of legal cache
lines&lt;br/&gt;are not identical and have a non-empty
intersection.&lt;br/&gt;Using this insight, the investigators evaluate
and&lt;br/&gt;compare different cache structures using new
techniques.&lt;br/&gt;Most other analytical studies of caches focus only on the
performance&lt;br/&gt;of algorithms for a given cache structure and do not
explicitly&lt;br/&gt;compare the effectiveness of distinct cache structures.
The&lt;br/&gt;investigators also study the performance of various
algorithms&lt;br/&gt;for these cache structures using a variety of techniques
such&lt;br/&gt;as resource augmentation, standard competitive
analysis,&lt;br/&gt;and trace-based simulation. Their results indicate that
traditional&lt;br/&gt;cache management algorithms behave very differently on
restricted&lt;br/&gt;caches than they do on traditional set-associative
caches.&lt;br/&gt;For example, the least recently used (LRU) algorithm that is
strongly&lt;br/&gt;competitive for traditional caches is not competitive at all
for&lt;br/&gt;restricted caches unless explicit rearrangement of items in
the&lt;br/&gt;cache is allowed. Finally, the investigators construct
a&lt;br/&gt;trace warehouse to facilitate the comparison of distinct trace-
based&lt;br/&gt;simulation studies as well as to help new researchers learn
this&lt;br/&gt;this evaluation technique.