* 0105612
* Chip-Interleaved Block-Spread Code Division Multiple Access
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2001,04/30/2004
* Georgios Giannakis, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 04/30/2004
* USD 350,000.00

Georgios Giannakis&lt;br/&gt;Title: "Chip_interleaved Block-Spread Code Division
Multiple Access"&lt;br/&gt;CCR-0105612&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;With the demand for
higher data rates and wireless services rising as fast as the Internet permeated
our lives, the need to cope with the idiosyncrasies of the shared wireless
medium increases along with the challenges : multi-user interference (MUI),
fading propagation effects, mobility-induced impairments, and high-performance
telecommunication systems that are also bandwidth- and power-efficient. Today's
Code-Division Multiple Access (CDMA) relies on long aperiodic pseudo-noise codes
and strict power control to suppress MUI. On the other hand, CDMA proposals with
symbol-periodic short spreading codes relax the need for power control at the
expense of high-complexity MUI cancellation which is less affordable at the
mobile unit in the downlink. But also in the uplink, the frequency-selective
fading that asynchronous high-rate transmissions experience as they propagate
through multipath-rich channels, degrades performance unless bandwidth is
sacrificed. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The CDMA system of this grant relies on the
novel idea of spreading a block of symbols with long, yet structured and
deterministic, user codes. Our block-spread transmissions can be viewed as (and
are implemented by) chip-interleaving of symbols spread by short codes. The
attractive features of the resulting &lt;br/&gt;Chip-Interleaved Block-Spread
(CIBS) CDMA system: i)flexibility to revert as block-spread TDMA, FDMA, Direct-
Sequence-, or, Multicarrier-CDMA; ii)power- and bandwidth-efficiency; iii)MUI
avoidance by-design; iv)full-multipath diversity and no loss of optimality with
matched-filter reception; and v)low-complexity. Basic research directions
include: performance analysis and comparisons with competing alternatives in
terms of capacity and bit error rates; mobility studies and development of
timing-offset, &lt;br/&gt;carrier-frequency offset and channel estimation
algorithms for acquisition and tracking; incorporation of multiple antennas to
enhance diversity with space-time coding gains; investigation of optimal
precoding, power-and-bit loading and adaptive modulation; and study of cellular
system-level issues.