* 0105322
* Collaborative research: Integrated  Geophysical &amp; Hydrogeologic Study of a Large Maine Peatland
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2002
* Lee Slater, University of Missouri-Kansas City
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 09/30/2002
* USD 96,078.00

0105322&lt;br/&gt;Slater&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Solute transport controls
vegetation and water chemistry gradients in peatlands. Dispersive mixing and
advective transport in peat will be measured in laboratory column experiments
and in a natural gradient tracer test in a peatland to determine the relative
importance of these processes. We will assess the retardation of solutes by
matrix diffusion and the applicability of a dual-domain model. Electrical
geophysical methods, verified through direct measurements, will be used to track
tracer migration.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An extensive geophysical and
hydrogeologic characterization of the peatland will map variability in peat
depth across the basin and identify stratigraphy. Ground-penetrating radar and
resistivity/induced polarization imaging will be employed. Piezometer tests will
provide a measure of the spatial variability in hydraulic conductivity within
Caribou Bog, a large peatland in Central Maine. Correlations between
hydrogeologic and geophysical parameters will be assessed and used to provide
constraints on parameters for ground-water flow and mass transport
modeling.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Peat cores will be collected for laboratory tests
to measure hydraulic conductivity, dispersion, effective porosity, specific
surface and complex resistivity. The variability of peat properties with depth
will be determined through laboratory testing. Relationships between peat
electrical properties and hydrogeologic parameters will be
evaluated.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;An NaBr tracer will be injected into the
peatland and monitored for 12 months. The tracer will be tracked using surface
and borehole electrical imaging. The pixels on the geophysical images will be a
substitute for extensive direct water sampling points, allowing rapid and nearly
continuous tracking of solute distribution. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geophysical
and ground-water chemistry data collected from the tracer test will be used to
calculate the spatial moments of the solute plume through time. Three-
dimensional hydrogeologic and mass transport models will be calibrated to the
geochemical and geophysical data to further evaluate mass transport parameters.
Matrix diffusion, the migration of solutes into hydraulically isolated pores,
will be incorporated into the numerical models to evaluate this important
process.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The project will evaluate: (1) the nature of
dispersive mixing, (2) the correlation of hydrogeologic and geophysical
parameters, and (3) the role of mass transporft in peatlands. Peatlands are a
large carbon reservoir and a significant source of methane gas. Ground-water
flow and mass transport are important in regulating geochemical conditions
favorable for methane production and peat accumulation. The work will add to the
understanding of processes that impact carbon and nutrient dynamics for
peatlands. Geophysical monitoring of a tracer will provide important information
on the utility of this non-invasive method for tracking the movement of solute
plumes. This project will demonstrate the potential benefits of including
electrical geophysics in hydrogeologic assessments and wetland
characterization., &lt;br/&gt;