* 0105507
* RUI: Oriented Matroids and Rigidity Theory Techniques for Pseudo Triangulations, Visibility Graphs and Other Structures in Computational Geometry
* CSE,CCF
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Ileana Streinu, Smith College
* Standard Grant
* David Du
* 07/31/2004
* USD 107,956.00

RUI: Oriented Matroids and Rigidity Theory Techniques for
Pseudo&lt;br/&gt;Triangulations, Visibility Graphs and Other Structures in
Computational&lt;br/&gt;Geometry&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: Ileana
Streinu&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is
motivated by fundamental questions in Robotics and&lt;br/&gt;Computer Graphics,
such as planning the motion of a robot arm, detecting&lt;br/&gt;collisions and
computing visibilities. It seeks efficient algorithmic&lt;br/&gt;solutions by
investigating the underlying computational structures with&lt;br/&gt;novel
mathematical tools and it has a substantial potential to lead
to&lt;br/&gt;applications in understanding the nature of the protein folding
process in&lt;br/&gt;biology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator is
undertaking a systematic plan of research aimed at&lt;br/&gt;furthering the
understanding of how the underlying oriented matroid&lt;br/&gt;structure of
points and lines affects properties of a variety of partially&lt;br/&gt;embedded
combinatorial structures such as pseudo triangulations and&lt;br/&gt;visibility
graphs. The focus is on combinatorial (enumeration,
generation,&lt;br/&gt;characterization) and algorithmic questions, the
underlying framework is&lt;br/&gt;geometric (dimensions 2 and 3), and the
techniques involved come from&lt;br/&gt;matroid and oriented matroid theory,
rigidity theory, combinatorial&lt;br/&gt;topology, computational algebraic
geometry and graph embeddings.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;