* 0105719
* Unwrapping Phase Images: Theory and Applications Using Probabilistic Inference Techniques
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2001,04/30/2005
* Ralf Koetter, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 04/30/2005
* USD 445,140.00

Koetter Abstract

Phase unwrapping in 2-dimensional topologies is a signal-processing problem that
has been extensively studied over the past 20 years and has important
applications, such as medical imaging and synthetic aperture radar. However,
despite its importance in science and engineering, to date, phase unwrapping in
2-dimensional grids has remained an essentially unsolved problem. This research
takes a fresh approach to the problem using methods from probabilistic
inference. The work not only holds the promise of resulting in powerful phase
unwrapping schemes based on the sum-product algorithm and structured variational
methods, but also has the potential to provide deep theoretical insight into the
ill-posed nature and solvability of the phase unwrapping problem. Such an
insight is extremely important for guiding the development of practical
algorithms.

The main objective of this research is to develop and refine algorithms for
phase unwrapping that are versatile, efficient and that significantly improve
upon earlier approaches. One of the guiding ideas in this context is the use of
probability inference as a nonlinear preprocessing step in a phase unwrapping
scheme. Initial experiments have confirmed that the performance of traditional
techniques can indeed be significantly boosted with such an approach. Success of
this research can have a profound practical impact. For example, in SAR
interferometry, phase unwrapping is an essential step in generating terrain
elevation maps, and this work can significantly enhance the accuracy of existing
algorithms based on deterministic phase models. Similarly, the proposed work
will make routine phase imaging using Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) signals
feasible, which will significantly extend the clinical utility of MRI.