* 0105659
* Strong Coupling Expansions for Models of Strongly Correlated Electrons
* MPS,DMR
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* William Putikka, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Continuing Grant
* Daryl Hess
* 08/31/2005
* USD 180,000.00

The properties of strongly correlated electrons in reduced dimensions remain
some of the most fascinating problems in condensed matter physics. The discovery
of high temperature superconductivity focused attention on two-dimensional
models, with the copper oxide plane found in high temperature superconductors
well described by a square lattice. The central theoretical hypothesis of
research in high temperature superconductivity is that strong electronic
correlations in reduced dimensions lead to enhanced superconducting correlations
when the electrons are itinerant. A corollary of this hypothesis is that the low
energy excitations in high temperature superconductors are anomalous due to
strong correlations. Exactly how strong correlations produce these effects for
two-dimensional systems, if at all, is currently not known.

This research will study the effects of strong correlations and reduced
dimensionality on systems of itinerant electrons by calculating high temperature
series for correlation functions of the 2D t-J model. The 2D t-J model has been
widely adopted as the fundamental model for high temperature superconductors.
Direct numerical results are needed to sort through approximate analytic
treatments of 2D strongly correlated electrons. High temperature series provide
a means to obtain accurate, unbiased results in the thermodynamic limit for key
properties of the 2D t-J model.

The specific quantities to be calculated are thermodynamic properties, equal
time correlation functions and zero frequency susceptibilities. The strength of
superconducting correlations in the 2D t-J model are of key interest for
applications to high temperature superconductivity. Series will be calculated
for all possible symmetries of spin singlet pairing correlations. The full range
of doping will be considered, from pseudogap behavior at small doping to the
crossover to more conventional behavior at large doping. The zero frequency,
wave vector dependent charge susceptibility will be used to search for charge
stripe formation, while the zero frequency, wave vector dependent spin
susceptibility will aid interpretation of NMR experiments. Equal time
correlation functions and susceptibilities through their temperature derivatives
can both be used to determine the momentum dependence of the low energy spin and
charge excitations of the 2D t-J model.

All quantities calculated for the full 2D square lattice will also be
calculated for ladder lattices and other subsets of the square lattice with
varying boundary conditions. This will allow a detailed study of boundary
effects for systems of strongly correlated electrons. The series results will
also be compared to density matrix renormalization group calculations on the
same lattices and with the same boundary conditions. %%% Theoretical
computational research will be conducted on a model for the behavior of
electrons in the high temperature superconductors. The results will aid in
understanding these intriguing, fundamental and potentially useful materials.
***