* 0105221
* Fast Transient Observations of Optical Flares from Gamma -ray Bursts
* MPS,AST
* 04/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Donald Smith, Smith                   Donald         A
* Fellowship Award
* Dana Lehr
* 08/31/2004
* USD 180,000.00

Prop: AST-0105221 PI: Smith, Donald

Dr. Smith is awarded an NSF Astronomy and Astrophysics Postdoctoral Fellowship
to carry out a program of research and education at the University of Michigan.
He will work with the Robotic Optical Transient Search Experiment (ROTSE)
project, a program to distribute and operate at least four small, automatic
telescopes at widely separated points on Earth in order to capture the early
optical emission from an extensive sample of gamma-ray bursts (GRBs). Early
observations will yield constraints on characteristics of the burst origins. The
telescope design allows GRB observations during the important window between
five and forty seconds after the onset of the event, which no other current or
planned experiment will be able to achieve. Dr. Smith will develop the
operational and analysis software, use existing instruments to respond to
alerts, install units at the international sites, and train collaborators in the
use of the system. The ROTSE project also provides a large database of all-sky
observations for student projects and his work will involve undergraduate
students in the research. He also intends to develop a course in observational
astronomy and presentations at a local museum using the ROTSE database, as well
as an interactive tool providing access for the public and researchers alike.
***