* 0105040
* Dissertation Research: Patterns of Reproductive Isolation in the Brachionus plicatilis Species Complex (Rotifera)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2003
* Jeffrey Powell, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2003
* USD 10,000.00

0105040&lt;br/&gt;Rice&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Speciation involves the splitting of
a population, such that the members of either of the new populations are unable
to mate and produce fertile offspring with the members of the other. In nearly
all cases, little is known about exactly what biological changes are responsible
for this reproductive isolation. The proposed research will address this
question using the rotifer Brachionus plicatilis, populations of which inhabit
salt lakes and coastal ponds worldwide and exhibit a range of abilities to
interbreed. First, two genes from B. plicatilis will be sequenced to determine
genetic divergences and the evolutionary relationships (i.e., a family tree)
between different populations. Second, representatives of different populations
will be crossed and the fate of the hybrids followed closely. The following
specific questions will be addressed: What trait differences causing
reproductive isolation arise first (i.e., what initiates speciation, and what
finalizes it)? What evolutionary processes are responsible for their divergence?
How rapidly can and does a new species
originate?&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Understanding the biology underlying the
evolution of reproductive isolation is critical to a general understanding of
the processes responsible for producing biological diversity. Furthermore, many
groups of organisms, including rotifers, have "hidden" species, populations that
are fully reproductively isolated but do not look distinct and are thus not
recognized as distinct species in most surveys. In addition to determining the
true number of species currently lumped together as "Brachionus plicatilis",
this study will provide insight into the mechanisms by which hidden species
arise and how common they are, an understanding of which is essential to any
accurate assessment of biodiversity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;