* 0105734
* Image Coding for Constrained Systems
* CSE,CCF
* 11/01/2001,10/31/2005
* Kenneth Zeger, University of California-San Diego
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 10/31/2005
* USD 485,149.00

TITLE: Image Coding with
Constraints&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project
studies image and video coding schemes for emerging and
future&lt;br/&gt;networks. The study concentrates on certain specific types of
image coding&lt;br/&gt;including facsimile, still imagery, and video. Networks
of the future will&lt;br/&gt;consist of hybrid combinations of wired and
wireless components. Commercial&lt;br/&gt;products such as digital cameras, cell
phones, and PDAs will send and/or&lt;br/&gt;receive images of various types over
a wide range of network channel&lt;br/&gt;conditions. The networks impose
constraints such as: low data rate and&lt;br/&gt;high/unpredictable packet
losses. The devices impose constraints including&lt;br/&gt;small batteries,
small displays, low delay, limited memory, and limited&lt;br/&gt;processing
power. Together, these constraints make the design of inexpensive&lt;br/&gt;and
efficient image transmission devices of the future a very challenging
task.&lt;br/&gt;In addition to designing such systems, a solid theoretical
understanding of the&lt;br/&gt;achievable qualities and limitations is important
to know.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The main objectives of this research are to
achieve deep theoretical&lt;br/&gt;understanding of source and channel coding
for images transmitted on lossy&lt;br/&gt;networks and to develop practical
algorithms that can be effectively used in&lt;br/&gt;real applications. The work
exploits the diverse backgrounds of the PIs in&lt;br/&gt;image and video coding
and combined source/channel coding. The investigation&lt;br/&gt;involves code
design, theoretical analysis, and computer simulation.&lt;br/&gt;The main topics
investigated for constrained image coding include:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;(1)
Robust facsimile transmission,&lt;br/&gt;(2) Robust low rate video source
coding,&lt;br/&gt;(3) Error correction, resilience, and concealment.