* 0105004
* The Lagrangian Averaged Navier-Stokes Equations with Applications to Turbulence Modeling
* MPS,DMS
* 08/01/2001,10/31/2004
* Steve Shkoller, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Henry Warchall
* 10/31/2004
* USD 94,599.00

0105004&lt;br/&gt;Shkoller&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This three year research effort
is founded upon the author's recent &lt;br/&gt;development of a novel Lagrangian
averaging procedure for the Euler and &lt;br/&gt;Navier-Stokes equations of
fluid dynamics. The method is based on &lt;br/&gt;expressing the exact
Lagrangian fluid flow as a composition of a smooth &lt;br/&gt;deterministic
volume-preserving Lagrangian flow and a rough stochastic &lt;br/&gt;flow
consisting of volume-preserving near-identity transformations. This
&lt;br/&gt;decomposition is asymptotically expanded about the identity,
substituted &lt;br/&gt;into the variational principle, and then averaged. The
resulting &lt;br/&gt;deterministic system of equations is termed the Lagrangian
averaged &lt;br/&gt;Navier-Stokes (LANS) equations in the presence of viscosity,
and the &lt;br/&gt;Lagrangian averaged Euler (LAE) equations in the ideal case
when &lt;br/&gt;viscosity is absent. Both the LAE and LANS models are
parameterized by &lt;br/&gt;a small spatial scale alpha, and are derived in such
a fashion as to &lt;br/&gt;accurately reproduce the dynamics of the Euler and
Navier-Stokes &lt;br/&gt;equations at spatial scales larger than alpha, while
averaging (or &lt;br/&gt;homogenizing) the fluid motion at scales smaller than
alpha. Unlike &lt;br/&gt;current approaches such as Reynolds averaged Navier-
Stokes (RANS) or &lt;br/&gt;Large Eddie Simulation (LES) models which add
artificial dissipation to &lt;br/&gt;the system to remove subgrid scales, the
LAE/LANS equations preserve &lt;br/&gt;the underlying structure of the inviscid
dynamics, namely, energy, &lt;br/&gt;helicity, and circulation, by instead using
a geometric, nonlinear dispersive &lt;br/&gt;mechanism. As a result, our LANS
model, unlike RANS or LES, does not &lt;br/&gt;artificially suppress
intermittency, a fundamental feature of fluid &lt;br/&gt;turbulence. The
resulting system is a set of dynamically coupled partial &lt;br/&gt;differential
equations for the mean velocity field and covariance tensor. &lt;br/&gt;This
system will be the backbone of a massive analytic and computational
&lt;br/&gt;assault on the modeling and understanding of fluid
turbulence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Although heavily studied by numerous
researchers for over a century, &lt;br/&gt;incompressible fluid turbulence
elusively remains one of the last great &lt;br/&gt;challenges of modern
scientific exploration. Its understanding is of &lt;br/&gt;paramount importance
in a wide range of engineering and physical &lt;br/&gt;applications, ranging
from the design of airplanes and automobiles, to &lt;br/&gt;daily weather
forecasts and global climate prediction. Roughly speaking, &lt;br/&gt;a flow
becomes turbulent when all of the spatial scales in the fluid are
&lt;br/&gt;activated, or in other words, when the fluid is moving so
chaotically, as to &lt;br/&gt;create smaller and ever smaller vortices. In such
a flow regime, the &lt;br/&gt;trajectory of each fluid particle appears
unpredictable, yet the challenge is &lt;br/&gt;to derive a mathematical set of
equations which can describe this &lt;br/&gt;unpredictable motion. About 150
years ago, the Navier-Stokes equations &lt;br/&gt;were introduced for this very
purpose, and although it is now generally &lt;br/&gt;accepted that these
equations do indeed provide a remarkable physical &lt;br/&gt;model of reality,
it remains a mathematical mystery as to whether or not &lt;br/&gt;unique
solutions to these equations exist for all time. Moreover, even
&lt;br/&gt;numerical approximations of these equations on the world's fastest
&lt;br/&gt;supercomputers are incapable of modeling the small-scale structures
and &lt;br/&gt;patterns which are formed in a turbulent regime -- the computer
simply &lt;br/&gt;runs out of memory long before it can simulate the
prohibitively small &lt;br/&gt;vortical motion. The LANS model, described above,
is intended to &lt;br/&gt;alleviate these fundamental difficulties, and make the
computational &lt;br/&gt;simulation of turbulent flows feasible.&lt;br/&gt;