* 0105851
* U.S.-Hungary Koros Regional Archaeological Research Project: Understanding the Neolithic-Copper Age Transition in the Southeastern Carpathian Basin
* O/D,OISE
* 07/01/2001,11/30/2001
* Richard Yerkes, Ohio State University Research Foundation -DO NOT USE
* Standard Grant
* Bonnie Thompson
* 11/30/2001
* USD 53,009.00

This U.S.-Hungarian archaeological research project involves William Parkinson
and Richard Yerkes of Ohio State University and Attila Gyucha of the Munkacsy
Mihaly Museum in Bekescsaba. Their intent is to examine socioeconomic
organization and change that occurred during the late Neolithic to Early Copper
Age period on the Great Hungarian Plain. The collaborative work involves
excavations at two Early Copper Age settlements (Veszto 20 and Korosladany 14)
located in the Koros River Valley. Results are expected to contribute to our
basic understanding of social organization in "middle range" or "tribal"
societies and to anthropological models for comparing development of pastoral
economic systems.

Together the Hungarian-U.S. team plans to explore the organization of specific
sites within their local context to gain a regional framework for interpreting
findings in the Carpathian Basin. Efforts at each site will feature: 1) size and
spatial organization of settlement sites, 2) economic organization, 3)
paleoenvironmental reconstruction, and 4) chronology and social interaction. The
insights gained should add to a specific body of multi-disciplinary regional
work that can be applied to models for trajectories of social change in the
later prehistory of the Great Hungarian Plain. While regionally specific, the
results of this research are also expected to help refine models for small-
scale, semi-sedentary agricultural, autonomous village societies elsewhere in
the world.

This international archaeological research project fulfills the program
objective of advancing scientific knowledge by enabling experts in the Untied
States and Central Europe to combine complementary talents and share research
resources in areas of strong mutual interest and competence.