* 0105998
* Ground Motion and Source Kinematics Studies of the 21 September 1999 Taiwan Earthquake
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Douglas Dreger, University of California-Berkeley
* Continuing grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 07/31/2005
* USD 183,112.00

Ground Motion and Source Kinematics Studies of the 21 September 1999 Taiwan
Earthquake

PI: Douglas S. Dreger Proposal EAR-0105998

The kinematic source process of the 1999 MW7.6 Taiwan (Chi-Chi) mainshock and
large aftershocks, and the effects of three-dimensional velocity structure on
the generation of strong ground motions are investigated. The Chi-Chi
earthquake, which occurred in a heavily urbanized region, inflicted considerable
damage and human suffering once again underscoring the need for better
understanding of the processes that control the generation of strong ground
motions. This earthquake is unique in terms of data quality and quantity. More
than 400 three-component strong motion stations recorded the earthquake waves,
and this high quality data set provides an opportunity to study the earthquake
source and wave propagation at scales never before possible. Three fault models,
each with a distinct geometry, have been proposed to describe the kinematics of
thrust faulting in the Chi-Chi earthquake, and are being tested by fitting
observed and synthetic seismic waveforms and ground deformation (GPS) data.
These geometries are tested by performing kinematic inversions of the strong
motion and GPS data sets to determine the optimal distribution of fault slip.
Additionally, several large aftershocks exhibited either shallowly or steeply
dipping reverse focal mechanisms. Of particular interest is whether any of the
aftershocks actually slipped on the low angle planes indicating the presence of
a controlling basal decollement. By investigating the source kinematics of the
mainshock and the large aftershocks it is possible to map the slip distribution
of the earthquake sequence thereby obtaining an image of the active fault
surface. The active mountain building of the Taiwan arc-continent collision has
resulted complex crustal structure, as evidenced in recent tomographic studies
and the considerable topographic relief. Three component seismic waveforms,
phase arrival times, and peak ground motion parameters for the mainshock and
large aftershocks are being modeled to constrain the three-dimensional wave
propagation, and effects of free-surface topography using an elastic, velocity-
stress staggered-grid, finite difference algorithm. Finally, the sensitivity of
simulated strong motion waveforms due to the coupled nature of extended finite-
fault source representations and three-dimensional structure is being analyzed.
The results from this study will form the framework for future waveform modeling
studies to refine the 3D structure of Taiwan, and will also provide an essential
examination of strong ground motion variability contributing to the US
earthquake hazard mitigation effort.