* 0105609
* Diversity Dynamics of Middle Paleozoic Marine Animals
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Michael Foote, University of Chicago
* Standard Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 06/30/2005
* USD 100,002.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Diversity Dynamics of Middle Paleozoic Marine
Animals&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Michael
Foote&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0105609&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The subject of diversity
dynamics explores how and why the number of species in the world changes over
time. This research will explore diversity dynamics with data on marine animals
from the middle of the Paleozoic Era, about 440 to 350 million years ago. The
species composition of fossil communities will be inventoried, and the ancient
geographic and environmental setting of these communities will be determined.
Using this new information as well as existing data from other sources, the
times of origination and extinction of animal genera (the more inclusive
taxonomic units that consist of one or more related species) will be estimated.
This will allow the temporal patterns of diversity, origination, and extinction
to be reconstructed, and these temporal patterns in turn will be used to assess
the dynamics of diversity. When diversity increases over millions of years, does
this tend to occur because the rate of production of new species has increased
or because the rate of extinction of existing species has decreased? Likewise,
does a decline in diversity tend to be marked by a decrease in origination or an
increase in extinction? In other words, is origination or extinction more
important in regulating biological diversity? Previous research shows that the
style of diversity dynamics changes over the course of animal evolution, with
extinction more important for about the first 300 million years of the history
of animals (during the Paleozoic Era) and origination more important thereafter
(during the Mesozoic and Cenozoic Eras). There are reasons to think that
diversity dynamics may vary geographically and environmentally. This research
will be the first to test the predictions that, as far as diversity regulation
is concerned, extinction is more important in the tropics than in the temperate
zones and more important in shallow-water environments than in deeper waters. In
addition, it is known that shallow marine and tropical marine environments were
more prevalent in the Paleozoic Era than later. The results of this research
will therefore be significant in determining whether the observed, long-term
temporal change in diversity dynamics may be underlain by a change in the
prevalence of certain environmental and geographic settings in the marine
realm.&lt;br/&gt;