* 0105985
* Meta-MAC Protocols: A New Dimension to Adaptation in Medium Access Control
* CSE,CNS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Andras Farago, University of Texas at Dallas
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

In all networks that have a broadcast channel as the basis of communication,
the medium access control (MAC) protocol serves a vital role, as it directly
controls the access to communication resources. As the networks and the traffic
they carry both become more heterogeneous the question is how to best adapt to
the unknown or changing network conditions. The natural answer provided by most
existing protocols is to include some kind of adaptivity in order to dynamically
adust their operation to the actual network conditions. Examples of adaptivity
include hybrid protocols that periodically recompute slot assignments,
adjustment of retransmission probabilities (e.g., backoff mechanisms), as well
as many other ad hoc solutions that tend to become unstable under high load.
Rather than what amounts to essentially tuning parameters of the protocol "on
the fly," we instead propose a new "meta-MAC" protocol framework that implements
new dimension of adaptivity, on top of existing MAC protocols. Specifically, we
propose research on a method, whose roots are in Artificial Intelligence (A1),
to systematically and automatically combine a set of existing protocols into a
single MAC protocol in a novel way, such that the resulting combined protocol
has provable optimality properties. Each protocol in the set may be a good
candidate for certain situations. For example, a randomized contention based
protocol is good for low loads, due to its low delay, while an allocation based
protocol is desirable for high loads, as it avoids the breakdown induced by too
many collisions. Then the meta-protocol will automatically find combined
decisions that dynamically represent the "best of the team," under the actual
network conditions, without having to know in advance which of the conditions
will actually occur and how they will change. Thus, rather than tuning
parameters in an ad hoc manner, we systematically and automatically optimize the
medium access approach itself. The proposed research program intends to fully
explore the promising potential of the novel meta-MAC protocol aggregation
approach, in which encouraging initial results of the PI and co-PI have already
shown the principal feasibility. Specifically, the three main research
directions include aggregating more sophisticated MAC protocols (such as IEEE
802.11), dynamically altering the protocol mix to support Quality of Service
(QoS) at the MAC layer, and an in-depth study of the correctness, stability, and
consistency of meta-MAC protocols. Our proposed meta-MAC optimization runs
autonomously without any centralized control or any message exchanges. This
makes the meta-MAC approach inherently scalable to arbitrarily large networks.
Thus, the meta-MAC approach is ideally suited for the evolving application
requirements of today's increasingly heterogeneous networking environments. In
addition to the above, we plan to incorporate the general approach into the
graduate curriculum in the new Telecommunications Engineering Program at the
University of Texas at Dallas, thus enriching the traditional telecommunications
curriculum with novel adaptive methodologies that provide intelligent, highly
adaptive solutions in large, dynamically changing, heterogrneous networks.