* 0105139
* DISSERTATION RESEARCH: Reproductive Cooperation and Conflict in the White-Throated Magpie-Jay
* NONE,NONE
* 05/01/2001,04/30/2003
* John Eadie, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* H. Jane Brockmann
* 04/30/2003
* USD 10,000.00

eproductive cooperation and conflict in the white-throated magpie-jay

John McAllister Eadie, PI Elena Catherine Berg, co-PI

This study will analyze the relationship between kinship, parentage, and
behavioral variation within a Costa Rican population of white-throated magpie-
jays (Calocitta formosa), a highly gregarious bird inhabiting the tropical dry
forests of Central America. In this cooperative breeding bird, territorial
groups typically consist of a breeding pair, their immature offspring, and one
or more helpers (adult offspring that forego their own breeding attempts and
assist the breeders with nest-building, defense against predators, and feeding
of the incubating female and her nestlings). In most cooperative breeders, males
act as helpers, but the magpie-jay is particularly interesting in that these sex
roles are reversed: only females stay behind. This provides a rare opportunity
to study interactions between related females and assess the factors affecting
female reproductive decisions. Specifically, we will test a recent model of
reproductive behavior that predicts the precise conditions under which females
should 1) lay eggs "parasitically" in the nests of other females, 2) breed
alone, or 3) act as non-breeding helpers in their natal territory. By testing
the specific predictions of this model in a field setting, it will be possible
to evaluate the factors affecting reproductive decisions among females, creating
a springboard for future research on the relationship between cooperation and
conflict in birds. To test this model, behavioral and molecular data will be
collected on multiple groups of magpie-jays during three breeding seasons.
Observational data will be collected on patterns of nesting and helping
behavior, and molecular analyses of blood samples collected from adults and
nestlings will be used to establish the reproductive output of individual
females as well as patterns of kinship within and among groups. This is an
exciting new approach because it offers a fresh outlook on female alternative
reproductive tactics, provides a theoretical framework for linking cooperating
breeding and parasitism, and outlines specific predictions that can be tested in
the field.