* 0105476
* RUI:  Cheirolepidiaceous Conifer Fossils from North America: New Data on the Structure and Diversity of the Dominant Mesozoic Vegetation
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Brian Axsmith, University of South Alabama
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2005
* USD 110,000.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Cheirolepidiaceous Conifer Fossils from
North America: New Data on the Structure and Diversity of the Dominant Mesozoic
Vegetation&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Brian J.
Axsmith&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0105476&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Members of the extinct
conifer family Cheirolepidiaceae evolved high levels of morphological diversity
and reproductive sophistication, and were among the dominant land plants of the
Mesozoic Era. Nevertheless, many aspects of the structure and evolution of these
plants remain poorly understood. This situation represents a significant gap in
our understanding of the Mesozoic world and the evolutionary history of seed
plants. The proposed research involves the collection and/or description of new
cheirolepidiaceous conifers from sites in Arkansas, Connecticut, Massachusetts
and New Jersey that will elucidate the structure, diversity and evolution of
this intriguing family. In addition to the first description of the important
genus Hirmeriella from North America, at least three new taxa, as well as the
only intact seed cones of the cosmopolitan species Pseudofrenelopsis
parceramosa, will be described. In addition, a preliminary phylogenetic analysis
of the Cheirolepidiaceae will be undertaken. Although much of the current state
of knowledge regarding these plants is based on European collections, the
proposed research will demonstrate that North America was a major locus of
cheirolepidiacean diversity and evolution&lt;br/&gt;