* 0105068
* Dissertation Research: Ecotone Dynamics and Landscape Response to Climate Change
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2004
* Dean Urban, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Alan Tessier
* 06/30/2004
* USD 9,950.00

Proposal: DEB-0105068&lt;br/&gt;PI: Dean Urban &amp; Todd
Lookingbill&lt;br/&gt;Title: Dissertation Research: Ecotone Dynamics and
Landscape Response to Climate Change&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Attempts to predict
ecological response to global climate change must start with a comprehensive
understanding of factors influencing current spatial patterns of vegetation. The
proposed research examines the relationship between patterns of vegetation in
old-growth forest and environmental factors likely to change under scenarios of
global warming. Previous analyses have shown the need for better landscape-level
estimates of fundamental environmental properties. Consequently, fine-grain
measurements of temperature and moisture will be collected across an
experimental watershed in the Western Cascades to address this critical need. An
additional sampling effort will focus on an active area of community transition,
because shifts in these transitions have been highlighted as potential early
warning signs of climate change. This research will examine how temperature and
moisture influence the transition from forest dominated by Tsuga heterophylla to
forest dominated by Abies amabilis. Simulation models based on generated data
will facilitate synthesis and identify areas of potential climatic
sensitivity.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;