* 0105031
* Dissertation Research: The Evolution of the A Mating Type Genes in the Mushroom Fungi.
* BIO,DEB
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Rytas Vilgalys, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 08/31/2003
* USD 5,066.00

0105031 &lt;br/&gt;Vilgalys &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research focuses on the
genetic basis for reproduction in mushroom-forming fungi. Genes will be isolated
from several mushroom species through a method termed "positional cloning".
Because of the hyper-variability of mating-type genes, these genes cannot be
isolated or cloned using standard protocols. As an alternative strategy,
positional cloning utilizes the conservation of genes adjacent on the chromosome
to the target genes. This technique will be applied to isolating the genes
controlling mating in oyster mushrooms as well other mushroom species that
represent unusual breeding systems. Finally, the proposed research will
determine whether the positional cloning strategy can be successfully applied to
isolating mating genes from the various and diverse subgroups of mushrooms.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mushrooms are atypical because natural populations of
these fungi can contain numerous sexes, called mating-types. Unlike animals and
many plants that determine sexes through sex chromosomes, mushrooms achieve
multiple sexes through variation at a single genetic locus. The genes
controlling mating-type in mushrooms have been isolated and the function of the
mating-type proteins is well known. However, mating-type in fungi has been
studied only in two species. Because of the great amount of variation in
reproductive mode among the mushroom fungi, it is important to expand the
knowledge of how mating type genes function to represent the diversity of this
ecologically important group of organisms. &lt;br/&gt;