* 0105488
* Machine Learning, On-line Algorithms, and Optimization
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Avrim Blum, Carnegie-Mellon University
* Standard Grant
* David Du
* 08/31/2004
* USD 285,990.00

This research involves developing new connections between the areas
of&lt;br/&gt;machine learning, on-line algorithms, and optimization, and
using&lt;br/&gt;these connections to address fundamental problems in
all&lt;br/&gt;three areas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In machine learning, one focus
of this research is how to best combine&lt;br/&gt;a small sample of labeled data
with a large amount of unlabeled data&lt;br/&gt;in order to produce high quality
predictions. This type of problem&lt;br/&gt;has become especially important
given the explosion of data now&lt;br/&gt;available over the web. This research
is exploring how techniques&lt;br/&gt;such as network flow and graph cuts from
the optimization literature&lt;br/&gt;can be used to provide a new means of
attack, and how to best make a&lt;br/&gt;number of design choices that arise in
this approach. Another basic&lt;br/&gt;question this work investigates is what
kinds of concepts can be&lt;br/&gt;automatically learned in the presence of
highly noisy data, and to&lt;br/&gt;what extent substantially new types of
algorithms may be possible.&lt;br/&gt;The PI recently gave the first algorithm
to learn a class of concepts&lt;br/&gt;in the presence of noise that is provably
not learnable by a wide&lt;br/&gt;class of techniques known as Statistical Query
methods. The current&lt;br/&gt;research aims to expand on this work and explore
the extent to which&lt;br/&gt;it can be pushed much further. The types of
learning problems being&lt;br/&gt;studied have close connections to problems of
decoding random linear&lt;br/&gt;codes and finding approximate shortest lattice
vectors that arise in&lt;br/&gt;cryptography. Improvements to the learning
algorithms should impact&lt;br/&gt;our understanding of those problems as
well.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Another major thrust of this research is the use of
techniques from&lt;br/&gt;machine learning to address problems in online
algorithms. In&lt;br/&gt;particular, the highly-developed "weighted experts"
technology in&lt;br/&gt;machine learning suggests new approaches for combining
multiple online&lt;br/&gt;algorithms that may simplify a number of longstanding
open problems.&lt;br/&gt;This work is studying the extent to which this
connection can provide&lt;br/&gt;insight into several basic questions, such as
dynamic optimality in&lt;br/&gt;search trees and the weighted caching problem.
Finally, this research&lt;br/&gt;is also studying a number of basic
approximability questions, as well&lt;br/&gt;as exploring new frameworks for the
analysis of local search&lt;br/&gt;techniques.