* 0105254
* Studies of Magnetohydrodynamic Turbulence and Turbulence in the Corona and Interplanetary Medium
* GEO,AGS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2006
* William Matthaeus, University of Delaware
* Continuing Grant
* Paul Bellaire
* 08/31/2006
* USD 505,180.00

The investigators will perform theoretical investigations of incompressible and
nearly incompressible magnetohydrodynamic turbulence and anisotropic linear
cascades in the corona and interplanetary medium. Complex nonlinear dynamical
behavior, or turbulence, is observed in space plasmas over a wide range of
scales that may be described by a magnetohydrodynamic (MHD) model. Many
phenomena in the extended solar corona, including the solar wind, in the
magnetosphere, and in the interstellar medium may involve turbulence. Turbulence
is likely to have importance in coronal heating, the acceleration of solar wind,
and the acceleration and diffusion of energetic particles. An integrated
approach will be adopted using MHD and fluid simulation techniques, transport
theory, analytic theory of turbulence and particle diffusion, and related
analysis and interpretation of spacecraft observations. Work in basic MHD theory
will include development and refinement of phenomenologies for MHD relaxation
and decay processes, further characterization of the nature of MHD spectral
anisotropy, and information theory-based attempts to advance a description of
coherent structures in MHD turbulence. Advances in phenomenologies and transport
models will be used to further develop scattering and transport theories of
cosmic rays. Long-term goals are self-consistent models of coronal heating and
the acceleration and evolution of the solar wind.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;