* 0105337
* Massive Data Streams: Algorithms and Complexity
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2004
* Joan Feigenbaum, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* David Du
* 06/30/2004
* USD 256,304.00

&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: "Massive Data Streams: Algorithms and
Complexity"&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Investigators: Joan Feigenbaum and Sampath
Kannan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt; Massive data sets are
increasingly important in many applications,&lt;br/&gt;including observational
sciences, product marketing, and monitoring and&lt;br/&gt;operations of large
systems. In network operations, raw data typically arrive&lt;br/&gt;in streams,
and decisions must be made by algorithms that make one pass&lt;br/&gt;over each
stream, throw much of the raw data away, and produce ``synopses''&lt;br/&gt;or
``sketches'' for further processing. Moreover, network-generated
massive&lt;br/&gt;data sets are often distributed: Several different, physically
separated&lt;br/&gt;network elements may receive or generate data streams that,
together, comprise&lt;br/&gt;one logical data set. The enormous scale,
distributed nature, and one-pass &lt;br/&gt;processing requirement on the data
sets of interest must be addressed with &lt;br/&gt;new algorithmic
techniques.&lt;br/&gt; Two programming paradigms for massive data sets are
"sampling" and&lt;br/&gt;"streaming." Rather than take time even to read a
massive data&lt;br/&gt;set, a sampling algorithm extracts a small random sample
and computes&lt;br/&gt;on it. By contrast, a streaming algorithm takes time to
read all the input, &lt;br/&gt;but little more time and little total space.
Input to a streaming algorithm &lt;br/&gt;is a sequence of items; the streaming
algorithm is given the items in order, &lt;br/&gt;lacks space to record more
than a small amount of the input, and is required&lt;br/&gt;to perform its per-
item processing quickly in order to keep up with&lt;br/&gt;the unbuffered input.
The investigators continue the study of &lt;br/&gt;fundamental algorithms for
massive data streams. Specific problems of&lt;br/&gt;interest include but are
not limited to the complexity of proving properties &lt;br/&gt;of data streams,
the construction of one-pass testers of properties of &lt;br/&gt;massive graphs,
and the streaming space complexity of clustering.