* 0105148
* Dissertation Research:  Are Relatively Small Populations more Vulnerable to increased Inbreeding Depression and Decreased Heritability for Traits with a Quantitative Genetic Basis
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2003
* Brook Milligan, New Mexico State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2003
* USD 6,000.00

0105148&lt;br/&gt;Milligan&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The performance of individuals
within populations and the ability of&lt;br/&gt;populations to respond to
selection, e.g., due to environmental&lt;br/&gt;changes, have received special
attention by conservation biologists.&lt;br/&gt;In particular, small relative to
large populations are generally&lt;br/&gt;regarded as either containing
individuals expressing deleterious&lt;br/&gt;genes or lacking sufficient genetic
variation to respond to selection. The&lt;br/&gt;quantitative genetics measures
of inbreeding depression and&lt;br/&gt;heritability quantify these effects, and
ideally such measures would&lt;br/&gt;be available for both small and large
populations of the same&lt;br/&gt;species. This study is using innovative
molecular genetic methods to&lt;br/&gt;measure these quantities in populations
of Aquilegia (Ranunculaceae;&lt;br/&gt;columbines) that vary dramatically in
total population size. DNA&lt;br/&gt;genotypes will be used to determine how
related inviduals are within&lt;br/&gt;the populations; statistical models will
then be used to estimate the&lt;br/&gt;quantitative genetics parameters
describing inbreeding depression and&lt;br/&gt;heritability. Because populations
of different sizes will be studied,&lt;br/&gt;a relationship between these
measures and population size can be&lt;br/&gt;detected if it
exists.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Conservation biology has increasingly relied upon
molecular genetic&lt;br/&gt;variation. However, to fully understand how that
variation relates to&lt;br/&gt;adaptive differentiation, evolutionary potential,
and resistance to&lt;br/&gt;the threat of extinction--all critical concerns of
conservation&lt;br/&gt;biology--a better understanding of the quantitative
genetic basis of&lt;br/&gt;adaptive traits is critical. Furthermore, the
assumptions mentioned&lt;br/&gt;above about how population size affects that
basis require empirical&lt;br/&gt;testing in natural populations. This novel
study addresses and&lt;br/&gt;empirically tests important phenomena in
biological conservation using&lt;br/&gt;measurements of quantitative genetics in
field environments.&lt;br/&gt;