* 0105929
* Collaborative Research:  Modeling the Impacts of Post-Settlement Sediment Deposition on Floodplain Vegetation
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,02/28/2006
* Philip Townsend, University of Maryland Center for Environmental Sciences
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 02/28/2006
* USD 417,515.00

0105929&lt;br/&gt;Townsend&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Temperate river systems and
their associated floodplains have been substantially altered by human activity.
Although the effects of dams on river hydrology and downstream ecosystems have
been studied extensively, data on how changes in historic sedimentation regimes
and geomorphology affect floodplain ecosystems is practically nonexistent. This
research will demonstrate for an entire model river system (the Roanoke River of
North Carolina) the degree of post-colonial landscape-scale ecosystem alteration
due to sediment deposition, and the future changes likely to affect vegetation
dynamics as those sediments are redistributed and transported out of the system.
We will test a series of specific hypotheses centered on the following: (1)
Anthropogenic sediment deposition on the Roanoke River floodplain over the last
250 years has led to a dramatic alteration of the extent and distribution of
landforms within the geomorphologic system; (2) The vegetation of the lower
Roanoke floodplain has been substantially altered as a consequence of
environmental changes due to geomorphic alterations from post-colonial
sedimentation; (3) Models of sediment-impacted riparian areas developed from
geomorphologic and paleoecological data can be used to predict future landforms
and vegetation composition. To address these hypotheses we will integrate
dendrogeomorphic, palynological and modeling techniques to (1) develop a
spatially explicit model of post-colonial sediment accumulation for the lower
Roanoke River floodplain, (2) model the pre-colonial geomorphic landscape and
simulate future floodplain geomorphology, and (3) predict vegetation
distributions for those surfaces using vegetation-environment
relationships.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;