* 0105485
* Performance Evaluation of Disk Arrays
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Alexander Thomasian, New Jersey Institute of Technology
* Standard Grant
* Timothy M. Pinkston
* 07/31/2005
* USD 199,987.00

The proposed research has as final objective advancing knowledge on disk arrays
performance, as well as developing new disk array organizations and algorithms
for improved performance and reliability. The following specific areas will be
investigated. Mirored disks (RAID1) double the disk access bandwidth for reads,
but even higher performance is possible through scheduling. A combination of
single disk scheduling methods adapted to mirrored disks and methods utilizing
non-volatile storage to defer writes will be investigated. RAID6 disk arrays
tolerating two disk failures utilize two parity disks or one parity disk and one
utilizing the Reed-Solomon code. Two data layouts for the former case have been
proposed. The performance of these configurations will be compared with each
other, as well as RAID5, while the system is operating in normal, degraded, and
rebuild modes. Active disks process data locally to disk, responding with final
or filtrated data rather than raw data. Techniques to process more sophisticated
queries than those considered so far will be investigated. Prioritized
processing of disk requests allows background applications to make progress
without significant impact on the performance of higher priority applications.
We plan to investigate nonpreemptive as well as preemptive priorities in
processing disk requests.