* 0105529
* Architectural Support for Scalable High-Speed Routers
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Nian-Feng Tzeng, University of Louisiana at Lafayette
* Standard Grant
* Timothy M. Pinkston
* 08/31/2006
* USD 300,000.00

Scalable high-speed routers are necessary to handle rapidly growing traffic in
the Internet at the aggregated packet forwarding rates expected to reach
terabits per second. This proposal deals with a novel router architecture with
good scalability and capable of forwarding hundreds of millions of packets per
second, in order to keep up with future transmission technologies. It aims to
help advance the state-of-the-art of router design and to enable large
networking configurations. The project contains both basic research and
experimental systems activities, including the major objectives of (1)
developing a fast packet classification subsystem (PCS), (2)pursuing a scalable
switching fabric (SSF) for interconnecting line cards,&lt;br/&gt;(3) assessing
the use of a simultaneous multithreading SMT) processor to replace the
conventional processor(s) in each forwarding engine, and 4) investigating into
effective fault-tolerant schemes for key router components. The first three
objectives are related to router scalability and performance,&lt;br/&gt;whereas
the last one is for reliability improvement, which is especially crucial as the
router sizes grow. The fast PCS proposed comprises multiple forwarding engines
and a novel cache-oriented multistage structure (COMS), which directs packets
arriving at line cards to those forwarding engines for table lookups. The COMS
caches lookup results at its constituent switching elements to enable fast and
concurrent lookups of subsequent packets. Each forwarding engine keeps only
partial routing/filter lookup tables, rather than full ones (as in any other
router design). The SSF is based on PI's earlier switching fabric work, with an
appropriate set of wrap-around connections and additional logics for hardware
multicast support. An initial study on the use of an SMT processor to handle
multiple table-lookup processes, with one thread for a process, is encouraging,
and its extensive assessment will be conducted in this project. Caching lookup
outcomes optimally in COMS will be modeled formally as a graph optimization
problem, with its solution being developed. Research results from this project
are likely to have material, positive impacts on future router design, advancing
networking technologies to facilitate the continuous expansion of the Internet
for years to come. They will also enrich the lecturing materials of such courses
as computer communications and networks, network computing, and distributed
systems.&lt;br/&gt;