* 0105499
* New directions in signal processing inspired by the auditory system
* CSE,CCF
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2005
* Ramdas Kumaresan, University of Rhode Island
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 06/30/2005
* USD 308,156.00

Proposal #0105499&lt;br/&gt;U of Rhode Island&lt;br/&gt;PI: Kumaresan,
Ramdas&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Many natural and man-made sounds have a time-
varying, broad-band spectrum. Although a number of computer processing methods
have been developed to analyze such signals, the auditory systems of humans and
animals seem to process such signals and make inferences on them much more
successfully. What kind of signal analysis underlies this phenomenon? In this
research auditory scientists and signal processing engineers collaborate to
attempt to answer this question, and, in the process advance the state of the
art in computer-based signal analysis. The potential applications of this
research include improved feature extraction for sound/speech
recognition/classification, separation of overlapping sounds/speech, sound
source localization and better understanding of the auditory system.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The auditory system, in addition to performing some form
of spectral analysis, also extracts temporal modulation information from the
acoustic signals. This information is encoded in the timing patterns of the
spike trains that originate in the inner ear. In this research, with the help of
auditory scientists, the above observations are translated into mathematically
tractable signal processing problems. Specifically, the following basic question
is explored: how can band-pass signals be represented by timing information
only, as opposed to traditional Nyquist-rate amplitude sampling (as in Shannon's
sampling theorem)? Recent results by the investigators indicate that the
information about the phase and envelope modulations of arbitrary band-pass
signals can be represented by certain zero-crossings alone, if appropriate
adaptive preprocessing(demodulation) is performed on the signal. Based on these
ideas an analysis-synthesis procedures is being developed in which time-varying
signals such as speech can be effectively represented by a small number of
modulated components using only timing information. The robustness of such
procedures will be examined and the analysis-synthesis procedures will be
applied to a number of applications mentioned in the above
paragraph.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;