* 0105334
* Electro/Magnetoencephalography Signal Processing Methods and Performance
* CSE,CCF
* 05/01/2001,04/30/2005
* Arye Nehorai, University of Illinois at Chicago
* Continuing Grant
* John Cozzens
* 04/30/2005
* USD 394,311.00

Electro/Magnetoencephalography&lt;br/&gt;Signal Processing Methods and
Performance&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Arye Nehorai&lt;br/&gt;EECS
Department&lt;br/&gt;University of Illinois at
Chicago&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Detecting electric sources in the brain is
important for both understanding its function and for clinical applications.
Examples include mapping the brain activities and finding foci of epilepsy
activities before surgical treatment. We are developing detection methods that
find the sources through computer processing of measurements from arrays of
sensors around the head. More specifically, we employ
Electro/Magnetoencephalography (E/MEG) sensors that measure electric potentials
on the scalp and induced magnetic field outside the head. We are developing
several new methods of processing the E/MEG signals, analyzing their performance
and validating with real data their applicability, thus contributing to
improvements in the use and performance of E/MEG equipment and to increase the
capabilities of neurological data processing tools.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We hope
to solve some of the most currently relevant E/MEG problems: (i) estimating and
tracking paths of functional and neuronal connectivity, following the
trajectories of cerebral sources, (ii) estimating concentrated and extended
sources, in the presence of noise with unknown spatio-temporal covariance, (iii)
simultaneously estimating source parameters and tissue conductivities, (iv)
developing computationally efficient methods for realistically-shaped head
models, which reduce the demands on segmentation algorithms, (v) estimating
source parameters for evoked responses with inhomogeneous epochs.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We are also deriving performance measures for evaluating
the newly proposed methods allowing comparison with existing systems and
techniques; identifying those that are effective and helping in the optimum
design of future systems. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Finally, we are using empirical
data sets evaluate and validate methods. These data sets are being derived by
the Dr. Jeffrey Lewine's group from Clinical and Cognitive Neurosciences studies
where whole-head MEG and high-density EEG are recorded simultaneously. The
Nehorai group is developing the processing methods and the two groups will
collaborate on their evaluation and validation. &lt;br/&gt;