* 0105089
* Dissertation Research:  Evolution of Floral Pattern Formation in Hibbertia (Dilleniaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2004
* Paul Manos, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 06/30/2004
* USD 10,000.00

The goals of this study are: 1) to infer the phylogeny, or set of genealogical
relationships, of Hibbertia using chloroplast and nuclear DNA sequences; 2) to
document the pattern of floral development using Scanning Electron Microscopy
for selected Hibbertia species; 3) compare the sequences of developmental events
between species in the context of a relativistic time course, so that
developmental events may be compared without the assumption that similar
appearing stages in the of different species represent units for direct
comparison. The combination of data on the pattern formation and relative timing
of organ development will then be analyzed in a phylogenetic context, so that
hypotheses of how relative changes in the timing of developmental events have
affected mature floral form may be explicitly tested. Preliminary data suggests
that in one major group of Hibbertia, the timing of the origination of the
carpels (female floral organs) has been advanced, relative to the initiation of
stamens (male, pollen-producing floral organs), so that the carpels take up
space on the lower half the floral meristem (aggregation of undifferentiated,
embryonic cells) that in other taxa produce stamens. The result of relative
timing shift is the transition of a radially symmetric patterning of stamens
around the flower, to a bilaterally symmetric arrangement of stamens formed
exclusively on the top half of the flower. This study will be among the first to
elucidate the evolutionary processes behind differences in floral morphology at
the level of the floral groundplan.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The study of
floral morphological diversity stands as one of the principal foci of botanical
research. While the implications of this field for flowering plant
classification have been the most long-standing and far-reaching, the study of
floral evolution impacts economically important disciplines such as horticulture
and plant breeding. A group with particularly great potential to further our
understanding of the evolution of floral form is Hibbertia (family
Dilleniaceae), a genus of ca. 150 species distributed in Australia, New
Caledonia, and Madagascar. What makes Hibbertia such an ideal candidate for such
a study is, as put forth by the great evolutionary botanist G. L. Stebbins
(1974), that "[t]here is probably no other genus of angiosperms that exhibits
such a high degree of variation in those characteristics that are often regarded
as 'fundamental' and are usually associated with the separation of genera or
even higher categories."&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;