* 0105927
* Testing For Regional Fluid Flow in Subducted Crust, Tinos Island, Cyclades (Greece)
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Jay Ague, Yale University
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2005
* USD 250,412.00

Ague&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0105927&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Profound questions regarding the
nature and extent of fluid migration in subducted crust have arisen in recent
years. Strong evidence for regional fluid flow and large fluid fluxes can be
found in some settings (e.g., California), but is notably lacking in others
(e.g., Alps, Cyclades). The latter case is particularly thought-provoking
because clays, serpentine, and carbonate minerals in the precursor sediments and
hydrothermally altered igneous rocks should have released abundant volatiles
during prograde high-pressure/low-temperature (HP/LT) metamorphism. In an effort
to resolve this apparent paradox, it is proposed to test for the presence of
large-scale, regional fluid flow during both prograde subduction and retrograde
exhumation and tectonic imbrication in the Cycladic Archipelago (Greece) by
integrating high-accuracy digital field mapping, chemical analyses of rocks and
minerals, and numerical models of coupled fluid flow and reaction. The specific
focus is on the HP/LT rocks of Tinos island, which to date have yielded no clear
evidence for regional flow despite prograde metamorphism during the Alpine
orogeny to epidote-blueschist/eclogite facies. Futhermore, the potential for
regional flow is not limited to the prograde stage, because many of the HP/LT
rocks of the Cyclades underwent fluid infiltration and greenschist facies
retrogression during exhumation. However, the processes and length scales of
flow remain unclear.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The field and laboratory work will
focus on the following straightforward criteria, applicable to both prograde and
retrograde settings, to test for limited or no regional flow. (1) Local or
limited devolatilization (prograde case) or volatile uptake (retrograde case);
(2) derivation of vein mass from local surroundings as opposed to precipitation
from through-going fluids; (3) limited mass transfer of non-volatile elements by
flow processes; (4) small estimated fluid fluxes and; (5) absence of regional
conduits for volatiles. Regional flow, on the other hand, requires that one or
more of these criteria be violated. The numerical modeling will establish what
type of flow regimes, whether local or regional in scope, are compatible with
observed net transfer reactions, amounts and spatial distribution of reaction
progress and element transport, volume changes of reaction, fluid compositions,
and distribution of any flow conduits. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The major goal will
be direct determination of processes of volatile generation and pathways of
volatile escape from downgoing slabs. The results will constrain models of the
major and trace element composition of subduction zone fluids, critical for our
understanding of mantle metasomatism and arc magma chemistry. Furthermore, the
general directions of fluid motion, whether subvertical or slab-parallel will be
estimated. Slab-parallel flow confined to regional tectonic units, in strong
contrast to subvertical flow across layers, may deprive the mantle hanging wall
of volatiles and transported non-volatile elements, therefore limiting mantle
metasomatism and, ultimately, arc magma generation. Tectonic juxtaposition in
active subduction zones allows downgoing rock units undergoing prograde
metamorphism to release fluids that retrograde HP/LT terranes undergoing
exhumation. What remains to be resolved is if the fluids can migrate regionally,
or if the HP/LT packages absorb volatiles locally, preventing large-scale
outwards fluid migration to the surface.&lt;br/&gt;