* 0105048
* Dissertation Research: Molecular Systematics and Evolution in Mimulus and Tribe Mimuleae
* BIO,DEB
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2003
* Richard Olmstead, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 07/31/2003
* USD 11,028.00

Systematists are charged with the difficult tasks of quantifying and
characterizing diversity in large groups of organisms and of identifying
discontinuities in morphological or genetic diversity that correspond with
species delimitations. These tasks are especially critical for groups that have,
1) species that have become model systems for studying evolution and ecology,
and 2) a large number of rare or threatened species. Species in the plant genus
Mimulus have become model systems for the study of evolutionary processes in
nature due to the diversity of interesting traits and adaptations in the genus.
Species in this worldwide genus have different chromosome numbers, reproductive
strategies, and pollinators, and interesting adaptations to extreme
environments. Many species of Mimulus are also rare. Phylogenetic estimates of
widely distributed, species-rich groups are important, because they give
biologists the opportunity to study broad-scale diversification events, in which
parallel radiations into spatially separated, similar environments may have
occurred. An estimate of the evolutionary relationships among the species is
useful in documenting these radiations and enables comparative analyses. The
role of systematists in delimiting species is equally vital. Conservation plans
and studies of evolutionary processes require accurate circumscription of
species. The purposes of this project are: 1) to determine the relationship of
Mimulus to other genera, 2) to determine whether Mimulus is a natural group, 3)
to estimate species-level relationships and define taxonomic units within
Mimulus and 4) to explore evolutionary patterns in the newly recognized
radiation of Mimulus in Australia.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; The proposed research
will accomplish two goals. We will use DNA sequence information from two
different genomes to further develop species-level phylogenetic hypotheses in
the newly recognized Australian Mimulus clade. These analyses will provide an
appropriate global perspective on diversification in the newly circumscribed
family Phrymaceae. These will also provide an explicit phylogenetic framework
for evaluating morphological changes in this group and will serve as a basis for
future comparative studies. We will use DNA sequence and polymorphic DNA
fragments to analyze patterns of genetic diversification in Mimulus sect.
Eunanus. These patterns will be used to guide taxon delimitation and will serve
as a model for defining taxa in groups with few morphological character
differences. Because many of its species are rare, accurate species delimitation
in Mimulus is critical to establishing appropriate management
policies.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;