* 0105091
* Dissertation Research: Local Controls of Landscape Abundance Patterns of a Stream Salamander.
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2003
* Douglas Bolger, Dartmouth College
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2003
* USD 8,265.00

0105091 Bolger

This research investigates local and landscape-scale controls on the abundance
of the spring salamander, Gyrinophilus porphyriticus (Plethodontidae), in
headwater streams throughout the northeastern United States. Spring salamander
abundance is negatively related to (1) post-timber harvest accumulation of
sediment in streams, (2) the presence of predatory brook trout, and (3) distance
to other streams which are potential immigrant sources. Experiments exploring
the combined effects of sediment level and brook trout on spring salamander
survival are proposed. These experiments will address the hypothesis that post-
harvest sediment input reduces the survival of larval spring salamanders in
streams occupied by brook trout by reducing the availability of refuges among
the rocks of the streambed.

Species abundance is controlled by factors acting both locally and at the
landscape-scale. Local controls include within-population reproduction and
survival rates. Landscape-scale controls are a function of dispersal rates among
populations. Landscape-scale controls have been shown to be critical to species
persistence in natural systems affected by human activities, but are poorly
understood in stream systems. These experiments will elucidate how habitat
disturbance affects species interactions in headwater streams and will permit
the assessment of the mitigating influence of among-stream dispersal. This
analysis will expand understanding of the basic ecology of stream species, and
significantly improve the effectiveness of recovery strategies for these species
following timber harvest.

