* 0105824
* Dissertation Research:  Molecular Systematics and the Evolution of a Novel Red Blood Cell Morphology in Plethodontid Salamanders
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2004
* David Wake, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 06/30/2004
* USD 9,996.00

The proposed research will focus on a multidimensional analysis of evolution at
different hierarchical levels, from the molecular to the organismal and
phylogenetic. The study organisms, plethodontid salamanders of the genus
Batrachoseps, are unique among vertebrates in displaying great variation in the
proportion of red blood cells in the circulating blood - from nearly all
nucleated to nearly all enucleated. The variation appears to be correlated with
degree of organismal specialization, in particular with elongation, attenuation,
and miniaturization, in a group of organisms that is specialized for
semifossorial existence in seasonally dry environments. A complicating factor is
the very high genome sizes in these organisms, which raises the possibility that
enucleation is a phenomenon associated with a fundamental conflict between large
cells, a necessary correlate of large genomes, and small blood vessels, a
necessary correlate of miniaturization. The study will investigate the
possibility that enucleation is a mechanical outcome of miniaturization, by
conducting ecological and morphological studies. In order to proceed it will be
necessary to develop a robust phylogenetic hypothesis for the genus, using
molecular markers. Mitochondrial genes have already been studied, and there is
good resolution of many of the tips of the phylogenetic tree; new work will
focus on more conservative nuclear genes and deeper branches in the tree. A
phylogenetic hypothesis will permit a comparative biological analysis of this
problem area and a determination of whether increases in body size within a
miniaturized lineage are accompanied by increases in nucleation levels for red
blood cells.

The significance of this research lies in the focused effort to study how
different levels of organization -- molecular, cellular, organismal, ecological,
and phylogenetic -- interact during development to give form and substance to
lineages of organisms. A simultaneous investigation of different levels provides
a realistic assessment of how evolution proceeds in lineages through time, and
permits an assessment of the nature of general adaptation processes and their
implications. The study also holds promise for opening new avenues of research
on the puzzling phenomenon of increases in genome size, which are so great in
these organisms as to strongly effect cellular and organismal levels (the
classic C-value paradox).



