* 0105623
* Computing the Nonlinear Vibrational Response of Liquids and Biomolecules
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2006
* Roger Loring, Cornell University
* Standard Grant
* raima larter
* 07/31/2006
* USD 222,300.00

Roger Loring of Cornell University is supported by the Theoretical and
Computational Chemistry Program to develop methods for modeling nonlinear
infrared spectroscopy in liquids and biomolecules with an atomistic level of
description. Experimental observables in two-pulse and three-pulse vibrational
echo measurements will be computed using classical molecular dynamics
simulations. The fundamental theoretical issue underpinning this research is
determining the optimal use of classical mechanical molecular dynamics data for
complex systems to calculate nominally quantum mechanical observables. Two
closely coupled research directions will be pursued: (1) to establish rigorously
the validity regime of classical mechanical echo calculations, by performing
numerically exact classical and quantum calculations for the same model system,
and (2) to perform classical echo calculations for liquid-state and biomolecular
models, for which quantum treatment is not feasible. Calculations will focus on
myoglobin-CO, for which experiments are now characterizing the nature and time
scales of protein fluctuations. Computing vibrational echoes in myoglobin-CO
will identify the specific protein dynamics sensed by the CO ligand, and will
guide the application of these new laser laboratory techniques to other
bimolecular systems.

Molecular motions in liquid solvents and in the heterogeneous environments of
proteins are an integral part of the dynamics of chemical reactions and
biological processes. A new generation of spectroscopic techniques can probe
these motions directly. This research will allow for a detailed molecular
picture of these processes by interpreting these new measurements.