* 0105752
* Online Algorithms
* NONE,NONE
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2004
* Elias Koutsoupias, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 05/31/2004
* USD 178,798.00

Online computation involves optimization problems for which the input is
revealed progressively. Online algorithms base their decisions only on the past
without knowledge of the future, much in the same way that a stock market
investor or a robot that explores an unknown environment decide about their next
action. Naturally such problems of decision-making with incomplete information
arise in many areas. During the last decade research in the area of online
algorithms has been very intensive. Still, some of the fundamental problems
remain unresolved and important problems arise from new applications. The
project deals both with old and new online problems.

Perhaps the most important fundamental unsolved problem is the k-server problem.
The objective is to settle the k-server conjecture and to investigate other
variants of the problem such as the k-taxicab problem and the CNN problem.
Another objective is to design and analyze competitive algorithms for a related
problem, the online matching problem on Euclidean spaces; some interesting
variants of the problem seem to play a central role in new e-commerce
applications. For all these and many other problems, one algorithm, the
generalized Work Function Algorithm, seems to have almost optimal competitive
ratio. The research addresses the roots of this phenomenon.

Research deals also with the pertinent problem of indexing of databases; the
size of datasets of real applications has been increasing dramatically and so
does the importance of good indexing schemes. Competitive analysis can be used
to quantify how much the performance of indexing schemes is affected by changes
in a database. Finally, the techniques of competitive analysis are a useful tool
to address specific game-theoretic problems in networks.