* 0105852
* Small Area and Longitudinal Estimation using Information from Multiple Surveys
* SBE,SES
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2005
* Sharon Lohr, Arizona State University
* Standard Grant
* Cheryl Eavey
* 08/31/2005
* USD 150,064.00

National surveys such as the Current Population Survey (CPS) or the National
Crime Victimization Survey give accurate estimates of poverty or criminal
victimization at the national level. These surveys do not, however, contain
sufficient sample sizes to give reliable estimates by themselves for "small
areas" such as counties or minority groups, or to provide detailed information
about events such as domestic violence that affect only a small part of the
population. Current methods for estimating poverty in small areas incorporate
auxiliary information from administrative sources such as tax records through
regression. This approach assumes that the administrative data are without
errors; it also does not incorporate information from other surveys or make use
of longitudinal information.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This project focuses on
combining information from multiple surveys, with possibly different sampling
designs, to improve estimation in small areas. Thus, for estimating poverty in
small areas, the CPS can be used in conjunction with the American Community
Survey and other sources. Multivariate multi-level models that allow for missing
data will be developed that make use of the correlations in the different
surveys to increase the precision of the small area estimates, and theoretical
properties of the estimates will be derived. Modifications of the multivariate
models will allow information from longitudinal surveys to be combined as well,
and allow longitudinal analyses from a panel survey to be supplemented by
information from related cross-sectional surveys. The investigator will also
develop methods for outlier detection and robust estimation using the multiple
data sources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Increasing amounts of information are
available from surveys and other sources, and there is increasing demand from
federal and local governments and from social scientists for estimates in small
areas. The models developed in this research will combine information from
different surveys and use longitudinal and spatial aspects of the surveys to
improve the accuracy of small area estimates, with no additional data collection
cost. The theoretical results derived in this research will also be useful for
other areas of application such as genetics and quality improvement. This
research is supported by the Methodology, Measurement, and Statistics Program
and a consortium of federal statistical agencies under the Research on Survey
and Statistical Methodology Funding Opportunity.