* 0105177
* Dissertation Research: Ecological Genetics of Life-history Evolution in Mimulus guttatus
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* John Willis, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 07/31/2003
* USD 9,390.00

A central goal of biology is to understand ecological and genetic factors which
have contributed to the diversity of life. Adaptation to different ecological
conditions occurs through changes in the genome and in visible traits. Few
studies have analyzed the genomic differences underlying divergence. This
project aims to answer fundamental questions regarding the adaptive differences
between two dramatically different wild populations of Mimulus guttatus (yellow
monkeyflower). One population consists of tiny, small flowered annual plants
living in extreme alpine conditions. The other population includes large-
flowered perennials inhabiting sand dunes in a coastal temperate environment.
This study will use genome mapping approaches to identify and characterize the
genetic basis of trait differences in a common garden environment. &lt;br/&gt;In
addition, this experiment will reveal how particular genotypes perform in
different natural environments with respect to fitness. By analyzing recombinant
inbred lines (advanced generation hybrids between annual and perennial) in a
reciprocal transplant experiment, fitness variation associated with specific
genomic regions in each of the two natural environments will be assessed. This
genetic dissection of local adaptation will help clarify which traits and
chromosome regions are associated with performance in the
wild.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Results of these experiments will provide an
unusually complete understanding of basic evolutionary questions, such as how
genetic differences contribute to an organisms' ability to occupy diverse
ecological environments.&lt;br/&gt;