* 0105398
* Magnetism and Superconductivity in Ruthenate-Cuprates: New Pathways to Novel Materials
* MPS,DMR
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2004
* Bogdan Dabrowski, Northern Illinois University
* Standard Grant
* Lynnette Madsen
* 06/30/2004
* USD 310,798.00

0105398 &lt;br/&gt;Dabrowski &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A significant thrust of this
project will address issues important to the materials synthesis of complex
oxides ceramics and will provide superior quality research material including
single crystals of novel compounds. These complex transition metal oxides
exhibit strong electron-electron, electron-magnon, and electron-phonon
interactions. Because of these strong interactions, conduction electrons in
these systems cannot be considered separately and the collective behavior is
best described in terms of highly correlated electron systems. In this context
an extensive study will be made of the superconducting and magnetic properties
of ruthenocuprates and magnetic properties of selected phases of non-
superconducting complex oxides that contain the octahedral arrangement of Ru and
0 ions. The proposed research will also address the problem of coexistence of
superconductivity and weak- ferromagnetism in ruthenocuprates, which remains
unique in the family of high-temperature superconductors, since the magnetic
order originates in the sublattice of d-electron Ru ions. Students in the
research work will be guided through the complex process of fabrication
(including our unique high- pressure oxygen synthesis capabilities that lead us
recently to discovery of novel Ru1-xSr2GdCu2+xO8-d superconducting and magnetic
phases) and materials characterization. Participating students will be exposed
to the use of cutting-edge techniques through their involvement in experiments
utilizing the X-ray synchrotron based (Advanced Photon Source) and neutron
diffraction techniques at Argonne National Laboratory. Supplementary muon spin
rotation experiments that provide unique insights into local magnetic structure
are planned and will be facilitated by the established cooperation with research
team at the Paul Sherrer lnstitut in Switzerland.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Advancing the fundamental understanding and associated
applications of complex transition metal oxide ceramics is constrained by the
current limits of our knowledge of the complex interactions present in these
systems. Study of these compounds constitutes the frontier of modern solid-state
ceramics and its associated physics and chemistry. The proposed project will
substantially enhance our understanding of the long-standing issue of the
coexistence of magnetism and superconductivity by studies of a class of recently
discovered magnetic high temperature superconductors. Our unique pathways to
synthesis have led to discovery of new superconducting phases of ruthenocuprates
and to significant modification of magnetic properties of complex ruthenates.
Beyond investigating the properties of these materials, emphasis will be placed
on studying the synthesis-structure-properties relationships and exploring
processing routes for novel compounds in this class using our distinctive high-
pressure oxygen synthesis capabilities. Supplementary experiments are also
planned, within the frame of existing cooperative efforts, with research teams
from the Paul Sherrer Institut in Switzerland and the Polish Academy of Sciences
in Poland. The inclusion of students in this project will provide them with
valuable, contemporary experience, training, and skill with state-of-the art
instrumentation in our laboratory and in the experimental facilities of Argonne
National Laboratory (cutting-edge X-ray synchrotron radiation based techniques
at the Advanced Photon Source and neutron diffraction experiments at the Intense
Pulsed Neutron Source).&lt;br/&gt;