* 0105194
* Dissertation Research: Phylogeny, Reconstruction of Ancestral States and Divergence Times of the Lichen-forming Fungi Acarosporaceae and Acarospora
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Francois Lutzoni, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 07/31/2004
* USD 10,191.00

&lt;br/&gt; Lichens are obligate mutualistic ectosymbioses between fungi
(mycobionts), and green algae or cyanobacteria (photobionts). Despite the
importance of the photobiont in providing carbohydrates to the mycobiont, the
identification of lichens relies almost exclusively on morphological and
chemical (secondary compounds) features of the mycobiont. Members of
Acarosporaceae and Acarospora have putative ancestral character states
suggesting a basal position within the lichenized ascomycetes. Therefore, the
study of this family and genus is likely to provide information essential to our
understanding of the diversification of lichens. However, morphological features
found in Acarospora and Acarosporaceae are also found in other genera and
families, resulting in their uncertain circumscriptions. In the present study,
phylogenetic relationships of the Acarosporaceae and Acarospora within the
Ascomycota will be reconstructed based on three molecular data sets. This
phylogeny will be the framework to: 1) date major speciation events within the
lichenized ascomycetes, while comparing three new methods for dating divergence
events; and 2) test the validity of traditional diagnostic features used to
circumscribe Acarosporaceae and Acarospora.&lt;br/&gt; About 1/5 of all known
extant species in the fungi kingdom are lichenized. The proposed research will
generate a considerable molecular database relevant to phylogenetic
relationships among fungi, in particular of the Acarosporaceae with other
lichenized and non-lichenized ascomycetes. The use of DNA sequences to
reconstruct the phylogeny of the Acarosporaceae and Acarospora will also answer
long-standing and important systematic questions at the family and genus levels,
that have not yet been answered using traditional tools (morphology, anatomy and
chemistry). The study of Acarosporaceae diagnostic characters will contribute to
a better understanding of the delimitation of the family. Finally, major dates
of origin and radiation of lichenized ascomycetes will be estimated for the
first time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;