* 0105306
* RUI: Magnetic Studies of Thin Films of Graphite Encapsulated Nanocrystals
* NONE,NONE
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Kiumars Parvin, San Jose State University Foundation
* Standard Grant
* Harsh Deep Chopra
* 07/31/2005
* USD 196,680.00

The project is on the measurement of magnetic properties of nanocrystals of
CoPt, FePt, and R2Fe17 (R=Rare earth) grown as films. The films are encapsulated
in gaphite coatings to protect them from oxidation and environmental
degradation. The graphite coating also increases the effective distance of
neighboring nanocrystals, and causes the decrease of the particle-particle
exchange interaction, which is an important issue in the ongoing development of
films for high-density magnetic recording medium. The ordered phases of CoPt and
FePt exhibit high magnetocrystalline anisotropy that results in a strong energy
barrier against thermally activated switching of the magnetic moments for
extremely small ferromagnetic nanocrystals. The presence of minute amount of
carbon in R2Fe17 structure increases Fe-Fe exchange interaction. This causes the
increase in the ferromagnetic transition temperature that makes the utilization
of these materials as magnets over a wide range of temperature possible. The
materials are fabricated at Northwestern University (Professor Vinayak P. Dravid
and his research group) while this study is aimed at the characterization of
their magnetic properties using magnetometry, Mossbauer spectroscopy and
magnetic force microscopy at the undergraduate research institution (San Jose
State). %%% The activities proposed here are fully compatible with the goals of
NSF-RUI program in enhancing the research infrastructure of SJSU. Interaction
with Northwestern University in areas of synthesis and structure is additional
feature of the proposed research making the study of advanced materials possible
at SJSU. SJSU is a diversified school with high percentage of minorities and
women while the results will be very useful to disk drive technology. ***