* 0105692
* Unusual Error Correcting Codes
* CSE,CCF
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2006
* Mario Szegedy, Rutgers University New Brunswick
* Continuing Grant
* Richard Beigel
* 06/30/2006
* USD 260,476.00

Error correcting codes were originally invented to increase
the&lt;br/&gt;precision of retrieval, storage and communication of
data.&lt;br/&gt;The investigator's goal is to study and develop
codes&lt;br/&gt;with new features added on top of the error correcting
property,&lt;br/&gt;such as checkability, identifiable parent property (IPP),
or&lt;br/&gt;quantum-error correcting property. In spite of
the&lt;br/&gt;importance of designing codes with added features,&lt;br/&gt;there
has not ben a comprehensive study of them up to date, and each&lt;br/&gt;design
is treated as an isolated case. The investigator&lt;br/&gt;wants to put the
designs under one umbrella (whenever&lt;br/&gt;it is possible) so that their
properties&lt;br/&gt;can be compared and further improved upon.&lt;br/&gt;Among
the benefits such improvement can bring about&lt;br/&gt;are better non-
approximability results in complexity theory,&lt;br/&gt;better means to trace
pirates of electronic images,&lt;br/&gt;and new algorithms for quantum
computers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigator was the first
to&lt;br/&gt;observe that constructs in the theory of probabilistically
checkable&lt;br/&gt;proofs can be viewed as error correcting codes with added
features.&lt;br/&gt;The best parameters for these codes and their kins
are&lt;br/&gt;still not known, and they are the primary&lt;br/&gt;targets of the
proposed investigation in the first year.&lt;br/&gt;The investigator also plans
for a study that&lt;br/&gt;would lead to a general checkability theorem for
product codes,&lt;br/&gt;with a surprise application in circuit
complexity,&lt;br/&gt;and recommends a simplified look at Raz's parallel
repetition&lt;br/&gt;theorem. A different thread of the the proposed
research&lt;br/&gt;is motivated by questions about schemes&lt;br/&gt;that
protect a multi-media publisher against piracy of&lt;br/&gt;electronic images.
The publisher can use words of a code&lt;br/&gt;to mark electronic copies of an
image. Then, if the code is&lt;br/&gt;appropriately designed, any image forged
by combining pieces of two legally&lt;br/&gt;traded images, contains sufficient
amount of information to trace&lt;br/&gt;the identity of at least one of the
source (parent) images.&lt;br/&gt;Here the problem is to build efficient codes
that can identify one of&lt;br/&gt;three or more source images. Other research
targets include&lt;br/&gt;efficiently decodable quantum codes,
and&lt;br/&gt;complexity lower bounds for dynamic problems via unusual
codes.&lt;br/&gt;There is a general framework in which&lt;br/&gt;the
investigator plans to do the research. This entails:&lt;br/&gt;1. The study and
exploration of the relation in&lt;br/&gt;between different unusual
codes;&lt;br/&gt;2. Their classification and axiomatization;&lt;br/&gt;3. Search
for novel applications of unusual codes&lt;br/&gt;in the theories of lower
bounds and pseudo-randomness,&lt;br/&gt;and in other walks of computer
science;&lt;br/&gt;4. Building a 'family tree' of code properties, and finding a
match&lt;br/&gt;in between properties and applications.&lt;br/&gt;The
methodology should embrace and extend classical coding theory.&lt;br/&gt;