* 0105360
* Moving Horizon Estimation and Nonlinear, Large-Scale Model Predictive Control of Chemical Processes
* ENG,CBET
* 05/15/2001,04/30/2004
* James Rawlings, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Maria Burka
* 04/30/2004
* USD 210,636.00

ABSTRACT&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI: James B. Rawlings &lt;br/&gt;Institution:
University of Wisconsin&lt;br/&gt;Proposal Number:
0105360&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;To maintain economic competitiveness, maximize
product quality and operate more environmentally benign processes, the chemical
process industries need to invest in process monitoring and control technology.
Industrial process operations are becoming increasingly integrated and complex,
operation against constraints is common and the dynamic process behavior
requires more sophisticated online analysis and decision making in order to
optimize the process performance. The goal of this research is to address three
outstanding challenges in the further development of advanced chemical control
methodology:&lt;br/&gt;1. State estimation based on dynamic models and online
measurements is used to further improve process operations. The moving horizon
estimation (MHE) approach addresses this need as it allows both nonlinear models
and estimator constraints as part of the problem formulation. The PI plans to
study a series of issues and application problems in order to understand and
expand the current applicability of MHE theory.&lt;br/&gt;2. Use model
predictive control (MPC) for online optimization of an integrated, large-scale
plant. The PI plans to exploit the inherent communication capability provided by
the forecast horizon in the MPC controllers.&lt;br/&gt;3. Develop a suite of
nonlinear MPC test problems for closed-loop control. These problems should
provide a convenient standard for the research community to test new nonlinear
MPC theories, approaches and algorithms.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Expected impacts
for this research include: improved understanding of the fundamental issues
surrounding the online use of models for monitoring, inference and decision
making; direct impact on industrial plant operations and control; and rapid and
wide dissemination of new research results to educators by the development and
release of high-level source code.&lt;br/&gt;