* 0105355
* Data Compression Techniques for Improving Memory Hierarchy Performance
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Rajiv Gupta, University of Arizona
* Continuing Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2005
* USD 270,000.00

&lt;br/&gt;Abstract:&lt;br/&gt;This project is aimed at developing data
compression techniques for&lt;br/&gt;substantially reducing the data memory
footprint of memory intensive&lt;br/&gt;applications. We will study the behavior
of a wide range of applications&lt;br/&gt;to identify characteristics of data
held in data structures by these&lt;br/&gt;programs that can be exploited in
carrying out data compression. We&lt;br/&gt;will develop a suite of data
compression transformations that will be&lt;br/&gt;implemented by the compiler.
Our goal is to develop data transformations&lt;br/&gt;that can be applied to
partially compressible data structures, that is,&lt;br/&gt;data structures in
which all the data is not compressible. This approach&lt;br/&gt;will not only
result in transformations that are widely applicable, but&lt;br/&gt;also lead to
techniques for applying them that are efficient. In
particular,&lt;br/&gt;instead of relying on complex compile-time analysis for
proving their&lt;br/&gt;applicability, we will be able to use simple value
profiling techniques&lt;br/&gt;to identify data structures that are mostly
compressible and then apply&lt;br/&gt;the transformations to them. We will
develop data compression extensions&lt;br/&gt;(DCX) to a RISC-style instruction
set for efficiently manipulating&lt;br/&gt;compressed data. In addition, we will
also address other low level code&lt;br/&gt;generation issues, such as impact of
transformations on register pressure&lt;br/&gt;and instruction cache behavior,
which can have a significant impact on&lt;br/&gt;performance.