* 0105013
* Dissertation Research: The Evolution of the Actinorhizal Symbiosis in Cercocarpus H.B.K. (Rosaceae)
* BIO,DEB
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* C. Randal Linder, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* James E. Rodman
* 07/31/2004
* USD 9,998.00

The mutualism (actinorhizal symbiosis) between the genus Cercocarpus, a shrub or
tree in the rose family (Rosaceae) found in western North America, and Frankia,
a nitrogen-fixing filamentous bacterium, is a system that may have experienced
cospeciation. We propose to generate hypothesized evolutionary histories for
Cercocarpus using DNA sequence and chloroplast restriction site data, and
strains of Frankia infective on Cercocarpus using DNA sequence data. We will
also test the host-specificity of these Frankia strains towards Cercocarpus
species and other plants that have the ability to interact with Frankia. In
addition, we will test whether the evolutionary histories of Cercocarpus and
Frankia exhibit a pattern of cospeciation. The phylogeny produced for
Cercocarpus will help clarify the confusing taxonomy, species boundaries, and
relationships among species in this genus. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our study will
be one of the first comprehensive examinations of possible cospeciation in
groups involved in actinorhizal symbiosis. No comparably broad surveys of
infective strains of Frankia exist for an actinorhizal genus, nor such broad
scale identification and description of strains infective on members of the rose
family. Information on the strains of Frankia infective on the members of the
rose family can be used in comparisons with other known actinorhizal groups and
our documentation of the diversity of Frankia may identify strains that can be
used in agriculture. &lt;br/&gt;