* 0105063
* Dissertation Research:  Effects of Fires on Population Dynamics and Viability of Chamaecrista keyensis (Caesalpinioideae), An Endemic Herb of the Lower Florida Keys
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2003
* Suzanne Koptur, Florida International University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 05/31/2003
* USD 7,847.00

In many fire-prone ecosystems of North America, the historical fire regimes have
been disrupted for decades, resulting in decline and disappearance of unique
species that reside in them. This study will determine the effects of
experimental fire regimes on the Big Pine Partridge Pea, Chamaecrista keyensis
(Fabaceae), a legume herb that only occurs in pine rocklands of the lower
Florida Keys. Lower Keys pine rocklands are one of the fire-dependent ecosystems
in Florida, but their historical fire regime is unclear.

An ongoing, larger study funded by the Department of the Interior, includes
experimental treatments (summer burn, winter burn, and unburned controls) on
blocks of pine rockland on Big Pine Key. Within this design are detailed plant
population studies, including monitoring soil seed bank dynamics. Preliminary
results indicate that the winter burn treatment may be the most beneficial for
maintaining or increasing populations of Big Pine Partridge Pea. These seasonal
fire treatments are being repeated to see whether this trend holds. This study
will also determine the relationship of Big Pine Partridge Pea population
dynamics with habitat variables influenced by fire. This research will help to
identify the historical fire regimes under which the Lower Keys pine rocklands
and their unique species evolved. Results will shed light on the processes that
can lead to local population decline and extinction of a rare species.