* 0105171
* SGER: Field Survey of Easter Island
* ENG,CMMI
* 03/15/2001,02/28/2003
* Costas Synolakis, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Clifford J. Astill
* 02/28/2003
* USD 45,673.00

This action is to support a field survey, in Easter Island and the Juan
Fernandez Islands off Chile, of the 1946 Aleutian
tsunami.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The April 1,1946 Unimak Island, Alaskan tsunami
remains a geophysical mystery: It was generated by a relatively moderate
earthquake, yet it produced the highest waves recorded in historical times in
Hawaii, where it killed 159 people and caused considerably more damage than the
nearby 1957 earthquake (a much larger seismic event), or even the great 1960
Chilean tsunami that was triggered by the largest earthquake ever measured.
Seismic information is scant, and the only realistic possibility of
understanding this 1946 event appears to be hydrodynamic inversion from
inundation data around the Pacific.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Criteria for the
accuracy of hydrodynamic inversions are not well established, but it appears
that the geographic distribution of data is at least as important, if not more
so, than the number of data points. Until recently, it was believed that the
tsunami had little impact south of Hawaii. However during a field survey of an
tsunami in the island of Fatu Hiva in September 1999, the International Tsunami
Research Team discovered large rocks that were reportedly moved inland in 1946,
at about the time of the Aleutian tsunami. Some of the rocks were found 300m
inland. In the summer of 2000, a joint US/France expedition was able to document
these findings. The team interviewed eyewitnesses and their accounts helped
develop approximate inundation maps for the Marquesas from the April 1,1946
event.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This field survey of the Aleutian tsunami in Easter
Island and the Juan Fernandez Islands off Chile is very timely, since the
location of these islands allows the measurement of free field inundation data -
assuming that eyewitnesses can be found. During the Marquesas survey, the ITST
interviewed about 40 eyewitnesses on 6 islands (and an additional 10 on 2 of the
Society Islands), many quite elderly. Apart from the advanced age of the
expected eyewitnesses, there is another compelling reason for performing this
survey: preliminary analysis suggests that a landslide was involved in the
Aleutian tsunami. If this is the case, then accurate hydrodynamic inversion is
urgently needed to identify the landslide source. Inundation maps for Hawaii are
currently being re-evaluated, and inundation maps for the Pacific states of the
US mainland are being developed for the first time. Tsunamis from the Aleutians
need to be carefully reassessed, particularly in view of the landslide trigger
potential, so that the new evacuation maps are developed with the best available
technology and field knowledge.&lt;br/&gt;
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;