* 0105344
* Rupture Propagation and Arrest in Geometrically Complex Fault Systems: Bends, Stepovers, and Damaged Border Zones
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,12/31/2004
* James Rice, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 12/31/2004
* USD 228,532.00

Abstract for proposal EAR-0105344 (PH # 37x)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: Rupture
propagation and arrest in geometrically complex fault systems: Bends, stepovers,
and damaged border zones&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI's: James R. Rice (principal
investigator) and Renata Dmowska (senior co-investigator), Dept. of Earth and
Planetary Sci. and Div. of Engin. and Appl. Sci., Harvard
Univ.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Our project seeks to understand mechanical principles
controlling earthquake rupture propagation and arrest in geometrically complex
fault systems. As part of that we are devising numerical methodology to model
dynamic rupture with inclusion of non-planarity of fault surfaces, step-overs
and branches in fault networks, activation of smaller faults or fractures in the
region bordering a main fault zone, and simultaneous activation of competitive
rupture paths. In general the rupture path cannot be specified a priori but,
rather, must be dynamically self-chosen among available fault segments of the
network. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Geological, geodetic and seismological
observations are used to constrain and test developing ideas on how rupture
geometry and prevailing stress state, including principal stress orientations,
control whether a rupture starts along a branching fault structure, whether it
continues for long distances along the branch, how intermittent is the rupture
propagation, etc. Those observational cases include thrust (San Fernando 1971,
Kettleman Hills 1985) and strike slip (Imperial Valley 1979, Landers 1992,
Hector Mine 1999) events in which branching and/or activation of off-fault
activity seem to be involved. Other examples are under study throughout the
world for major fault systems, including the North Anatolian system, the Izmit
1999 sequence along it, and its possible future continuation near
Istanbul.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The studies include consideration of how energy
is dissipated in dynamic rupture, and what are characteristics of the enriched
high frequency seismic radiation.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;