* 0105147
* Dissertation Research:  Testing for Disruptive Competition in Solitary Populations of the Three-spined Stickleback
* BIO,DEB
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2003
* Peter Wainwright, University of California-Davis
* Standard Grant
* Mark Courtney
* 05/31/2003
* USD 10,000.00

Wainwright 0105147

Sympatric speciation, in which a single population undergoes an evolutionary
split into two co-occurring species, has been a source of controversy for 50
years. Many biologists believe species split only when populations are
geographically divided. Skepticism about sympatric speciation is due to
theoretical criticisms and the paucity of unambiguous examples. The idea has
regained acceptance lately, due to accumulating empirical examples and
supportive theoretical analyses. However, the theory relies on population
dynamics that have never been soundly demonstrated in nature. The hypothesis is
that competition among individuals in a population is strongest among common
phenotypes, weakest for rare phenotypes, so that the average individual does
poorly while unusual individuals escape competition and do relatively well.

The investigators will use observational surveys to test whether such disruptive
selection occurs naturally in populations of freshwater stickleback fish. They
will also conduct experimental population density manipulations to test whether
competition is the underlying cause. This research will test the assumptions
underlying recent advances in speciation theory. It is also relevant to
understanding how individuals in a population subdivide their resources, which
affects both population dynamics, and how an invading species adapts to a new
environment.