* 0105557
* The Geochemical Characteristics of the Hawaiian Plume: Constraints From Studies of Lavas Forming the Koolau and Kahoolawe Shields
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Frederick Frey, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 08/31/2006
* USD 315,970.00

Frey&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0105557&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Terrestrial volcanoes
are associated with three different tectonic&lt;br/&gt;settings. Two are
associated with plate boundaries, that is, regions of&lt;br/&gt;plate divergence
and convergence, and the third is intraplate volcanism.&lt;br/&gt;Magmas erupted
in these different environments differ significantly in&lt;br/&gt;geochemical
characteristics. In this proposed research the goal is to&lt;br/&gt;understand
the source and processes which determine the
geochemical&lt;br/&gt;characteristics of Hawaiian lavas. This endmember is of
great interest&lt;br/&gt;because it may in part represent the consequences of
subducting oceanic&lt;br/&gt;crust deep into the mantle at subduction
zones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The approach will be to determine abundances of
major and trace elements&lt;br/&gt;and isotopic ratios of O, Sr, Nd, Pb, Hf and
Os in lavas of varying&lt;br/&gt;relative age from these two shields. For Koolau
the samples to be studied&lt;br/&gt;are from a recently drilled core, that
penetrates the shield to a greater&lt;br/&gt;depth and older age than previously
studied surficially exposed samples.&lt;br/&gt;For Kahoolawe, which has not been
intensively studied, the samples will be&lt;br/&gt;from several stratigraphic
sections across the shield. The principal&lt;br/&gt;objective is to understand
the source components contributing to these&lt;br/&gt;magmas; hence emphasis
will be on evaluating correlations between abundance&lt;br/&gt;ratios of highly
incompatible elements, e.g., Ba/Th, Ce/Pb and La/Nb, and&lt;br/&gt;isotopic
ratios. These geochemical characteristics will be determined&lt;br/&gt;using
analytical facilities such as inductively couples plasma
mass&lt;br/&gt;spectrometry and thermal ionization mass
spectrometry.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Because of their oceanic plate setting,
relatively simple mineralogy and a&lt;br/&gt;wealth complementary studies,
Hawaiian volcanoes present the best&lt;br/&gt;opportunity for understanding the
role of recycled crustal components in&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;oceanic island
volcanism. In particular, this research will aid in&lt;br/&gt;constraining the
processes and source components which create a geochemical&lt;br/&gt;endmember
of Hawaiian shield lavas.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;