* 0105079
* Dissertatioin Research: The Effect of Artificial Selection on the Evolution of Ontogenetic Trajectories
* BIO,DEB
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2003
* Patrick Carter, Washington State University
* Standard Grant
* Samuel Scheiner
* 06/30/2003
* USD 5,640.00

0105079 Carter

Evolution can occur through several different processes. One process that has
important implications for the evolution of many traits, including those related
to aging, is the correlated response of a trait at one age to selection on that
same trait at a different age. More specifically, how a trait measured at many
different ages (also called an ontogenetic trajectory) responds to selection at
one specific age is poorly understood. In this study, lines of laboratory mice
selected for voluntary activity and unselected control lines will be used to
examine the influence of early-age selection on a trait's ontogenetic
trajectory. In both populations, the ontogenetic trajectories of one
morphological and two behavioral traits will be described, changes in the
patterns of genetic variance and covariance of all three traits across all ages
measured, and patterns of genetic variance and covariance partitioned to
determine how genetic variation contributes to each trajectory.

These results will provide predictions about the effects of future selection on
each ontogenetic trajectory, identify genetic tradeoffs during aging, and
determine the effect of selection on the genetic variation underlying each
trait. This information is important to the further development of evolutionary
theory, and to gaining a better understanding of the genetics and evolution of
aging.