* 0105596
* Scalable Optimization of Generic Java
* CSE,CCF
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* Robert Cartwright, William Marsh Rice University
* Standard Grant
* Almadena Chtchelkanova
* 08/31/2005
* USD 220,000.00

Java programmers rely on clumsy "erasure" idiom to define generic operations: a
generic class is represented by conventional classes where all references to
type parameters have been replaced by the type Object. Programs that rely on
this idiom must repeatedly cast the results of generic operations to the types
of omitted type parameters. Generic operations in Java are slower than their
non-generic counterparts because this idiom introduces a level of indirection in
the representation of type parameters instantiated as primitive types.

The investigator has recently completed the construction of a prototype compiler
for NexGen, a Java extension supporting genericity designed by the investigator
and Guy Steele. The compiler relies on the erasure idiom to implement genericity
and hence does not improve the performance of computations involving generic
classes.

To produce good performance for generic Java, a compiler must eliminate
indirection in the representation of generic class instances. The requisite
transformation is called {\em whole program analysis} because it is invalid if
any program operation depends on the address of an inlined object. Fortunately,
there is a nearly linear algorithm based on previous work by the investigator on
concrete type analysis that can determine if a given object field can be
inlined.

This project will develop a new optimizing compiler for NextGen that uses
concrete type analysis to inline the parametric fields of generic classes.