* 0105252
* Doctoral Dissertation Improvement Grant: Revisiting Nawinpukyo: Toward a Reevaluation of the Early Intermediate Period in Ayacucho, Peru
* SBE,BCS
* 05/15/2001,04/30/2002
* William Isbell, SUNY at Binghamton
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 04/30/2002
* USD 12,000.00

Under the direction of Dr. William Isbell, Mr. Juan Leoni will collect data for
his doctoral dissertation. He will conduct archaeological fieldwork at the site
of Nawinpukyo which is located in the Ayacucho region of highland Peru. Situated
on a rocky hill the site contains concentrations of stones which have been
interpreted as public buildings and elite residences. A supposed "ceremonial
compound" with a platform mound, a series of storage granaries, administrative
buildings, courts and patios has also been described. Although studied by
previous researchers the site is enigmatic because its surface has been affected
by centuries of farming and related earth moving activities. Ceramics indicate
occupation during more than one period. The original excavator interpreted
Nawinpukyo as the capital city of an early Andean state and believed that the
size and arrangement of ruins testified to this fact. Later archaeologists have
disagreed and asserted that the remains reflect a less complex form of social
organization. To address this question, Mr. Leoni will conduct a multistage
research project. He will survey and map the site core, conduct surface
collection of pottery and other artifacts and also carry out limited excavation.
The resulting materials will be subjected to laboratory analysis. Through this
approach Mr. Leoni will determine what portions of the site were occupied at
particular periods of time and then focus on the earliest of these.
(Archaeologists agree that by the latest represented interval state level
societies were, in fact, present in Peru.) In particular Mr. Leoni will examine
the distribution of materials across residences to determine whether their
amount and variety differ significantly among them. Differential distribution of
wealth which reflects the presence of a governing elite is one of the hallmarks
of state level society.

The question of how complex societies arose and were maintained is central to
anthropological archaeology and considerable disagreement exists. The process
has taken place independently in many parts of the world - the Andes is one -
and thus archaeologists can compare geographically discrete occurrences to look
for underlying patterns. Some believe that the same basic processes and
principles apply in all cases and that it is possible to define a clear-cut
series of developmental steps. Others argue that historical contingency plays a
major role and that the process varies in fundamental ways from region to
region. Because complex state level societies developed in the Andes, data from
sites such as Nawinpukyo speak directly to this question. This research will
also provide data of interest to regional archaeologists and assist in training
a promising young scientist.