* 0106441
* Using Spatial Coherency of Crystal Zoning to Reveal Residence Time and Mixing Regimes in Calc-Alkaline Plutons
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* George Bergantz, University of Washington
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2005
* USD 198,093.00

Bergantz&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0106441&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Open system behavior is
ubiquitous in magmatic systems but the timing and extent of mixing associated
with any single event is poorly understood. The objective of this work is to
develop and employ novel technologies from information science to extract new
structures of data and combine them with physical models of multiphase mixing to
reveal (in part) the physical history of the body.&lt;br/&gt;The central concept
is that crystal zoning provides for a non-monotonic, but progressive time-
series. We significantly extend this by doing simultaneous spatial-statistical
inversion of all crystal zoning patterns for hundreds, and perhaps thousands, of
samples. This provides not only the minimum number of chemical events, defined
by volumes of unique chemical potential, it also allows one to estimate particle
trajectories and minimum residence times in portions of the system. Once
putative volumes of prior chemical potential can be identified (chambers within
chambers) isotopic microdrilling will be performed on a sub-set of the samples.
This leads to a significant savings in time and effort in isotopic analysis as
one can focus efforts on samples of most interest.&lt;br/&gt;The analysis tools
are innovative in that they combine a number of recent advances in 1) crystal-
chemical isotopic studies, 2) information technology and spatial statistics and,
3) multiphase modeling, in a combined way that has not been applied previously
to problems in petrology and volcanology.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;