* 0106730
* Isotopic Geochemistry of Mercury in Hydrothermal Ore Deposits
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2004
* Bjoern Klaue, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2004
* USD 200,335.00

Kesler&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0106730&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This proposal requests funding
for a study of the magnitude, possible causes and applications to ore genesis of
variations in the isotopic composition of Hg in hydrothermal systems. It is
designed to follow up on our recent development of a highly precise and
sensitive MC-ICPMS method to measure the isotopic composition of Hg.
&lt;br/&gt;Hydrothermal systems are the main cause of Hg migration in the upper
crust and Hg could undergo both organic and inorganic isotopic fractionation
during transport. The main organic process under low-temperature, anaerobic
conditions is bacterially mediated production of mono-methylmercury (HgCH3+,
MMHg), a critical compound in the cycling and toxicity of Hg in the environment.
Inorganic processes such as evaporation, condensation, decomposition, diffusion,
oxidation-reduction, precipitation, dissolution, complexation, and ion exchange,
might also cause fractionation of Hg isotopes, and will dominate in hydrothermal
systems because methylating bacteria are absent. &lt;br/&gt;Our goal is to
evaluate the relative importance of inorganic fractionation processes on the
isotopic composition of Hg in hydrothermal systems and then determine whether Hg
isotope compositions can be used as tracers of the source of Hg in these
systems. Our preliminary analyses show that Hg from deposits over boiling
geothermal systems at Coso (California) and Monte Amiata (Italy) have low
198Hg/204Hg ratios that could have been produced by evaporation. Samples of
native Hg and cinnabar from the Idria (Slovenia) deposit have significantly
different 198Hg/204Hg ratios that could reflect oxidation-reduction or the
thermal decomposition of cinnabar, respectively. Samples from different parts of
the Almaden Hg deposit have the same isotopic composition, suggesting that Hg in
this large deposit came from a homogeneous source. Finally, 198Hg/204Hg ratios
in meteorites (as a proxy for Hg in igneous rocks) and methylmercury in fish (as
a proxy for Hg in most organic sediments) differ, suggesting that Hg isotope
compositions might distinguish between these two possible sources of Hg in
hydrothermal systems. &lt;br/&gt;The proposed research will focus on studies of
actual mercury mineral deposits, with two main goals. First, we will analyze Hg
above and below the boiling zone in active geothermal systems at Coso and the
Geysers (California) and in the paleogeothermal system at the Ivanhoe epithermal
district, in order to evaluate the importance of boiling to fractionation of
mercury isotopes. Second, we will evaluate the use of Hg isotope compositions as
tracers by analysis of Hg from ore deposits and possible source rocks in Coast
Range Hg belt (California) and Opalite district (Nevada), which represent the
full range of possible sedimentary and igneous source rocks for Hg. This work is
expected to provide an interpretive framework for Hg isotope studies of active
and extinct water-rock systems as well as laying the groundwork for studies
seeking to distinguish between natural and anthropogenic sources for Hg in
modern accumulations of environmental interest. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;