* 0106909
* Rayleigh-Taylor Instability and Mantle Dynamics Beneath Mountain Belts
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Peter Molnar, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 07/31/2005
* USD 84,564.00

Molnar &lt;br/&gt;0106909 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In this ABR project the PI will
continue work with Greg Houseman and colleagues that examines Rayleigh-Taylor
instability relevant to the earth, with the ultimate goal of understanding how
thickened mantle lithosphere can become gravitationally unstable. Most of the
work until now has considered simple situations in which only one layer, that
simulating mantle lithosphere overlies an inviscid fluid. They plan to examine
more thoroughly the effect of an imposed horizontal shortening on a three-
layered model: a light viscous layer (like crust) over a heavy viscous layer
(like mantle lithosphere), which in turns overlies a layer (like asthenosphere)
of low viscosity and slightly lower density than mantle lithosphere. The effect
of buoyant crust can profoundly affect the nature of the instability, such that
in some situations downwelling blobs of the dense layer form adjacent, not
below, the thickest part of the overlying layer and therefore sink beneath the
equivalent of the margins of mountain belts. Preliminary calculations show, not
surprisingly, that the viscosity ratio that defines the transition between one
or two downwellings depends also on the density of the upper layer, with lighter
layers favoring two downwellings. The investigators plan to explore the
parameter space more thoroughly, in particular, by quantifying the effects of
different density ratios and thickness ratios of the two layers on the
configuration of downwelling. They will construct "phase diagrams" that show the
parameter ranges for which one or two downwellings occur and will examine non-
Newtonian viscosity. They will consider the effects of somewhat different
boundary conditions from those used so far. In particular, they plan to use
conditions that do not mix varying strain rates at the top of the deforming
layer, and instead consider how laterally varying viscosity might affect
unstable growth. Finally, they will relate the calculations to geological and
geophysical observations from belts where mantle lithosphere seems to have
thinned or been removed entirely. Processes that motivate the study include the
widespread normal faulting and post-orogenic volcanism in mountain belts, both
of which must be associated with the evolving sub-crustal lithospheric
structure.