* 0106685
* A Test of Paleomagnetic Field Variability at Equatorial Latitudes
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2001,05/31/2004
* Steven Lund, University of Southern California
* Standard Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 05/31/2004
* USD 155,381.00

Lund &lt;br/&gt;0106685 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Paleomagnetic studies of the
Earth' magnetic field secular variation (PSV, both directions and
paleointensity) require knowledge of its spatial and temporal pattern of
variability. At present, we have no detailed PSV records in Equatorial regions
prior to the last 3000 years. Yet, several recent models of field variability
require an understanding of Equatorial PSV in order to properly interpret PSV
records at other latitudes and make predictions about possible dynamo sources in
the Earth's deep interior. &lt;br/&gt;This proposal has five scientific goals.
(1) recover two replicate deep-sea sediment PSV records (both directions and
paleointensity) spanning the last 130,000 years from Equatorial latitudes in
Indonesia/Philippines, (2) carry out a careful rock magnetic study of all
sediments (magnetic mineralogy, ARM, IRM, CHI, plus selected AMS and hysteresis
measurements) to assess where environmental effects might be biasing the
directional or paleointensity data, (3) carry out a detailed statistical study
of the final PSV records focussing on the temporal variability of vector and VGP
angular dispersion associated (almost entirely) with quadrapole-family dynamo
sources, (4) carry out a comparison of all Holocene PSV records extending from
Lake Baikal (Russia) to Lake Pounui (New Zealand) including the new records from
this study, (5) compare the PSV records of the Laschamp and Blake excursion time
intervals in these cores with similar PSV records from the North Atlantic Ocean.
Final paleomagnetic datasets will be available on the PI's website
(http://earth.usc.edu/~slund). &lt;br/&gt;The investigators' previous work
indicates that they can recover high-resolution PSV records (both directions and
paleointensity) for the last 130,000 years from several deep-sea cores in the
Equatorial Indonesia/Philippines region. Their preliminary PSV data suggest that
times of low paleointensity have higher PSV angular dispersion in both
Equatorial and higher-latitude bands, but the relative increase in dispersion at
Equatorial latitudes appears to be significantly greater. Assuming that the
quadrapole-family dispersion level is constant as a function of latitude, it
could be that the quadrapole family of dynamo sources is the sole cause of PSV
dispersion at mid latitudes during the Laschamp excursion! They have also
recovered an excursion record equivalent in time to the Laschamp Excursion.
Comparison of this record with detailed Laschamp Excursion records from the mid-
latitude North Atlantic Ocean suggests that the excursions on opposite sides of
the Earth are virtually identical in age. Both regions have waveform
characteristics of Class I excursions, but the Laschamp excursion in the North
Atlantic Ocean has two cycles of clockwise-looping excursional VGPs while the
Equatorial excursion has two cycles of counterclockwise-looping excursional
VGPs. Careful comparisons of the proposed Equatorial PSV records with data from
other latitude bands should provide significant new insight into magnetic field
variability and dynamo processes that cause it.