* 0106905
* SGER:  Self/Brain/Behavior Systems: Cognition and Neurophysiology
* SBE,BCS
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2003
* Timothy Strauman, Duke University
* Standard Grant
* Amber L. Story
* 08/31/2003
* USD 67,721.00

This project focuses on the cognitive processes that represent personally
significant goals and which provide for continuous self-evaluation. Recent
theory and research suggests that such processes may be linked with underlying
neurophysiological mechanisms for approach and avoidance, and that such a
linkage accounts for the affective consequences of self-evaluation. However, few
studies have been conducted to determine whether the cognitive and
neurophysiological correlates are functionally associated. A model of self-
regulation postulates two regulatory systems: the promotion (approach) and
prevention (avoidance) systems. These systems are thought to operate in the
pursuit of specific classes of interpersonal goals and could account for the
associations observed among self-regulatory cognition, motivation, and affect.
Furthermore, these systems have been characterized as self/brain/behavior
systems and bi-directional functional links between self-regulatory cognition
and each system's physiological substrates have been
hypothesized.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;If the promotion and prevention systems
constitute self/brain/behavior systems involving cognitive, motivational,
affective, and neural processes, then activation of either system should induce:
(1) a pattern of neural activation consistent with the priming task, (2) a
distinguishable pattern of neural activation associated with the motivational
orientation represented by the cue, and (3) a separately distinguishable pattern
of neural activation, and associated behavioral and physiological responses,
corresponding to the affective consequences associated with an anticipated
positive or negative outcome within that motivational orientation. In addition,
within the limits of the temporal resolution of available measures, these three
patterns should be identifiable in sequence.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The purpose of
this research is to test the self/brain/behavior systems model by determining
whether the promotion and prevention systems are reliably associated with
specific, discriminable neural substrates. Three studies will examine whether
the presentation of goals relevant to one of the two systems leads to
simultaneous activation of characteristic cognitive, affective, and
neurophysiological components of the two systems, both acutely (in the presence
of relevant cues) and chronically (as individual differences). In Study 1,
people will participate in a replication of previous priming research examining
the affective consequences of exposure to self-relevant goals, using functional
magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) to quantify patterns of brain activation
associated with four types of motivationally significant cues:
promotion/success, promotion/failure, prevention/success, and
prevention/failure. Study 2 will extend the fMRI priming method to the domain of
autobiographical memory, again examining patterns of brain activation in
response to the motivational significance of goal-relevant cues. In Study 3,
college students who have already been assessed for individual differences in
prefrontal cortical asymmetry via EEG will be administered a series of measures
assessing motivational orientation and self-regulatory cognition, to test the
hypothesis that individual differences in orientation toward promotion versus
prevention will be associated with stable differences in prefrontal brain
asymmetry.&lt;br/&gt;