* 0106658
* Experimental Study of Plagioclase Textures and Amphibole Reaction Rims:  Implications for Rates of Magmatic Processes
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2004
* Jessica Larsen, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 06/30/2004
* USD 172,000.00

Larsen and Gardner&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0106658&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Mineral phases in
crustal magma bodies record information about magma mixing, heating, and
degassing in the form of reaction textures that occur as the mineral responds to
the change in state of the magma. Two minerals that commonly show these features
are plagioclase and amphibole, exhibiting sieve, dusty, and patchy zoning
(dissolution and growth) and reaction rims (degassing and heating) respectively.
These textures are often used to estimate the rates of magma mixing and magmatic
ascent processes. We propose to experimentally constrain the rates at which
these textures form at conditions applicable to shallow-level crustal
reservoirs, using natural (rhyo)dacite and andesite starting material, and
clean, unzoned, euhedral seed crystals. Our goal for this proposed study is to
provide the vital calibrations needed to make observations of these reaction
textures quantitatively useful for volcanologists when examining the products of
crustal magma reservoirs. Previous work (refs) investigating the rates and
causes of these textures have provided a good basis for our proposed study.
However, limitations to this work exist, necessitating further study to make
constraints useful to a wide range of mineral-melt compositions and P-T
conditions applicable to crustal magma reservoirs. We will accomplish our goals
in two tasks that are designed to experimentally constrain the rates of
dissolution and regrowth textures in plagioclase resulting from heating and
compositional disequilibrium, and amphibole reaction rims produced by melt
degassing or heating. The first task will focus on plagioclase dissolution and
rim growth in Aniakchak rhyodacite and andesite, using plagioclase seed
phenocrysts of An20, An37, and An80 composition, at pressures between 0.1 and
300 MPa and temperatures between 825 and 1100 degrees C. The goal of this task
is to constrain rates of plagioclase dissolution as a function of heating above
the plagioclase solidus, and to examine dissolution and re-growth of plagioclase
due to chemical disequilibrium in melts in which plagioclase of another
composition is stable. The second task will investigate pargasite and hornblende
amphibole breakdown in Redoubt dacite and andesite at P-T conditions appropriate
for amphibole stability in these compositions. The goal of this task is to
extend known calibrations of this reaction to different melt compositions and
magmatic conditions. In addition, the thermal breakdown of amphibole will be
investigated in order to help petrologists distinguish between decompression and
heating rims. The results of these studies will be constraints on the rates of
formation of important plagioclase and amphibole reaction textures in shallow-
level crustal reservoirs.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;