* 0106802
* A Proposal for 3D Basin Structure Reconstruction in Central Taiwan and 3D Simulation of Ground Motion and Deformation Related to the 1999 Chi-Chi (Mw=7.6) Earthquake, Taiwan
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2003
* Chi-Yuen Wang, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Kaye Shedlock
* 07/31/2003
* USD 80,001.00

Abstract for proposal EAR 0106802 (PH #56x)

Title: A Proposal for 3D Basin Structure Reconstruction in Central Taiwan and 3D
Simulation of Ground Motion and Deformation Related to the 1999 Chi-Chi (Mw=7.6)
Earthquake, Taiwan

PI's: Chi-Yuen Wang and Douglas S.Dreger, University of California, Berkeley

Created by oblique collision between the Philippine Sea plate and the Eurasian
plate since ~5 Ma, the island of Taiwan is one of the most rapidly rising
mountain belts in the world. The 1999 Chi-Chi (Mw=7.6) earthquake, the biggest
to hit the island in the last century, has created an unprecedented amount of
accurate data and hence a watershed of research opportunity towards a better
understanding of earthquake hazards, with a potential to significantly advance
the state of knowledge. A timely interpretation of this great amount of data may
benefit ongoing programs of earthquake research both in Taiwan and in the US and
the other part of the world. Numerical simulation has been widely used for
understanding of earthquake hazards. It provides an effective means for testing
different models; it may also be used to generate information at locations where
data are not available, allowing interpolation between the recording stations.
However, recent investigations have shown that the results of such simulation
are particularly sensitive to the subsurface structures of the sedimentary
basins in the vicinity of the earthquake. Hence, as the first step to a
meaningful simulation, the proposed research will focus on defining the 3D
structure of the sedimentary basin adjacent to the ruptured Chelungpu fault,
using the existing data. The structure so reconstructed will be a pre-requisite
for reliable simulations of ground motion and for the detailed study of
earthquake source complexity. Finally, the reconstructed basin structure will be
useful for other proposed projects and will be made available to the research
community. The data required for reconstructing the basin structure in central
Taiwan include 3D crustal velocity structure, multi-channel seismic reflection
profiles, drilling data and gravity anomalies. The 3D crustal velocity structure
has been recently published. Other data have been collected by the Chinese
Petroleum Corporation (CPC) as part of its intensive hydrocarbon exploration in
this area. The PI visited CPC in December of 1999 and succeeded in getting the
collaborative support of Dr. Kuo-An Lin, director of the Exploration and
Development Research Institute of CPC, to provide the needed data for the
proposed research.

