* 0106816
* The Evolution of Developmental Potential in Vascular Plant Leaves: Linking Biological Process and Paleontological Pattern
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Andrew Knoll, Harvard University
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2005
* USD 173,369.00

Abstract&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The Evolution of Developmental Potential in
Vascular Plant Leaves: Linking Biological Process and Paleontological
Pattern&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Andrew H. Knoll and N. Michelle
Holbrook&lt;br/&gt;NSF Grant NSF 0106816&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; Developmental
biologists study processes that give rise to form in plants and animals.
Paleontologists are interested in development, as well, because variations in
developmental patterning must fuel the changes in form documented by the fossil
record. Plant fossils are uniquely well suited for the synthesis of
developmental and paleontological perspectives on morphology. Plant cell walls
constrain developmental pathways, and walls preserved in fossils record patterns
of growth and development in ancient plants. Further, the requirements for
photosynthesis have resulted in the repeated evolution of functionally and
morphologically similar structures in plants through time. Studies of living
plants suggest that universal relationships exist between particular leaf forms
(including leaf shape and venation patterns) and developmental dynamics. To
date, however, this relationship has been probed in only a limited number of
plants. PIs will examine leaf development in all living groups with laminar
leaves, particularly a variety of fern lineages, to determine the level of
correlation between basic characteristics of venation patterns (which can be
recovered from fossils) and growth dynamics. They will track the growth hormone
auxin in growing leaves to determine the extent to which its important role in
vascular patterning is conserved across all plants, and compare developmental
aberrations in fossil and extant leaves as an independent test of the
developmental similarity of leaves with similar form. Their goal is to produce a
new developmental framework for interpreting the rich fossil record of leaf
evolution.&lt;br/&gt;