* 0106885
* COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH:   A Sequence-, Chemo-, and Biostratigraphic Study of Late Early Cambrian Rocks, Southern Selwyn Basin, Mackenzie Mountains, N.W.T., Canada
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,07/31/2005
* Bruce Lieberman, University of Kansas Center for Research Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 07/31/2005
* USD 117,874.00

ABSTRACT &lt;br/&gt;Collaborative Research: A Sequence-, Chemo-,
Biostratigraphic Study of Late Early Cambrian Rocks, Southern Selwyn Basin,
Mackenzie Mountains, Canada&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt; This project investigates how
early episodes of animal evolution, which occurred roughly 520 million years ago
during the so-called Cambrian radiation, were influenced by environmental
changes. To investigate these issues we will study the sedimentology,
paleontology, and geochemistry of the Early Cambrian rocks of the Mackenzie
Mountains, Northwest Territories, Canada. This is a remote location, but it has
a remarkably complete geological record for the Early Cambrian interval. This
gives us a window into the life forms and environments of both shallow and deep
water settings, a situation found nowhere else for this time period.&lt;br/&gt;
The types of environmental changes we will study include both changes in the
relative level of the seas as well as temperature changes: the two are partly
linked. During the Cambrian radiation there may have been rapid oscillations
between relatively warm and cold climates. To determine the nature of these
environmental changes, it is necessary to understand the variations in the rock
types, which we will study in detail. It is also necessary to study when these
variations occurred; this we will accomplish by documenting the sequence of
fossil species and through use of chemical isotopes. Evolutionary changes and
extinction events in this region, and elsewhere, and their relationship to the
environmental changes, will also be documented. In this manner, we will not only
come to better understand the nature of the environmental changes that occurred
during this critical interval in earth history, but we will also determine how
one of the key episodes in the history of life may have been fundamentally
driven by climatic changes.&lt;br/&gt;