* 0106824
* Mechanisms of Postseismic and Interseismic Deformation, Southern Alaska
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2001,12/31/2004
* Jeffrey Freymueller, University of Alaska Fairbanks Campus
* Continuing Grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 12/31/2004
* USD 475,000.00

Freymueller &lt;br/&gt;0106824 &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Strong postseismic
deformation continues today, more than 35 years after the 1964 Alaska
earthquake. The objective of this research is to understand the physical
mechanisms responsible for postseismic deformation and variations in plate
coupling in the 1964 earthquake rupture area. The problem of understanding
postseismic deformation cannot be separated from the problem of understanding
the shallow seismogenic zone; we measure the sum of the two. For the postseismic
deformation, the investigators aim to determine the relative importance of
creep/afterslip and viscoelastic relaxation in explaining the present and
cumulative postseismic observations. Is a combination of the two classes of
mechanisms required to explain the observations? If so, what is their relative
importance? For variations in plate coupling, they aim to delineate as well as
possible where the boundaries between strongly and weakly coupled zones lie. How
sharp are these boundaries? How well do they correspond to the asperities
determined from the 1964 rupture? How does the complex velocity observed in
Prince William Sound relate to the transition from subduction to collision of
the Yakutat block? &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The investigators will carry out an
integrated study of GPS observations, analysis of related geodetic data
including leveling and tide gauge measurements, and development of numerical
models of crustal deformation applicable to both the specific tectonic
environment of southern Alaska and to subduction zones in general. Continued
measurements of crustal deformation in southern Alaska, combined with advanced
dislocation and viscoelastic modeling, may allow the investigating team to
unravel the physical mechanisms of postseismic deformation. The research will be
a cooperative effort involving personnel from the Geophysical Institute,
University of Alaska and the Geodynamics Branch, Laboratory for Terrestrial
Physics, Goddard Space Flight Center. &lt;br/&gt;