* 0106010
* Effects of Tissue Architecture on Vascular Mechanics: Role of the Hierarchical Structure and Constituent Evolution of Elastin
* ENG,CMMI
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2004
* Lisa Pruitt, University of California-Berkeley
* Standard Grant
* Yip-Wah Chung
* 08/31/2004
* USD 264,872.00

Effects of Tissue Architecture on Vascular Mechanics: ROLE OF THE HIERARCHICAL
STRUCTURE AND CONSTITUENT EVOLUTION OF ELASTIN

This proposal combines the techniques and approaches of several disciplines,
including mechanics, polymer physics, and molecular biology, to study the role
of elastin in the arterial wall. Arteries are complex heterogenous structures
with profound ability to remodel in response to biochemical and mechanical
stimuli. Since arterial diseases like atherosclerosis and aneurysms directly
correlate with changes in the amounts of elastin in the vessel wall, it is
important to characterize the mechanical properties of arteries with varying
amounts of elastin. The project aims to hierarchically link tissue
microstructure and biochemical composition of arterial walls to their emergent
mechanical behavior. A primary goal of this work is to study the effect of
constituents on the structural properties of vessels. The mechanical tests will
be used to assess the effects of a changed tissue microstructure on its overall
constitutive behavior. In order to link changes in mechanical behavior with
alterations in tissue microstructure, structural relationships will be
characterized using biochemical methods. The results of this study have broad
applicability to vascular mechanics and clinical treatments for arterial
diseases.

