* 0106990
* Experimental Determination of Phase Equilibria and Thermodynamic Properties of the System H2O-CO2-NaCl
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Lawrence Anovitz, University of Tennessee Knoxville
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2004
* USD 226,542.00

Anovitz and Labotka&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0106990&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Aqueous fluids in
the Earth's crust participate in nearly all geologic processes, including
partial melting, heat and solute transport, reaction and alteration of host
country rock, deposition of insoluble minerals in fractures, and rock
deformation. The extent to which fluid participates in these processes depends
on its chemical and transport properties. The H2O-CO2-NaCl system is a close
approximation to real crustal fluids. An understanding of the p-V-T-x properties
of this system is critical, and an experimental determination of the
thermophysical properties at high temperatures and pressures is clearly required
to be able to understand the fluid-rock interaction in crustal geologic
processes. We, in collaboration with J. Blencoe, propose to determine
experimentally the phase relations and thermodynamic properties of the
H2O-CO2-NaCl system at pressures ranging from 100 to 300 MPa and temperatures
from 500 to 800 degrees C. These conditions lie above the critical curve of the
H2O-CO2 binary, span the critical curve in the H2O-NaCl binary, and are
appropriate for many crustal fluid-rock processes. We will determine the halite
saturation surface and the activities of H2O on the surface with the use of an
internally heated pressure vessel equipped with hydrogen service. With these
data, we will be able to determine the phase equilibria and the activity-
composition relations for the ternary system. The results will be complementary
to studies of the system that use synthetic fluid inclusions and will provide
the basic input necessary to construct mathematical models of the thermodynamics
of the H2O-CO2-NaCl system at conditions appropriate for crustal geothermal,
metamorphic, and deformation systems.&lt;br/&gt;