* 0106433
* Exploring the Initial Upper Paleolithic at Üçagizli Cave, Turkey
* SBE,BCS
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2004
* Steven Kuhn, University of Arizona
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2004
* USD 70,572.00

With support from the National Science Foundation, Dr. Steven Kuhn and
a&lt;br/&gt;group of international researchers will continue archaeological
excavations&lt;br/&gt;at UUagizli ("three mouths") cave in south-central Turkey.
The team includes&lt;br/&gt;professional archaeologists, physical
anthropologists, geologists, and specialists&lt;br/&gt;in the analysis of
ancient plant remains, as well as graduate students from&lt;br/&gt;the U.S.,
Turkey, and western Europe. The central goal of the project is&lt;br/&gt;to
examine evidence for marked changes in human behavior within the
earliest&lt;br/&gt;Upper Paleolithic period, and to place these developments in
their environmental&lt;br/&gt;context. Archaeological deposits at the site span
the period between about&lt;br/&gt;30,000 and 43,000 years before present.
Although humans with essentially&lt;br/&gt;modern skeletal anatomy had appeared
much earlier, many researchers believe&lt;br/&gt;that it was only after 45,000
years ago that there is evidence in Eurasia&lt;br/&gt;for complex technologies,
symbolic communication and art, and other features&lt;br/&gt;of material, social
and intellectual life that distinguish fully modern&lt;br/&gt;humans from their
ancestors. Results from excavations at UUagizli cave&lt;br/&gt;to date have
helped expand our understanding of changes in economies and&lt;br/&gt;technology
for this crucial interval in human history. The site has also&lt;br/&gt;yielded
remains of what are among the earliest ornament-making traditions&lt;br/&gt;in
Eurasia. These findings are especially important because they
document&lt;br/&gt;the use of material culture as a medium of symbolic
communication, long&lt;br/&gt;considered an important rubicon in human cognitive
evolution. One issue&lt;br/&gt;guiding the research is whether developments in
human behavior after 45,000&lt;br/&gt;years ago represent local responses to
changing ecological and demographic&lt;br/&gt;conditions, or whether they
reflect the appearance of new human populations&lt;br/&gt;with enhanced
cognitive abilities. Continuing excavations will allow us&lt;br/&gt;to examine
in detail the timing of major shifts in behavior, and whether&lt;br/&gt;they
occurred independently or in concert. Studies of animal bones,
remains&lt;br/&gt;of shellfish, as well as ancient pollen and phytoliths
(durable crystalline&lt;br/&gt;components of plant tissues) will allow us to
place these developments in&lt;br/&gt;their environmental context, helping to
distinguish broad evolutionary trends&lt;br/&gt;within the human species as a
whole from local adaptations to changing conditions.&lt;br/&gt; At the same
time, the project is helping to establish new links between&lt;br/&gt;academic
institutions in Turkey and the United States. Through their
participation&lt;br/&gt;in the research, students from Ankara University obtain
training in field&lt;br/&gt;and lab methods. In exchange, American graduate
students get valuable&lt;br/&gt;overseas research experience as well as material
for theses and dissertations.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;