* 0106693
* Seismic Daylight Imaging: A New Passive-Seismic Method to Image Basin and Crustal Structure
* GEO,EAR
* 10/01/2001,09/30/2005
* Jon Claerbout, Stanford University
* Standard Grant
* Eva Zanzerkia
* 09/30/2005
* USD 56,949.00

Abstract for proposal EAR0106693 (PH # 21x)&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Title: "Seismic
Daylight Imaging: A new passive-seismic method to image &lt;br/&gt;basin and
crustal structure" &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;PI's: Klemperer and Claerbout, Stanford
Univ.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We are developing a new passive-seismic imaging
technique that we call "Seismic Daylight Imaging" (SDI), and will test its
ability to image basin and crustal structure beneath the San Clara Valley in the
San Francisco Bay area, California. We hope SDI can supplement more costly
active-source (i.e., typically small dynamite explosions) seismic imaging, and
even possibly supplant active-source shooting in cases where extreme building
density and cultural noise precludes the traditional active-source methodology.
We will produce a seismic image of the crustal structure beneath the Santa Clara
Valley, similar to one produced by an active-source seismic survey, but with
less resolution. Thus we will add to existing knowledge of central California
tectonics by delineating important crustal structures such as midcrustal
detachments and sedimentary basin depths. We will also improve microzonation of
earthquake hazards in Santa Clara Valley by constraining basin depths and
velocity profiles.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;SDI is a relatively simple, but time
consuming process. Using existing data recently acquired in the Santa Clara
Valley Seismic Experiment (SCVSE), seismic traces from the entire data set will
be cross-correlated, one hour at a time, beginning with the vertical channel,
and stacked. The cross-correlations will result in a cube of virtual seismic
shot records, which will then be migrated to produce a 3-D seismic image of
crustal structure beneath the Santa Clara Valley. Our SDI image will be compared
with a linear high-resolution active-source seismic survey that has recently
been conducted by the USGS in the same area.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;