* 0106879
* Collaborative Research:   A New Generation, User-Friendly Time Scale for the Cretaceous Period
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2004
* Timothy Herbert, Brown University
* Continuing Grant
* Enriqueta Barrera
* 08/31/2004
* USD 65,299.00

To attempt to constrain the future effects of global warming, geologists are
increasingly focussing studies on periods of warm climate in the rock record.
One of most representative intervals of such warm, "greenhouse" climate occurred
in the Cretaceous Period from 140 to 65 million years before present. Recent
investigations of Cretaceous climate have shown rapid swings that seem to have
occurred over millennia or less. These changes had dramatic effects on
evolution. One of the major problems facing geologists in constraining the exact
environmental effects of these warming events is that they took place over
periods an order of magnitude shorter than that resolvable using traditional
techniques to date rocks. Thus we cannot determine the rates of important
processes such as evolution nor can we constrain the fluxes of materials such as
CO2 between reservoirs. &lt;br/&gt; This collaborative, multidisciplinary
project involving the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Brown
University and consulting scientists at other universities seeks to improve the
precision and accuracy of the Cretaceous time scale by: (1) compiling time
scales based on the fossil record (biostratigraphy) of microscopic marine
organisms (foraminifera and nannoplankton) with higher resolution than
previously attainable; (2) refining the calibration between time scales based on
biostratigraphy, reversals in the Earth's geomagnetic polarity, and fluctuations
in the Earth's orbit that are all recorded in rocks, (3) improving the
correlation between biostratigraphy and recently acquired radiometric age dates;
(4) calibrating large portions of the Cretaceous time scale to elapsed time
using the orbital time scale, and (5) correlating and scaling the different
stratigraphic elements in a logical fashion.&lt;br/&gt; We also propose to
publish this time scale and associated data in a user-friendly format so that
all geologists can estimate ages of samples with the minimum of error. To do
this we will make the time scale available to the geologic community on the
world wide web as downloadable Excel files. Combined with the biostratigraphic
work that will be conducted in well-known rock exposures from the deep sea and
land areas, these Excel files will include macros that calculate the ages of
samples from their depths. Thus all a geochemist, for example, needs to do to
plot data is to download the file and input the depth of samples. All of our
data will also be archived on the web providing a ready means of future
revision.&lt;br/&gt; The new generation time scale proposed will provide
improved precision and resolution that will enable geologists to study abrupt
changes in the Cretaceous Earth. Moreover, the mode of communication of the time
scale will improve accuracy in diverse geologic
applications.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;