* 0106953
* The Role of Fluid Flow in the Cooling of Metamorphic Core Complexes
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2004
* Christian Teyssier, University of Minnesota-Twin Cities
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 07/31/2004
* USD 199,480.00

The role of fluid flow in the cooling history &lt;br/&gt;of metamorphic core
complexes&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Christian Teyssier, University of
Minnesota&lt;br/&gt;Mark Person, Indiana University&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The aim
of this project is to quantify the effects of fluid flow on the thermal history
of metamorphic core complexes during exhumation using a hydrothermal model that
incorporates the kinematics of crustal deformation. The numerical model is
constrained by field studies based on extensive structural, metamorphic, and
thermochronologic data for the Shuswap metamorphic core complex, British
Columbia. The modeling allows for quantitative comparison of heat transfer with
rock thermochronology and fluid-rock isotopic exchange within the Shuswap
system. The modeling helps to test the sensitivity of fluid flow to fault
geometry, kinematics, and permeability in the upper crust (horst and graben,
domino-style blocks, listric systems), as well as ductile flow and attending
heat advection in the lower crust. The modeling also evaluates the effect that
fluid flow has on heat distribution and geothermal gradients below the
detachment zone, which has implications for the understanding of metamorphic
zoning in core complexes. Quantitative results are being compared to the large-
scale thermochronology database we developed in the Shuswap metamorphic core
complex, British Columbia; this type of generic modeling is directly exportable
to other metamorphic core complexes as well as rift
zones.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The research also sheds light on the systematics of
fluid-rock interactions and thermal history in the detachment zones of the
Shuswap metamorphic core complex. Towards this end, we are conducting a detailed
thermochronologic study based on the fission-track and (U-Th)/He methods on two
transects across the Columbia River detachment and fault system that bounds the
metamorphic core complex to the east. In the same regions, we are examining
fluid-rock interaction by analyzing the stable isotope signature and fluid
inclusions within veins, fault rocks, and unfractured rock. This part of the
study constrains the nature of the fluids, the extent of fluid pathways, the
degree to which surficial fluids penetrate the metamorphic crust, the fluids
paleo-temperatures, and possibly also fluid fluxes. We are constructing a suite
of numerical experiments to represent isotopic fluid-rock interactions as well
as thermochronologic data within this smaller-scale framework in order to better
understand fluid flow in detachment/normal fault systems. The detailed field
work and geochemical results also serve as ground truth against which the
modeling results are tested. The quantitative analysis of fluid flow as a major
heat transfer mechanism will help to refine the method in which geologists use
cooling rates to determine exhumation rates.&lt;br/&gt;