* 0106475
* Characterizing the Importance of Mafic Sources for Mantle-Derived Magmatism
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2004
* Richard Carlson, Carnegie Institution of Washington
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2004
* USD 99,415.00

EAR-0106475&lt;br/&gt;Carlson&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This study is examining the
importance of mafic (pyroxene/garnet/mica dominated rock types) as opposed to
peridotitic (olivine-dominated rock types) sources for mantle-derived magmas.
Though generally present only in volumetrically small amounts compared to
peridotite, mafic material in the mantle potentially can contain a large
fraction of the mantle's incompatible elements, including major elements such as
sodium, iron, calcium and aluminum. Consequently, mafic components in the mantle
can influence the composition of melts produced in the mantle to a degree
disproportionate to their volume. Given that the incompatible element abundances
in melts are used to infer mantle properties such as temperature, bulk-
composition, and geodynamic history, the participation of mafic material in the
melting process may lead to erroneous conclusions regarding mantle properties in
models where only peridotitic sources are
considered.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Detecting the contribution of mafic source
components is difficult because many of the properties of mantle melts will be
influenced by the predominance of peridotitic wall rock. Commonly used
radiogenic isotope systems such as rubidium-strontium, samarium-neodymium and
uranium-lead are not sensitive indicators of a mafic source since both mafic and
peridotitic materials can have similar parent daughter ratios for these systems.
In contrast, the ratio of rhenium to osmium is dramatically different between
mafic and peridotitic materials, which makes this radiometric system very
sensitive to reflecting the abundance of mafic material in the source of a
mantle derived melt. In addition, when a mafic source contribution is detected,
the lutetium-hafnium isotopic system potentially is capable of discriminating
between a mafic source produced by shallow (spinel stability) melting as opposed
to deep (garnet stability) melting.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In order to determine
whether or not mafic source materials contribute significantly to mantle derived
magmas, this study is examining the osmium and hafnium isotopic composition of
mafic-alkalic magmas erupted in a variety of tectonic settings in the western
US, Italy, Brazil, and Siberia. These compositions represent small volume melts
of the mantle that may preferentially sample a mantle mafic component. Defining
the chemical characteristics in these small volume melts that can be attributed
to mafic sources will allow these signatures to be more unambiguously identified
in larger volume magmas (ocean ridge, ocean island, and continental flood
basalts) where the percentage of melt from a mafic source may be small in
comparison to melt from surrounding peridotite. The study will also produce
radiogenic isotope data for mafic xenoliths from the mantle beneath southern
Africa and the western US to better define the expected range of isotopic
compositions of mafic material in the mantle. Understanding the compositional
characteristics of the source materials of mantle-derived magmas is critical to
their use as tracers of mantle temperature variations, compositional
heterogeneity in the mantle, and the geodynamics of mantle convection and
mixing.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;