* 0106612
* Travel support for AGU Chapman Conference: State-of-the-Art in Hillslope Hydrology
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2002
* Lawrence Band, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
* Standard Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 07/31/2002
* USD 20,000.00

0106612&lt;br/&gt;Band&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;We request funding to help support
travel expenses for invited international and domestic speakers as well as
additional junior scientists and students for and AGU Chapman Conference. The
Chapman Conference is entitled "State-of-the-art in hillslope hydrology," and
will occur in October, 2001. It is already approved by AGU and cosponsored by
the Hydrology and Biogeoscience Sections. This conference will focus on a review
and assessment of our current knowledge in hillslope hydrology, with an emphasis
on the processes by which water enters and moves through hillslope systems and
into a receiving stream. Major subtopics for which we will solicit papers will
include mechanisms and patterns of water input and output from hillslopes, the
distribution and dynamics of flowpaths, spatial patterns of surface and
subsurface soil moisture and soil hydraulic properties, methods of measurement
or inference of these processes and states, and their representation in models.
This focus has important implications for the formation of hillslope and
watershed hydrographs at the storm to seasonal time scale, the transformation
and export of sediment and chemical load to streams, the distribution and
dynamics of the vegetation canopy, and land/atmosphere interactions. The
conference will bring together internationally recognized researchers in the
field with younger scientists and students and will promote an extensive
exchange of research finding, outstanding questions and developing theories and
techniques. The conference format will include invited plenary presentations in
the morning, followed by poster sessions and moderated discussion in the
afternoons, and an additional plenary talk and discussion in the evening.
Sufficient free time during the afternoon will be reserved to allow both
recreational activity and smaller group discussion. One day will be devoted to a
field trip to the HJ Andrews Experimental Watershed for brief presentations and
a half day field trip revolving hillslope hydrology related research at the
site. Peer review research papers will be solicited for publications of the
proceedings, either as an AGU Monograph or as a special issues of Water
Resources Research.&lt;br/&gt;