* 0106798
* Investigation of Surface Deformation at Subduction Zones using a Finite Plate Model
* GEO,EAR
* 06/15/2001,05/31/2003
* Robert McCaffrey, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute
* Continuing grant
* Robin Reichlin
* 05/31/2003
* USD 104,619.00

Williams 0106798

Surface deformation at subduction zones is generally interpreted in terms of
movement on the thrust boundary between the subducting slab and the overriding
plate. Elastic half-space dislocation (EHSD) models are frequently used to infer
a slip distribution on the fault from surface geodetic observations and seismic
hazard is evaluated in terms of which portions of the fault are fully or
partially locked. These models are appealing because of their simplicity, but
the assumption that all surface deformation is due to movement on a fault
embedded in a homogeneous elastic half-space leads to some unrealistic behavior.
Rather than considering the entire system, this project will consider only the
portion of the overriding plate that behaves elastically over the time period of
interest. Surface deformation occurs as a result of stress changes or rates
applied along the thrust fault boundary and along the base of a finite elastic
region (the overriding plate). This approach offers a more promising means of
understanding the physics of subduction zones and makes fewer implicit
assumptions than do EHSD models. Inversion results using this method will be
compared and contrasted with those using EHSD models. The investigators will
initially examine the Cascadia subduction zone in Oregon and Washington, and the
Kenai Peninsula in Alaska. Additional study areas will include Japan, Sumatra,
the Himalayas, and New Zealand. The results of this study should have important
implications in fault friction studies and earthquake hazard research, and in
understanding plate driving and resistive forces.