* 0106781
* A Posteriori Error Analysis and Adaptive Algorithms for Variational Inequalities
* MPS,DMS
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* Weimin Han, University of Iowa
* Standard Grant
* Junping Wang
* 07/31/2004
* USD 137,041.00

The objective of this project is to develop a systematic theory on a posteriori
error estimation and adaptive algorithms for finite element solutions of
variational inequalities. A posteriori error estimates play an essential role in
assessing the reliability of numerical solutions and in developing efficient
adaptive algorithms. Although several standard techniques have been developed to
derive and analyze a posteriori error estimates for finite element solutions of
differential equation problems, they do not work directly for a posteriori error
analysis of numerical solutions of variational inequalities. In the proposed
research, the duality theory of nonlinear analysis will be employed as a basic
mathematical tool for the development of a posteriori error estimates of
numerical solutions of variational
inequalities.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Variational inequalities form an important
family of nonlinear problems arising in a wide range of applications. A partial
list of the applications where variational inequalities arise include contact
mechanics, plasticity, non-Newtonian fluid flows, metal forming, metal
extrusion, financial mathematics. A systematic approach will be developed to
derive a posteriori error estimates and to form and test efficient, reliable
adaptive solution algorithms for finite element approximations of variational
inequalities. The research results will have a direct impact on many areas of
science and technology. &lt;br/&gt;