* 0106614
* Collaborative Research: Experimental Determination of Abiologic and Inorganic Iron and Oxygen Isotope Fractionation
* GEO,EAR
* 08/15/2001,07/31/2004
* Clark Johnson, University of Wisconsin-Madison
* Standard Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 07/31/2004
* USD 225,156.00

Johnson and Beard&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0106614&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Isotopic variations
of transition metals have attracted attention in the last year or two, in large
part because such elements may be isotopically fractionated by biological
processes. So far, clear biologically produced isotopic fractionation has been
measured in the laboratory only for Fe, and this led to the proposal that Fe
isotopes may be a useful "biosignature" that may be applied to tracing the role
of organisms in modern and ancient environments, and may help in understanding
the origin and evolution of life on Earth or other planetary bodies. However,
because significant Fe isotope variations (3-4 per mil [/] in 56Fe/54Fe) are
found only in fluids, rocks, and minerals from low temperature environments, it
is possible that inorganic or abiologic Fe isotope fractionation may at least in
part explain the range of Fe isotope compositions measured for natural samples.
Support for inorganic or abiologic Fe isotope fractionation comes from
experimental data and theoretical calculations, involving both mineral and fluid
systems. Data from the U.W. Madison group on oxide and carbonate minerals from
sedimentary rocks, as well as initial experimental results from mineral-fluid
and Fe(II)-Fe(III) aqueous systems, indicate inorganic Fe isotope fractionations
on the order of 1-3 / for some (but not all) systems, similar to those
calculated from theory for a few cases, but also pointing to significant
discrepancies between experiments and theory.&lt;br/&gt;The proposed research
involves an extensive set of experimental determinations of Fe isotope
fractionation factors between coexisting aqueous Fe species, between minerals
and fluids, and between coexisting minerals. In all of the proposed experiments,
distinction between kinetic and equilibrium isotope fractionations will be
accomplished through use of the "three isotope method" or use of enriched
isotope tracers. One phase of the proposed research will focus on determining
the equilibrium Fe isotope fractionation between coexisting Fe(II) and Fe(III)
complexes as a function of temperature, ionic strength, pH, and ligand
chemistry, including aquo, chloro, and cyanide complexes, as well as mixed
complexes. Another phase of the planned work will involve determining mineral-
mineral and mineral-fluid isotope fractionation factors over the T-P range
200-600 degrees C and 1-20 kbar; in many cases, this work will involve
determination of both O and Fe isotope fractionation factors from the same run
products so that the relative isotopic exchange rates of these two elements may
be compared. Initially, the goal will be to determine isotopic fractionations
between siderite, magnetite, hematite, and fluid, given the importance of these
minerals in the low-temperature rock record, but our work may be extended to
other minerals (such as sulfides) depending upon the results. Ultimately,
combined O and Fe isotope analysis of natural minerals may provide important
cross-checks of attainment of isotopic equilibrium and the sources of fluids
from which they precipitated. A number of experimental strategies are outlined
in the proposal, which are aimed at addressing known experimental issues, but
are intended to be flexible enough so that different approaches may be tried
depending upon initial results. An important component to the viability of the
planned experimental program is the very high precision that is now attainable
using new instrumentation at U.W. Madison, where Fe isotope compositions may be
determined on real samples to an external precision of plus or minus0.05 / in
56Fe/54Fe ratios on very small (~ 100-300 ng) quantities of Fe. Given the great
potential that Fe isotope geochemistry has for addressing problems that cut
across several disciplines, the proposed experimental determinations of Fe
isotope fractionation factors are viewed as essential before the field of Fe
isotope geochemistry can move forward.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;