* 0106518
* Active Continental Extension of Eastern Papua New Guinea:  Geologic Studies of Emerged Coral Reefs and Marine Sedimentary Rocks
* GEO,EAR
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2004
* Frederick Taylor, University of Texas at Austin
* Standard Grant
* David Fountain
* 06/30/2004
* USD 217,450.00

0106518&lt;br/&gt;Mann&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The lateral transition from seafloor
spreading at a narrow, well defined plate boundary to diffuse rifting of
continental crust occurs today in three localities worldwide: the Red Sea, the
Gulf of Aden, and eastern Papua New Guinea. These three areas are critical for
understanding how continents rupture because the spatial progression from
seafloor spreading to continental rifting provides insights into the temporal
and structural evolution of an oceanic spreading ridge to a continental rift.
Such insights are not readily apparent from the more widespread zones of active
intracontinental extension like the U.S. Basin and Range province where
extension has not - and may not - eventually proceed to the point of seafloor
spreading. Of these three seafloor spreading to rift transition areas, only
Papua New Guinea exhibits a close spatial association between the tip of the
propagating spreading ridge and low-angle normal fault earthquakes, active, low-
angle normal faults in a submarine setting, and late Neogene metamorphic core
complexes. The D'Entrecasteaux Islands and Papuan Peninsula, fringed by late
Neogene sedimentary rocks and late Quaternary coral reefs, occupy the transition
area between oceanic spreading and continental rifting. These accessible land
areas provide an ideal geologic setting to test several contrasting tectonic
models for spreading ridge-rift transitions proposed on the basis of
earthquakes, radiometric and structural studies of core complexes, and marine
geophysical studies. The main elements of these previously proposed models
include oceanic propagating ridge models applied to this region of continental
crust, localization of metamorphic core complexes and topographic uplift
adjacent to areas of propagating ridges, and lateral shifts in the location of
rifting and subsequent spreading. We are using a combination of geologic studies
of late Quaternary coral reefs and late Neogene sedimentary sections along
hundreds of kilometers of eastern PNG coastlines to determine the pattern of
late Neogene to late Quaternary vertical tectonic history, style of deformation,
and tectonic mechanisms in order to test the tectonic models described above.
Key questions that we are addressing in these studies include: 1) Where is the
area of maximum late Quaternary coral reef uplift in the D'Entrecasteaux Islands
and Papuan Peninsula and what structures have affected them? 2) Are there
detectable spatial migrations in the uplift pattern of this region? and 3) Are
low angle normal faults present in the late Neogene marine rocks and the coral
terraces themselves in the area of low angle normal fault earthquakes near
Sanaroa and Fergusson Islands? Our results will aid interpretations of the
tectonic effects of active ridge propagation or jumping in other active rift
areas including the Red Sea, East African rifts, and Gulf of Aden where a
detailed reef record such as in Papua New Guinea is not available.&lt;br/&gt;