* 0106520
* Household, Community, and Power in Precolumbian Puerto Rico
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2003
* Luis Curet, Field Museum of Natural History
* Standard Grant
* John Yellen
* 06/30/2003
* USD 59,967.00

With National Science Foundation support Drs. Antonio Curet and Lee Newsom will
conduct preliminary archaeological survey at the site of Tibes, located adjacent
to the southern coast of Puerto Rico near the city of Ponce. Discovered in 1975
the site is composed of a variety of highly distinctive archaeological features
including discrete cultural deposits from two periods, middens and twelve stone
structures (ball courts, plazas and causeways). Original excavations uncovered
two cemeteries and other burials dispersed across the site. Likely Tibes also
contains a full range of domestic deposits with the potential to reveal a
complex history of space use and community pattern. This civic-ceremonial center
is of significant scientific interest because it is the oldest in the Caribbean
and may document the rise of a complex chiefdom level of society. The Taino
native inhabitants of much of this region formed some of the most complex "pre-
state" societies in the New World and Spanish chroniclers, attempting to apply
European categories described their organization as "feudal kingdoms."The highly
developed social-political organization of these groups was accompanied by an
intricate religious system controlled by chiefs who were able to gather labor
for communal work or war, and who accumulated wealth and staple products.

While much archaeological effort has been devoted to understanding the rise of
social complexity in regions of North, Middle and South America the Caribbean
has been relatively unstudied. Because islands constitute delimited areas where
social boundaries can be clearly defined, they provide an excellent venue for
study of individual group development. With National Science Foundation support,
Drs. Curet and Newsom will conduct a geophysical survey of Tibes and test the
utility of three techniques - resistivity, magnetometry and ground penetrating
radar - to determine their ability to locate and determine the nature of buried
archaeological features, including hard to locate domestic areas. They will then
conduct test excavations to match remotely sensed anomalies with buried
counterparts. The information gathered will be used to develop a methodology and
set the stage for a longer term project which examines the rise and nature of
Tanio social complexity.