* 0106315
* Data Mining and GIS Spatial Analysis to Study Epidemiological Trends in Asthma
* MPS,DMS
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2003
* James Brennan, University of Louisville Research Foundation Inc
* Standard Grant
* Lloyd E. Douglas
* 06/30/2003
* USD 104,000.00

Medical geography is an interdisciplinary collaboration between geography and
medicine to apply geographic methods to study disease distributions using the
geographical information systems (GIS) containing information that can be cross-
linked to hospital and county health data to examine the relationship between
chronic diseases such as cancer and asthma and air quality and other
environmental hazards. Substantial environmental data are currently available in
the GIS, but the data are underutilized in investigating chronic health
problems. Local hospitals provide emergency treatment for asthma for patients
and patient addresses can be cross-linked to geographic information. Health data
can be correlated to the geographic information to determine the relationships
between air and water quality, and asthma emergencies. Standard statistical
methods cannot be readily applied to the complex, observational data. Therefore,
the analysis will use data mining techniques, including artificial neural
networks, visualization, and kernel density estimation. Structural equation
modeling examines the causal flow. The investigator will work with geographers
in the Department of Geography/Geosciences and with health researchers to expand
skills to include knowledge of the GIS system and software, and to use those
skills to examine the epidemiology of chronic diseases related to environmental
factors. The methods studied can be applied to many chronic diseases. This IGMS
project is jointly supported by the MPS Office of Multidisciplinary Activities
(OMA) and the Division of Mathematical Sciences (DMS).