* 0106716
* Feedforward Control of  Data Rate in Wireless Networks
* CSE,CNS
* 09/15/2001,08/31/2004
* Pierre Kabamba, Regents of the University of Michigan - Ann Arbor
* Standard Grant
* Darleen Fisher
* 08/31/2004
* USD 318,923.00

Modern wireless networks use feedback control of transmit power to accommodate
changing channel conditions, such as propagation loss, shadowing, multi-user
interference, etc. This proposal suggests the utilization of feedforward control
of data rate, in addition to the existing power control schemes, in order to
more effectively combat these disturbances and, in addition, accommodate channel
model uncertainties. These controllers use the bit error frequency, observed in
the previous packet, in order to calculate the data rate of the packet to be
transmitted next. Our preliminary results indicate that ideally this approach
leads to a minimum of 20% throughput improvement, without additional power
expenditures, or to a minimum of 30% decrease of transmit power, without
decreasing the throughput. In some scenarios, this approach may lead to as much
as 300% of throughput improvement or to 600% of power saving. Moreover, the
efficacy of this&lt;br/&gt;approach is independent of whether a single or multi-
user environment is considered, and no data rate wars take place.&lt;br/&gt; The
efficacy of feedforward data rate control is mainly due to the following two
reasons:&lt;br/&gt;(a) Unlike feedback power control, which adapts relatively
slowly due to a finite step of power increase/decrease, feedforward data rate
control adapts in the span of one packet transmission time. This leads to a more
effective rejection of fast disturbances, such as the level of shadowing. The
above-mentioned minima of throughput increase and power decrease are due to this
fast adaptation capability.&lt;br/&gt;(b) Unlike feedback power control, which
does not adapt to channel uncertainties (e.g., whether the channel is AWGN or
Rayleigh), feedforward data rate control does accommodate these effects. The
above-mentioned three-fold in-crease of the throughput and six-fold decrease of
power are exactly due to this fact.&lt;br/&gt;The approach to the development of
feedforward data rate controllers, considered in this proposal, is based on the
following three steps: (i) First, a non-causal and non-realistic but optimal
feedforward data rate controller is designed. It is non-causal because it
calculates the optimal data rate as a function of bit error probability in the
packet yet to be transmitted. It is non-realistic, because it uses the
probability of bit error rather than the frequency of this event. It is designed
solely in order to derive the least upper bound of the achievable
throughput.&lt;br/&gt;(ii) Next, this controller is causified and made
realistic. The causification is achieved by making the data rate of each packet
a function of bit error probability in the previous packet. It is made realistic
by using the frequency of bit error rather than its probability. Thus, an
implementable controller is obtained and its performance is evaluated. It is
shown that causification leads to a relatively small decrease of performance for
all practical speeds of mobiles. However, using frequencies instead of
probabilities may lead to a substantial performance loss. Thus, a certain level
of filtering of bit error frequency is necessary.&lt;br/&gt;(iii) Finally, a
filtered version of the above implementable controller is introduced and it is
shown that a right level of filtering leads to an efficient performance. At this
point, this level of filtering is investigated only experimen-tally (i.e.,
numerically), and a rigorous method for designing right filters is, along with
others, a problem to be addressed in the proposed research.&lt;br/&gt; Based on
the results to-date briefly mentioned above, the main tasks of the proposed
research are as follows:&lt;br/&gt;1. Develop methods for design of
implementable feedforward data rate controllers for wireless
networks.&lt;br/&gt;2. Quantify the level of throughput increase and/or transmit
power decrease when this technology is used.&lt;br/&gt;3. Develop an
architecture in which feedforward data rate control can be used in both cellular
and ad-hoc environ-ments.&lt;br/&gt; The impact of the proposed research is in
providing wireless network designers with a new method for combating channel
disturbances and uncertainties.