* 0106309
* Insect and Vertebrate Faunas of a Unique Late Triassic Freshwater Ecosystem in Eastern North America
* GEO,EAR
* 08/01/2001,07/31/2005
* David Grimaldi, Virginia Museum of Natural History Foundation
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 07/31/2005
* USD 241,165.00

INSECT AND VERTEBRATE FAUNAS OF A UNIQUE LATE TRIASSIC FRESHWATER ECOSYSTEM IN
EASTERN NORTH AMERICA&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Nicholas C. Fraser and David A.
Grimaldi&lt;br/&gt;EAR-0106309&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The end of the Triassic
period (230 -200 mya) was a pivotal time in the evolution of modern terrestrial
ecosystems. There is a good global record for tetrapods, including the first
mammals, crocodiles, turtles, lissamphibians (frogs and salamanders),
sphenodontians, and, by extension, their sister taxon, the lizards. By contrast
the record for the most significant group of modern day animals, the insects, is
considerably poorer. Only a handful of rich insect-producing Triassic sequences
are known worldwide, and the majority of fossils from these localities comprise
incomplete specimens such as isolated wings and elytra. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;A
single site in the Newark Supergroup of eastern North America has been found to
contain numerous complete Late Triassic insects. The Solite Quarry is situated
on the Virginia-North Carolina state line, and it has produced the oldest global
records for water bugs, thrips and caddisflies. Other fossils found to date
include a unique gliding reptile and numerous specimens of a small aquatic
reptile that frequently preserve details of their soft part anatomy. These have
yet to be fully described. Only a relatively small portion of the fossiliferous
sequences has been excavated and PIs will open large-scale excavations in the
most productive quarry units. The next phase of the work will be to conduct
detailed studies of all the finds and to compare them with the two major
assemblages that share the most in common: the Madygen Formation of Kirghizistan
and the Molteno Formation of South Africa. The exquisite preservation of the
Solite insects will permit a complete re-evaluation of the extensive Russian and
South African insect collections and thereby allow for a better understanding of
the mode and tempo of insect evolution and radiation at this critical
time.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;For a long time the Solite quarry was regarded as
being largely unfossiliferous. Certainly the microscopic insect fossils can be
readily overlooked under normal lighting conditions. The search image is
critical to the PIs success, and using the same methods they have identified
other localities nearby that also contain insect remains. Together with the
diverse plant and vertebrate remains, they shall reconstruct a detailed picture
of marginal freshwater ecosystems in the Late Triassic.&lt;br/&gt;