* 0106680
* A Global Survey of the Initiation of Large Earthquakes: The Influence of Earthquake Magnitude and Depth on the Rate of Growth of Moment Release
* NONE,NONE
* 07/15/2001,06/30/2005
* Heidi Houston, University of California-Los Angeles
* Standard Grant
* Eva E. Zanzerkia
* 06/30/2005
* USD 102,859.00

Abstract for proposal EAR 0106680 (PH # 63x)

Title: A global survey of the initiation of large earthquakes: The influence of
earthquake magnitude and depth on the rate of growth of moment release

PI: Heidi Houston, University of California, Los Angeles

How earthquakes initiate is a key issue in understanding the process of seismic
rupture. For example, the question of how seismic ruptures grow and whether
large earthquakes initiate in a different manner than small ones has attracted
significant attention in recent years, but remains controversial. We propose to
determine the initial rates of growth of earthquake ruptures (initial source
time functions) with detailed resolution in time for many (~150) large
earthquakes (with depths of 15 to 100 km and MW \204 6.7) directly from
seismograms. Systematic comparison and statistical analysis of the results will
enable us to determine the influences of factors such as earthquake magnitude,
source depth, focal mechanism, and tectonic setting on how ruptures grow in
their first few seconds. Several recent results suggest that such influences may
exist. A slow beginning to rupture (seismic nucleation phase) proportional in
duration to the final magnitude and lasting 4 to 10 seconds for MW 8.0 to 8.2
earthquakes has been put forward as a general feature. The work proposed here
should detect its systematic presence or absence in our magnitude range.
Systematic differences in the energy budgets of small earthquakes compared to
large ones have been proposed, which suggest that melting or fluid
pressurization occurs during large but not small events, and affects dynamic
rupture. The duration of rupture is known to decrease with depth, implying an
increase in the rate of initial rupture growth. Finally, rupture growth could be
affected by the aspect ratio (shape) of the fault, which is closely related to
tectonic regime. Differences (or their absence) in rate of initiation with
magnitude, depth, or other parameters can place constraints on the physical
processes acting during rupture initiation.

