* 0106391
* Non-Contact River Discharge and Precipitation Measurements
* GEO,EAR
* 09/15/2001,03/31/2006
* Jeffrey Nystuen, University of Washington
* Continuing Grant
* L. Douglas James
* 03/31/2006
* USD 369,884.00

0106391&lt;br/&gt;Plant&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The US Geological Survey routinely
measures river discharge at more than 7000 sites in the United States by
monitoring the height, or stage, of the rivers. This requires that the relation
between stage and discharge be accurately known. Present methods of acquiring
such calibration data place instruments and, often personnel, in the water. At
high flow rates such measurements are both difficult and hazardous; at extremely
high rates, they cannot be made at all. Yet the need for these measurements is
especially acute at very high flow rates in order to monitor and predict
flooding conditions. In this proposal we outline research to develop a microwave
system capable of remotely measuring river discharge under nearly all flow
conditions. Additionally, the system will provide infon-nation on
rainfall.&lt;br/&gt;Our approach is to construct an array of simple continuous-
wave microwave systems and algorithms for analyzing their output in order to
obtain river surface velocities and rain rates remotely and continuously. The
primary focus of the project will be on the algorithms needed to obtain accurate
currents and rain rates since the microwave and data acquisition systems will be
relatively simple. Current information is contained in the Doppler shift of the
microwaves backscattered from the river while rain rates are related to the
intensity of the return from raindrops. The initial application of the prototype
system will be long-term measurements from a bridge on the Cowlitz River near
Castle Rock, WA. The work will be carried out in collaboration with the USGS,
who will mount the antenna of a ground-penetrating radar on a cableway near the
bridge. The combined measurements have the potential to yield
discharge.&lt;br/&gt;This research will provide inexpensive, portable systems
for making river discharge and precipitation measurements. Continuous, remote
measurements with these systems will improve development and monitoring of
international and interstate agreements on allocation of water resources;
provide streamflow data to manage and improve water quality; assess changes in
the riverine environment that affect the quality of river and riparian habitat;
and improve the estimation of flood frequency and flood inundation
areas.&lt;br/&gt;