* 0106968
* Virtual Reality Modeling-based Inquiry: The Role of Isomorphic and Behavioral Modeling on Knowledge Construction
* EDU,DRL
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2005
* J. Scott Shaw, University of Georgia Research Foundation Inc
* Continuing Grant
* Gregg Solomon
* 08/31/2005
* USD 724,770.00

This proposed research project is designed to analyze the strengths of four
theoretically grounded model-use conditions. The investigation focuses on the
process through which understanding emerges, evolves and diffuses through
modeling-based inquiry and pedagogy and 3D technologies. These investigators
will use a data acquisition system that allows them to record data (video,
audio, screen shots, and computer log files) in the classroom setting and
analyze the data through activity "nodes" and "links" to track the "process" by
which students engage in the modeling process. The group then proposes to
explore the possibility of doing similar analysis through web-base
resources.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Fundamentally, the project builds on the
existing foundation of experience, technology, and curriculum materials in
Virtual Reality modeling-based inquiry. The basic design of the project is
congruent with the approach advocated by Stokes labeled "use-oriented basic
research." The findings will be used to develop a conceptual model of how
learners learn under these modeling conditions. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The
proposal is well written, detailed, and grounded in extant research on
isomorphic and behavioral environments. The researchers, including the proposed
subcontractor, have broad knowledge and experience in the areas of virtual
reality, model building, and assessment. The work will have an influence on
content areas beyond astronomy, providing insight into how students learn from
modeling environments.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;The panel generally viewed this
project as having high potential. However, several issues were raised during the
discussion:&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;1. A significant portion of the proposal was
devoted to the technology, and this technology-centered focus distracted from
how the technology would be used to address the research
questions.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;2. The ROLE goals include integrating diversity
into NSF programs, projects and activities. This proposal did not address this
issue, and the panel felt that this detracted from the proposal.&lt;br/&gt;