* 0106790
* An Investigation of Cambrian and Ordovician Plant Spores
* GEO,EAR
* 07/01/2001,06/30/2005
* Paul Strother, Boston College
* Continuing Grant
* H. Richard Lane
* 06/30/2005
* USD 179,999.00

Prior to the middle Silurian (425 Ma) when the first plants with woody tissue
appeared, the fossil record of plant life on land is represented only by spores.
In the past few decades, Paleobotanists have established that this spore record
began about 475 million years ago and that the earliest land plants were
probably related to the present day bryophytes (mosses, liverworts, and
hornworts). Recent discoveries of spores from Middle Cambrian rocks in Tennessee
now put the origin of land plants back yet another 50 million years, extending
the tenure of this early bryophytic biome. The purpose of this research project
is to collect, describe, and study this new evidence for the greater antiquity
of the plant kingdom. As we work on describing new species, we hope to establish
the timing and stratigraphic extent of these microfossils. With the addition of
stable isotope studies, we hope to expand their usefulness in helping to
constrain global geochemical models of ancient atmospheres and carbon flux in
ancient ecosystems. But the primary purpose of this research is to gain
fundamental knowledge about diversity and extent of plant life on the surface of
the Earth during the Cambro-Ordovician (545-450 Ma) time interval. Project goals
will be achieved through a combination of original fieldwork and comparative
examination of museum specimens. Educational outreach for this project will be
accomplished via the world wide web.