* 0106516
* A Workshop on Earth Systems Engineering:  A Civil, Environmental,  and Architectural Engineering Approach
* ENG,CMMI
* 06/01/2001,12/31/2002
* Vijay Gupta, University of Colorado at Boulder
* Standard Grant
* Richard Fragaszy
* 12/31/2002
* USD 95,000.00

With a current population of 6 billion, there is growing recognition that humans
are altering the Earth's natural systems at all scales from local to global at
an unprecedented rate in the human history. In general, most human-made projects
involve the interactions of non-natural systems (such as machines or
infrastructures) with natural systems (biosphere, hydrosphere, geosphere).
Engineering, being a central element of human society, needs to understand and
take into account the relationships between natural and non-natural systems when
creating structures needed to sustain the quality of life of current and future
generations. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Traditionally, engineering practice and
engineering education have been based on the paradigm of control of nature
rather than cooperation with nature. In this paradigm, humans and the natural
world are divided. As a result, past engineering achievements have often been
developed without considering their social, economic and environmental impacts
on natural systems. A worldwide transition to a more holistic approach to
engineering requires a major paradigm shift from control of nature to
participation with nature. For example, the question of what represents a
sustainable engineering structure or system is still an open-ended question that
needs to be addressed and clarified by engineers.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Engineers
need to be given a much broader and integrated education than what is
traditionally taught in engineering curricula today. For example, an ability to
understand how engineering structures adapt and adjust to natural systems is
critical. It is clear that engineers of the 21st century will be called to make
decisions in a professional environment where they will have to interact with
others from many technical and non-technical disciplines.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;In response to the global nature of the problems that
Earth is facing today and is likely to face in the near future and in view of
the complexity of the interaction between natural and natural systems, we are
developing a new initiative called Earth Systems Engineering (ESE) in the
Department of Civil, Environmental, and Architectural Engineering at the
University of Colorado at Boulder. &lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;As a first step in this
initiative, we are planning to conduct an international workshop on ESE on
October 4-6, 2001 on the CU Boulder campus. The workshop will be three days in
length and will bring together industry, government and university participants
from engineering, physical sciences, biological sciences, and social sciences.
The overall purpose of the workshop is three-fold: (1) provide an intellectual
framework for interdisciplinary exchange, (2) provide recommendations on the
future course of engineering education, research, and practice in the
understanding of the interaction between natural and non-natural systems at
multiple scales from local to regional and global, and (3) recommend new
engineering concepts in water resources, geomechanical, environmental, and other
sub-fields in Civil, Environmental and Architectural Engineering. More
specifically, the workshop will consider the interaction of natural systems with
non-natural systems such as civil, environmental and architectural
infrastructures (e.g. the built environment). All three components of ESE
research, education and outreach will be addressed throughout the
workshop.&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;