* 0106645
* Ultradeep Kimberlite/Carbonatite Petrogenesis: Melting of Model Carbonated Lherzolite in the System CaO-MgO-Al2O3-SiO2-CO2 at 7-14 GPa
* GEO,EAR
* 09/01/2001,08/31/2006
* Dean Presnall, University of Texas at Dallas
* Continuing Grant
* Sonia Esperanca
* 08/31/2006
* USD 359,996.00

EAR-0106645&lt;br/&gt;Presnall&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;Kimberlite is the magma type
that is the carrier of most diamonds from the deep interior (mantle) of the
Earth. These magmas generally erupt at the Earth's surface, form a pipe-like
throat near the surface where the diamonds are found, and are commonly
associated with another magma type called carbonatite. Kimberlites are generally
understood to represent the greatest depth of origin of any magma type and
therefore tell us something about the Earth's interior at depths not generally
sampled. Traditionally, the depth of origin has been thought to be about 220
km., but the recent discovery of exotic mineral inclusions in a very few
diamonds indicates an origin much deeper in some cases, possibly even to the
core-mantle boundary. Experimental data on the chemistry of melting processes at
depths in excess of about 200 km are very sparse. This project is designed to
examine melting relations for compositions that model the Earth's deep interior
at depths up to about 430 km. The apparatus used for this study is called a
multianvil press and is capable of duplicating temperatures and pressures
thought to be relevant to possible melting process at these great depths. The
purpose is to determine the temperature of melting as pressure increases and the
compositions of the melts generated. These data will provide quantitative data
that will help resolve the issue of whether melting at these depths is
reasonable or if the diamonds are transported slowly from extreme depths by
solid-state convective processes in the mantle, to be sampled by kimberlites
generated at more traditionally accepted depths of about 220 km.&lt;br/&gt;