* 0106500
* Archaeological Excavations at Bosutswe:  Trade, Cattle and Transformations in the Political Economy of the Eastern Kalahari between 700 and 1700 CE
* SBE,BCS
* 07/15/2001,01/31/2004
* James Denbow, University of Texas at Austin
* Continuing Grant
* John Yellen
* 01/31/2004
* USD 136,365.00

With National Science Foundation support, Dr. James Denbow and collaborators
will conduct two field seasons of archaeological excavation at the site of
Bosutswe on the eastern fringes of the Kalahari Desert in Botswana. The site of
Bosutswe has one of the longest Iron Age sequences in southern Africa,
comparable in scale to only two other contemporary centers south of the Zambezi:
Mapungubwe and Great Zimbabwe. The excavations thus provide an almost unique
opportunity to measure social, cultural, economic, and ecological change over a
thousand year period from 700 to 1700 CE. The project brings together an
international team of specialists in archaeology, metallurgy, stable isotope
analysis, osteology, and archeo-zoology from the United States, Botswana, and
South Africa. New and innovative methods that include stable isotope and trace
element source-tracking of metals, slags and alloys, lithics, ceramics, and even
hunted and domestic game, will be used to examine questions related to the
operation of exchange networks beyond the site. The excavations will focus on
three major issues: 1) an investigation of one of the earliest incidences of
bronze manufacture and trade in southern Africa; 2) an analysis of how
transformations in early state development occurred as cattle, and then long
distance trade in precious metals, led to major restructurings in the political
economy of the region; and 3) an examination of the ways in which these changes
affected not only the internal dynamics of agro-pastoralist societies, but also
created new sets of relations with neighboring hunters and gatherers.
&lt;br/&gt;&lt;br/&gt;This research is important because it will shed new light
on the development of complex societies in southern Africa, and on the
historical trajectories that have led to contemporary social formations in the
region. &lt;br/&gt;